
“I want to be a soldier, to fight,” says 11-year-old Khin Soe Win, glancing 
round at the other children sitting in the gleaming new classroom. Another boy 
also has his hand in the air; he too wants to be a soldier.

The pair are in the village of Kwin Ka Lay in Myanmar’s Kayin state. We are a 
good 12 hours’ drive from the city of Yangon, the last three hours having been 
traversed on dirt roads.

It is not entirely clear who controls the surrounding area: there are Karen 
National Liberation Army checkpoints on the road, but also army patrols – white 
pickups packed with soldiers and machine guns on the cab roof.

The children are answering questions on what they might do when they leave 
school. One wants to be a nurse, another a builder, another a farmer. Khin Soe 
Win is unswayed. “It is tiring and hard being a soldier, but I want to 
sacrifice for my country.”

But he and his friend don’t want to fight for the Tatmadaw, the national army. 
They want to join the KNLA. When he talks of country, his teacher explains, he 
means Kayin – what used to be known as Karen state.

The Karen are one of the 135 ethnic groups recognised by the Myanmar 
constitution, a minority who engaged in a six-decade fight with the central 
government. They may have signed a ceasefire and backed Aung San Suu Kyi in
November’s historic elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/final-myanmar-results-show-aung-san-suu-kyis-party-won-77-of-seats>
, but the desire for self-determination remains undimmed and a natural 
scepticism in the region is just one of the new leader’s problems.

Five months on from the election that swept the Nobel prizewinning democracy 
campaigner’sNational League for Democracy into power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/aung-san-suu-kyi-wins-myanmar-landmark-election>
, Aung San Suu Kyi now leads the country’s first civilian government since 
1962. Simply winning enough votes to wrest power from Myanmar’s powerful 
military was seen by many as the greatest triumph of the woman known to 
everyone as “The Lady”, generating excitement at home and an international wave 
of goodwill. But if her government is to be judged a success, it faces 
formidable challenges on its own doorstep.

Aung San Suu Kyi’s first challenge was to entrench her own position. Her hopes 
of securing the presidency were dashed by the refusal of the military to change 
the constitution, which bars her from the role because her sons hold British 
citizenship. It was a setback, but one she sidestepped by taking on thenew role 
of “state counsellor” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/01/aung-san-suu-kyi-set-to-get-pm-type-role-in-myanmar-government>
, effectively placing herself above the president, Htin Kyaw. She also holds 
the roles of foreign minister and minister in the president’s office. No one 
has been left in any doubt that she regards herself as being in charge.

But the military has not relinquished its grip on power. The army retains 
control of three key ministries – defence, home affairs and border affairs – 
and has 25% of the seats in parliament. Any changes to the constitution require 
a 75% plus one majority, and last month the commander-in-chief of the army, 
Senior General Min Aung Hlaing, made it clear that he saw no need for further 
liberalisation.

“The Tatmadaw has steadfastly held on to the multiparty system for five years 
and progress has also been made. During the next, second, five-year phase, 
deviating from the present situation will not be accepted,” he said.Aung San 
Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> may hope that 
further constitutional change will come sooner rather than later, but in the 
meantime she has a dysfunctional country to run.

“This is one of the most corrupt countries in the world,” a senior western 
diplomat said last week, trying to dampen some of the rampant optimism that her 
victory has generated. “Bad things happen here every day. You will see problems 
everywhere.”

I believe in this new government, but I'm prepared to take action in case 
things go wrong
Abraham, Karen National Union 
Myanmar is rich in resources, including oil, timber, gas and gems, but remains 
one of the world’s poorest countries.It lacks a sense of unity. There has been 
an exodus of young people seeking work in neighbouring Thailand; people 
trafficking is endemic; there are myriad civil rights violations; most of the 
main rebel groups have refused to sign up to the so-called national ceasefire. 
Then there are theRohingya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya>, 
stateless Muslims denied a vote or the chance to stand in November’s elections. 
Hundreds of thousands have been displaced since 2012 after clashes with 
Buddhist nationalists. It amounts to the to-do list from hell.

Driving east out of the capital, the built-up area quickly gives way to 
countryside. The traffic, bumper to bumper in the city, thins out. Many people 
travel in makeshift buses fashioned out of flatbed trucks, with chrome metal 
frames built over the top. Passengers are crammed in tightly: some hang off the 
back.

Many men wear the wraparound sarongs known as lungis. Women carry umbrellas 
unfurled to keep off the sun, their faces painted in a white paste,thanakha, 
which serves as both a cosmetic and a sun screen.

The landscape is dotted with gilded Buddhist stupas 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=stupas&oq=stupas&aqs=chrome..69i57j0l5.2647j0j4&sourceid=chrome&es_sm=119&ie=UTF-8>
, some of them enormous. Several are under construction, festooned with 
necklaces of bamboo scaffolding.

The European Journalism Centre has arranged a series of meetings in villages 
in Kayin state, where the EU is funding development projects with some of the 
£550m it has pledged to spend inMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> by 2020 in the hope of helping the 
new government tackle some of its most pressing problems.
Map of Myanmar showing Karen state 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/karen-state_myanmar/giv-12515fgPuPUpnMoIm/>
The first destination is the town of Hpa-An. As the road pushes farther into 
the countryside and turns south, there are fish farms and rough huts on stilts, 
water buffalo in the fields, water melon stalls by the roadside. Monks in deep 
red robes walk along the roadside, soliciting donations.

In the village of Kawt Ka Lway, some of the older residents explain how most 
families here have at least a couple of children working in Thailand, which is 
less than 100km away. Daw Lay Phyu is 85 and bent 90 degrees at the waist. She 
walks with a stick but insists on living alone in a large hardwood house raised 
on stilts. Two of her daughters are in Thailand working as housemaids, while 
one son works there selling snacks, another in a plastics factory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d4e15ac6e60c37a4091911357e6a693ec91b5a%2F0_22_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20new%20era%20is%20thwarted%20by%20the%20old%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20new%20era%20is%20thwarted%20by%20the%20old%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d4e15ac6e60c37a4091911357e6a693ec91b5a%2F0_22_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Arbram, 42, of the Karen National Union in Kwin Ka Lay village, Kayin state. 
Photograph: Gethin Chamberlain 
Only one daughter, Daw Ngwe Thin, 55, remains living nearby. She says she only 
stayed because she was worried about leaving her mother alone. Two of her own 
daughters have also gone to Thailand to find work. “Incomes here are so low, 
everyone wants to go to Thailand for work. There has not been fighting here for 
years but there is just no money here.

“We want our children back and factories to come for the village and the road 
to be mended, and if we can have electricity we can make profits for our lives 
and our children.”

There are electricity cables running between posts down the main street of the 
village, but they are not connected to the houses. The village is clean and 
tidy, but desperately poor. Aid groups are working with some of the villagers: 
Ngwe Thin has borrowed money from them to buy a pig, which gave birth to seven 
piglets that she sold to raise money. The money is important: there is no state 
pension and the number of people in the country over the age of 60 is predicted 
to rise from 9% to 19% by 2050.

In the offices of the Pa-O ethnic group in Hpa-An, it is civil rights that vex 
the workers who have been recruited to tackle corruption and police 
indifference to crime. Without help from the police, the workers say, they are 
limited in what they can do, other than plead the cases of those they are 
trying to help. They rattle off the challenges: land grabs by members of the 
military, rapes, child labour, trafficking, domestic violence, forced labour.

Khin Than Htwe, a formidable former professor aged 58, describes how two 
children abandoned by their parents were sold to a tea shop by their neighbour. 
The children lived on Bilu Kyun island, she says, a place named after the ogres 
which legend says once inhabited it. The children were looked after by a female 
neighbour after their parents split up and went away to work. But the neighbour 
came to hear that the owner of a tea shop in the city of Mayyamline, across the 
water on the mainland, needed waiters. So she sold the children, who were about 
seven years old, for 700,000 kyats (about £420).

The tea shop was near the university and a student from the island saw the 
children working. He informed their grandmother, who lived on the island. She 
went to the tea shop to demand that the owner release the children, but he 
refused. He had paid for them and they were his.

“The grandmother came to us and we went to the tea shop and negotiated with 
the owner,” says Khin Than Htwe. “He said we could buy them back. But we didn’t 
have the money. Every day, we went to see him, to explain about child labour 
and how he could go to jail. In the end, he handed them over to make us go 
away.”

The group informed the parents, who ignored them. They didn’t waste their time 
with the police. “We don’t believe in the police. If they get money they will 
do something, but the minimum they demand is 50,000 kyats (£30). They don’t 
want to do anything if they don’t think they will get money.

“It shouldn’t happen. Children should be in school. If they are in a tea shop 
or a factory, it is a loss to the country.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F755e392074d8a398368e962519f4e4e24f9d0ba4%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20new%20era%20is%20thwarted%20by%20the%20old%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20new%20era%20is%20thwarted%20by%20the%20old%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F755e392074d8a398368e962519f4e4e24f9d0ba4%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Schoolboy Khin Soe Win, 11, wants to be a KNLA soldier. Photograph: Gethin 
Chamberlain 
Around a quarter of children go to work in the city, and it is more prevalent 
in the rural areas, says Khin Than Htwe. They are only given food as payment, 
no money. And there is trafficking into China too – teenage girls mainly. Their 
parents let them go to work in Thailand’s prawn and fish industries and they 
are trafficked from there.

The road out of Hpa-An runs alongside wooded hills before the landscape begins 
to become flatter. After a couple of hours the vehicles turn on to the dirt 
track that leads to Kwin Ka Lay, another three hours away. Now there are only 
occasional villages and river after river to cross. In the monsoon season, the 
village can only be reached by boat.

Buddhist prayer flags line the road around shrines. There are country-made 
vehicles with more than a hint ofMad Max about them: a small tractor engine or 
generator fixed to the end of a long girder, two tractor tyres at the front, a 
cart bolted to the rear. The rider, masked against the dust, sits on the girder 
and steers with the aid of two long handles. Behind the driver, men and women 
sit on straw on the flat bed of the cart.

This area is the territory of the KNLA’s Brigade 6, but since the ceasefire 
the army is also present. The Karen National Union, the political wing of the 
KNLA, signed a preliminaryceasefire in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/12/burma-ceasefire-karen-rebels-isolation>
 and the KNLA agreed a ceasefire code of conduct with the military last 
November. It holds, up to a point, but the Karen want the army out of the area 
entirely. The army has other ideas.

Kwin Ka Lay is a mixed village, Buddhists and Christians living alongside each 
other. In the Buddhist monastery, three KNU men sit on the wooden floor. 
Arbram, 42, wears a black beret with a gold KNLA badge. He has a red-and-white 
striped woven Karen top, as do Nay Gay, 29, and Hai Hku, 43. They all want a 
federal state. “We want the government to remove the military,” says Arbram. 
“It is like being in prison. There is no freedom of movement.”

The jury is out on the election results, he says. “There is a saying in 
Myanmar: you need to believe, but you also need to act. The idea is that 50% 
[of me] believes in this new government, but 50% [is prepared to] take action 
in case things go wrong.”

Nam Paw Lay Lay Wah, 35, has lived in the village all her life and vividly 
remembers the fighting when she was a child. She hopes she has seen the last of 
it. “We had a bunker in our house. When there was fighting we would run to the 
bunker. I remember my sister and my dad were in the garden at the farm and the 
soldiers used to pass by there, so the KNU dropped bombs on the area. There 
were two big trees and my sister and my dad were trying to shelter under them. 
My dad grabbed my sister and a moment later a bomb hit the tree she was hiding 
under. It was like this until I was 18.”

It was not just the military who lost out in November’s elections; many of the 
ethnic parties found themselves marginalised as voters decided that the only 
way to ensure change was to back Aung San Suu Kyi. But in their hearts, the 
people here remain Karen, says Nam Paw Lay Lay Wah.

“With the new elections taking place, I was really happy. But I do not expect 
that much from this new government because I know that there are so many things 
to be taken care of in this country.

“In five years, it will be impossible to change a whole nation. But I believe 
there is a will to change. Maybe if they win yet another election, things will 
start to really change. Also, I do not have complete faith in this ceasefire 
agreement because it is just a signature on a paper. The peace process is very 
fragile, everyone knows that. I want to see it work but whether we have enough 
patience I don’t know.”

The National League for Democracy manifesto supported a federal union, but 
back in Yangon there seems little agreement on how that might be achieved, 
given the army’s grip on constitutional change.

U Aung Shin, a member of the NLD’s central executive committee who was 
imprisoned from 2000 to 2009 for his involvement with the party, says the 
international community must exert pressure for change.

“Assistance of international actors is essential. We need a better 
relationship between the military and civilians,” he says. “Their attitude 
should be government from a democratic way, to change the mindset of the 
military to stay away from dictatorship.”

U Tin Maung Oo, a decorated former infantry officer and member of the 
parliamentary commission for legal affairs and special issues, agrees. “People 
welcome federalism. But if you can’t get agreement from the military you can’t 
change the constitution. We need a good military/civilian relationship.” But 
neither he nor anyone else seems able to suggest how that might be achieved if 
the military are unwilling to bend.

A couple of days later, an earthquake of magnitude 6.9 struck Myanmar. It was 
a big quake, but originated far beneath the surface and there was little 
damage. Earthquakes can send shockwaves around the world, but many other 
factors determine whether there is any significant impact at the epicentre. 
Those who voted for The Lady must hope that the same does not apply in politics.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2acc6d3fe72a2f4f7578658d6ee76830b1a7ed6%2F0_237_3882_2329%2F3882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20new%20era%20is%20thwarted%20by%20the%20old%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20new%20era%20is%20thwarted%20by%20the%20old%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcan-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2acc6d3fe72a2f4f7578658d6ee76830b1a7ed6%2F0_237_3882_2329%2F3882.jpg>
 Aung San Suu Kyi is sworn into power in March. Photograph: Ye Aung Thu/EPA 
THE LONG ROAD TO DEMOCRACY

1824 Britain makes its first incursions into the country. Two years later the 
Treaty of Yandabo cedes the Arakan coast to Britain. By 1886, Britain has 
completely annexed the country, making it part of British India. In the 1920s, 
protests begin against British rule.

1937 In response to the protests, led by students, intellectuals and Buddhist 
monks, Britain declares Burma a crown colony separate from India. But in 1942 
the country is occupied by Japan, with assistance from the Japanese-trained 
Burma Independence Army, later known as the Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom 
League, led by Aung San, father of Aung San Suu Kyi.

1945 Britain regains control of the country from Japan, also with assistance 
from the AFPFL, which by now has changed sides after it became clear that Japan 
had no intention of honouring its promise of granting independence. Two years 
later, Aung San negotiates an agreement for independence, but is then 
assassinated by political opponents, along with six members of the interim 
government.

1948 Burma achieves full independence under U Nu as prime minister, but a 
decade later he is ousted by the military under General Ne Win. In 1960, U Nu 
wins a general election but riles the military again by promoting Buddhism as 
the state religion and tolerating separatism.

1962 Another coup led by Ne Win overthrows the government. The Social 
Programme party becomes the only political party. Twelve years later, a new 
constitution transfers power to a people’s assembly under Ne Win and other 
military officers.

Aung San Suu Kyi set to get PM-type role in Myanmar government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/01/aung-san-suu-kyi-set-to-get-pm-type-role-in-myanmar-government>
1987 Demonstrations begin against the government, provoking a violent response 
from the military. Thousands die in anti-government riots. Two years later, the 
State Law and Order Restoration Council declares martial law and Aung San Suu 
Kyi is placed under the first of a series of house arrests. The country is 
renamed Myanmar.

1990 The National League for Democracy (NLD) wins a general election but the 
military ignores the result. Aung San Suu Kyi wins the Nobel peace prize in 
1991.

2003 Khin Nyunt becomes prime minister, promising a new constitution, but is 
placed under house arrest in 2004. Three years later, anti-government protests 
by monks end in thousands of arrests, but in 2008 the military offers a new 
constitution. It does, however, award 25% of seats in parliament to the 
military and bans Aung San Suu Kyi from office.

2009 Aung San Suu Kyi is jailed for breaching house arrest for three years, 
later commuted to 18 months’ further house arrest. Her party, the NLD, boycotts 
the following year’s election, which is won by the military-backed Union 
Solidarity and Development party.

2011 Thein Sein becomes president. The following year, the NLD makes big gains 
in byelections, winning 43 out of 45 seats it contests. Aung San Suu Kyi is 
elected to parliament, becoming leader of the opposition.

2015 A draft ceasefire is signed with 16 rebel militias. The NLD sweeps to 
victory in the general election, winning an overall majority. Four months later 
Htin Kyaw is installed as president.GC

This article was amended on 17 April to remove a reference to Yangon as the 
capital of Myanmar. The country’s capital is Naypyidaw.
 