
Myanmar authorities have dropped charges against nearly 200 political 
activists sinceAung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> pledged to fight for their 
freedom, a senior police officer has said.

The cases were dismissed on Friday, following Suu Kyi’s announcement the day 
before that she was working with her new civilian-led administration to secure 
the release of scores of political prisoners languishing in Myanmar’s jails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/aung-san-suu-kyi-mass-amnesty-political-prisoners-myanmar>
.

Aung San Suu Kyi hints at mass amnesty for political prisoners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/aung-san-suu-kyi-mass-amnesty-political-prisoners-myanmar>
“Police have dropped 199 cases against political activists around the country 
as of yesterday,” the officer said on condition of anonymity.

The issue has personal resonance for Suu Kyi and many in her fledgling 
government, which is stacked with former activists once jailed under junta rule 
for their pro-democracy campaigns.

Those freed on Friday included dozens of student activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/jubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students>
 in central Tharrawaddy who had been locked up for more than a year over an 
education demonstration they organised in March 2015.

In statement later that night Aung San Suu Kyi said more political prisoners 
would be released following Myanmar’s new year holiday, but that “necessary 
scrutinisation” would need to be completed first.

The police officer said more cases would be reviewed during the festival, 
which starts next week, and that other activists could be freed when the courts 
reopen.

Aung San Suu Kyi’s administration is expected to seek the release of convicted 
political prisoners through a pardon signed by President Htin Kyaw, a close 
aide of hers who was sworn in last month.

Dissidents were routinely jailed by the brutal junta that strangled free 
expression inMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> for decades, 
one of many repressive policies that garnered global support for Suu Kyi’s 
democracy struggle.

Friday’s release of activists was applauded by international human rights 
groups, though many urged the new government to go a step further and amend 
legislation that allows authorities to round up peaceful protesters.

“We look forward to the release of all remaining political prisoners and their 
full rehabilitation,” the European Union said in a statement.

Watchdog groups in Myanmar say there are still hundreds of activists facing 
trial or being held in the country’s notorious prisons, many of them arrested 
under the quasi-civilian government that stepped down last month after five 
years of transitioning the country from junta rule.

Aung San Suu Kyi called for the prisoner release through her new position as 
state counsellor, which she was given despite vehement opposition from the 
still-powerful military whose charter bars her from the presidency.

MPs from her National League for Democracy (NLD) party approved the new post, 
which will be added to her portfolio as foreign minister, through their solid 
majority in parliament.
 