
An armed mob has razed a Muslim prayer hall in northern Myanmar, the second 
attack on a mosque in just over a week asanti-Muslim sentiment  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/aung-san-suu-kyi-tells-un-that-the-term-rohingya-will-be-avoided>
swells in the Buddhist majority nation.


Myanmar has struggled to contain bouts of deadly religious bloodshed in recent 
years, with bristling sectarian tensions and rising Buddhist nationalism posing 
a challenge to the new government led byAung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>.

'No Muslims allowed': how nationalism is rising in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
On Friday, villagers in Hpakant, a jade-mining town in northern Kachin state, 
ransacked a mosque “wielding sticks, knives and other weapons” before burning 
it down, according to the state-run Global New Light ofMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>.

“The mob was unresponsive and entirely beyond control. The building was razed 
by the riotous crowd,” the paper reported, adding that the rampage was sparked 
by a dispute over the mosque’s construction.

The riot coincided with the end of a 12-day visit by a United Nations rights 
investigator who warned that “tensions along religious lines remain pervasive 
across Myanmar society”.


In a press conference concluding her trip on Friday, Yanghee Lee called on 
authorities to investigate the destruction of another mosque in central Bago 
late last month.

“The government must demonstrate that instigating and committing violence 
against an ethnic or religious minority community has no place in Myanmar,” she 
said.

Religious intolerance has mushroomed across the country in recent years, 
threatening to unravel advances towards democracy since the former junta 
stepped down in 2011.

Authorities have been reluctant to launch prosecutions out of fear of stoking 
further unrest.

The worst religious violence struck western Rakhine State in 2012, leaving 
scores dead and pushing tens of thousands of the stateless Muslim Rohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/us-defies-myanmar-government-rohingya-muslims>
 into destitute displacement camps.

The state remains almost completely divided on religious grounds, with Muslim 
communities subject to a host of restrictions on their movements and access to 
basic services and employment.

Lee urged the country’s new government to make ending “institutionalised 
discrimination against Muslim communities in state... an urgent priority”.

Suu Kyi, the Noble peace prize winner who championed her country’s struggle 
against a repressive military regime, has dismayed rights groups by not taking 
swifter moves to carve out a solution for the Rohingya.
 