
The treatment of Myanmar’s Rohingya Muslims by the country’s military, 
including allegations of rape and helicopter gunships firing randomly on 
villages, may constitute crimes against humanity,Amnesty International has said 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/asa16/5362/2016/en/>.

South-east Asian foreign ministers met in Yangon on Monday for emergency talks 
about the two-month campaign against a nascent insurgency, during which time 
Myanmar’s leader,Aung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>, has failed to respond to 
international criticism.

More than 27,000 people from the ethnic group have fled to Bangladesh, leading 
to an open spat within the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean), a 
regional 10-member bloc.
Who are the Rohingya? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=50ada5b7-66e0-4fc1-b40f-c01f1fa3ba76>
Malaysia, where most of the population is Muslim, has called for an 
independent investigation into the allegations and for complete humanitarian 
access to the locked-down area inRakhine state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/eight-dead-in-clashes-between-myanmar-army-and-militants-in-rakhine>
, where more than 130,000 people are without aid.

Malaysia’s foreign minister, Anifah Aman, warned that the crackdown could 
trigger a repeat of last year’s boat crisis, when thousands of starvingRohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> were abandoned at sea.

“We believe that the situation is now of a regional concern and should be 
resolved together,” he told the meeting, according to a statement released by 
Kuala Lumpur.

“Myanmar must do more in trying to address the root causes of this problem,” 
he added.

This month, Malaysia’s prime minister, Najib Razak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/najib-razak>, said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/malaysia-pm-urges-world-to-act-against-genocide-of-myanmars-rohingya>
 “the world cannot sit by and watch genocide taking place”, opening a rift 
within Asean, which normally maintains a diplomatic tone among members.

Myanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>, which denies allegations 
of abuse, summoned Malaysia’s ambassador and banned its workers from going to 
the country.

The Myanmar army says it is hunting militants behind deadly raids on police 
posts in October. Rohingya survivors have made allegations of rape, murder and 
arson by security forces.

“The Myanmar military has targeted Rohingya civilians in a callous and 
systematic campaign of violence,” said Rafendi Djamin, Amnesty’s south-east 
Asia director. “The deplorable actions of the military could be part of a 
widespread and systematic attack on a civilian population and may amount to 
crimes against humanity.”

The Rohingya are a minority of about a million people who, despite living in 
the country for generations, are treated as illegal immigrants and denied 
citizenship. They have been persecuted for years by the government and 
nationalist Buddhists.

The recent bloodshed is the most deadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/myanmar-rohingya-violence-dozens-killed-army-clashes>
 since hundreds were killed in clashes in 2012 and more than 100,000 were 
forced into squalid camps. Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel peace prizewinner and de 
facto leader of Myanmar, has been criticised for not doing more to stop 
military action in the area.

Amnesty’s report was based on extensive interviews with Rohingyas in both 
Myanmar and Bangladesh, as well as analysis of satellite imagery, photos and 
videos.

It accused the military of torching more than 1,200 Rohingya homes, and said 
government forces sometimes burned down whole villages. Several eyewitnesses 
also described how soldiers used rocket-propelled grenade launchers to destroy 
houses, Amnesty said.

Images released by Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/12/13/burma-military-burned-villages-rakhine-state>
 in November showed 1,500 burned homes.

The Amnesty report said that in one incident on 12 November, after a skirmish 
with suspected militants two helicopters fired randomly on fleeing villagers 
fleeing, killing an unknown number. The next day troops set fire to hundreds of 
homes.

Amnesty’s report follows criticism from the UN’s high commissioner for human 
rights,Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, who said 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=55814#.WFeOpbZ97MA> the 
government’s handling of the crisis was “short-sighted, counterproductive, even 
callous”.

“The results have been catastrophic, with mass displacement, the nurturing of 
violent extremism, and everybody ultimately losing,” al-Hussein said in Geneva 
on Friday.

AP and AFP contributed to this report
 