
If there was an upside to sitting through the dismal Inbetweeners 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/10/the-inbetweeners-2-review-sequel-box-office-smash>
, it was the bountiful visual gags that came at the expense of the hapless 
foursome’s newly purchased car, a hatchback lovingly painted with a mural ode 
to Peter Andre’s classic Mysterious Girl.

Perhaps to escape the laugh-free film I was watching, I found myself drifting 
away, dreaming of that moment when Andre stepped, fully-formed, out of his 
mum-pleasing bare-chested shirts and into a set of abs so rippled most of my 
schoolmates thought they were made of plastic.

It’s true, the British-Australian New Faces 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcKHNW_iPew> discovery 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcKHNW_iPew> had traded on his hunky looks for 
some time, but there’s a lot of daylight between his 1993 hit Gimme Little Sign 
(and itsaccompanying video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNR36fqCGAA>, which 
mixes some truly abysmal choreography – not to mention mum jeans – in with the 
beefcake shots) and 1995’s altogether more smooth Mysterious Girl.

And if Andre looked a little embarrassed to be carrying on like a backup 
dancer in a Euphoria video in the early days (hey,it didn’t do Simon Baker any 
harm <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mdynaMn8qm0>), by the time Mysterious 
Girl premiered, he had apparently embraced his position as hot stud numero uno.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuZvKGXNEI0Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuZvKGXNEI0Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuZvKGXNEI0Y&media=>
The video for the single <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uZvKGXNEI0Y> was as 
much an advertisement for Andre’s personal trainer and spray-tan artist as it 
was a music video; the sight of him grooving in searingly blue tropical waters, 
proudly displaying his new look, was eye-popping (though not necessarily for 
the reasons he might have hoped).

These days, we expect actors, models and, to a lesser extent, pop stars to be 
ripped; when Andre revealed his Mysterious Girl rig it was mind-blowing. 
Remember that in 1995, Brad Pittlooked like a guy who probably went to the gym 
a bit 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2013/05/photos-brad-pitt-vanity-fair.sw.0.brad-pitt-vanity-fair-ss01.jpg>
 and had a hamburger on the weekends; Andre looked like an action figure.

In a behind-the-scenes video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5S58rxIrK4> 
shot during the clip’s production, Andre oils and flexes so often you could be 
forgiven for thinking Mysterious Girl was just the backing track chosen to 
accompany a Playgirl photoshoot.

The song itself, on the other hand, is a perennial classic from that 
peculiarly mid-90s period where reggae and dancehall had invaded the pop 
charts. It holds its own (perhaps due to the guest spot from Caribbean rapper 
Bubbler Ranx) alongside Maxi Priest’sThat Girl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H5ak3pVBDdc>, Shaggy’s Oh Carolina 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zMwmK_zPOAU> and Chaka Demus & Pliers’ 
ebullient cover ofTwist And Shout <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x90NoBIW87Q>.

Andre was lucky to have engaged the services of co-writer and producer Ollie 
Jacobs, formerly/occasionally of Arkarna, who had worked with Leftfield, East 
17 and Take That and had a keen eye for the musical zeitgeist.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm5S58rxIrK4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm5S58rxIrK4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm5S58rxIrK4&media=>
 In retrospect, it seems almost poignant that Andre felt he had to take his 
pin-up persona to an almost parodic level just as he was, musically, hitting 
his stride. After all, Mysterious Girl was followed by his excellent 1996 cover 
of Kool & The Gang’sGet Down On It <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yqz4Qb0Mpbg>
, but that song and video’s breezy charm was waylaid by his slowly calcifying 
hunky dude persona outside of music.

This reached a fluorescent pink crescendo upon his 2005 wedding to Katie 
“Jordan” Price. That romance buoyed his tabloid stocks considerably, beyond 
their 2009 divorce, and he was catapulted into a world of OK! exclusives and 
tell-all interviews (which, it needn’t be said, rarely seemed to actually tell 
much at all). The Andre of 2014, despite his affable nature, seems a haunted 
figure underneath it all.

This is summed up – with, I hope, a sense of satire on his part – by his 
appearance in UK discount supermarket chain Iceland’snew ad campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/13/peter-andre-iceland-advert?CMP=twt_gu>
. In the ads, women continue to bail Andre up in the aisles, driven mad with 
lust, but all he wants to talk about is fresh-frozen peas for 89p. As a 
metaphor for life in the spotlight, it cuts deep. Let’s just hope they weren’t 
playing a muzak version of Mysterious Girl in the freezer section.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBgA7HADaIfg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBgA7HADaIfg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBgA7HADaIfg&media=> 