
History was put on hold in the Rod Laver Arena when Spain's Rafael Nadal, 
playing in his firstAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final, defeated Roger 
Federer 7-5, 3-6, 7-6 (3), 3-6, 6-2 for his fifth successive victory over the 
Swiss and his 13th out of 19. Federer entered the match knowing he could equal 
Pete Sampras's all-time record of 14 grand slam wins if he beat Nadal. And 
having had an extra day's rest and preparation there seemed every chance he 
might. This was to underestimate Nadal.

The 22-year-old Nadal has managed to get well and truly inside Federer's head, 
thrashing him in last year's French Open final when the Swiss won only four 
games, then taking his Wimbledon title and later in the year replacing him as 
the world No1. Nadal, four times the French Open champion, has now won a major 
on all three surfaces, and by winning here, his sixth slam title, became the 
first male Spaniard to win a major on hard courts.

The opening set took precisely one minute less than the women's final at 58 
minutes. It was not of the highest quality compared to their Wimbledon final, 
though the tension was immense. Everybody was watching the world No1 like a 
hawk, wondering if his Friday night-Saturday morning semi-final against fellow 
Spanish left-hander Fernando Verdasco, which lasted more than five hours, had 
taken away his edge. The general perception was that he was just a shade 
slower, though this could easily have been an optical illusion, given Federer's 
languid movement. He never seems in a hurry, even when moving at maximum speed.

It was a curious opening with no fewer than five breaks of serve, Federer 
establishing a 4-2 lead, then contriving to lose it. Nadal was hitting some 
wonderful backhands, striking with a power that jolted the Swiss. Neither was 
serving well, though the warning bells clanged for Federer when he lost his 
serve for a fourth time midway through the second set. The crowd, longing to be 
part of history, and as much as they admired Nadal, urged Federer on and he 
duly responded, winning four successive games to win the second set.

Federer's service percentage for that second set was a mere 37%. That he still 
managed to level the match increased the feeling that Nadal was struggling 
physically. After one deep run to his left, after which he pulled off a 
stupendous passing shot, he seemed to say something to his coach, Toni Nadal, 
and at the next changeover he called for the trainer to have his right thigh 
massaged, as if he was feeling cramp.

It was not a medical time-out, though he continued with the treatment two 
games later at the change of ends. At 4-4 Nadal saved three break points, and 
three more at 5-5. The Spaniard was clearly pushing himself to the limits, 
knowing it was imperative to win the third set if he were to have the chance of 
winning the title. It was an absorbing middle set, Nadal almost clinching it at 
6-5, and then taking the tie-break as the clock passed three hours. A stunning 
running backhand volley by Nadal took the tie-break to 6-3, with Federer double 
faulting to give his rival a two sets to one lead.

Federer jumped ahead 2-0 lead at the beginning of the fourth, only for Nadal 
hit back and then have the Swiss at 15-40 on his serve. The French umpire 
over-ruled a call, only to get it wrong when Federer challenged via Hawk-Eye. 
He had a stern word with Maria, but Federer used his anger to lift himself, 
saving five break points in total for a 3-2 lead. This time it was Nadal who 
cracked and, just as at Wimbledon, the final entered a fifth set, though this 
time there was no need to worry about the light in the floodlit Rod Laver Arena.

In the fifth and final set Nadal broke for a 3-1 lead and although Federer 
saved two match points at 5-2, the three times Australian Open champion put one 
final forehand long and Nadal was the champion for the first time.
 