
Nan Goldin is guiding me though her unlikely exhibition space in Reading 
prison, which comprises a row of cells on C Wing, close to where, in the summer 
of 1895, Oscar Wilde began a two-year sentence for gross indecency following 
the failure of his libel case against the Marquis of Queensbury.Goldin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/23/nan-goldin-photographer-wanted-get-high-early-age>
 discovered the writer at the age of 15 and he became a huge influence on her. 
“What I understood him to be saying is that you can be who you pretend to be,” 
she says. “You can remake yourself completely. That idea drove my desire to 
create myself though my art.”

Inside: Artists and Writers in Reading Prison review – a star-studded tribute 
to Oscar Wilde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/inside-review-a-momentous-artangel-project>
Goldin is one of several artists and writers – including Marlene Dumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/11/the-daring-art-of-marlene-dumas-duct-tape-pot-bellies-and-bin-laden>
,Steve McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, Wolfgang 
Tillmans <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/wolfgang-tillmans> and Ai 
Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> – whose work is on 
display inside the prison forInside 
<https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/inside/>, a new project by Artangel. To 
reach C Wing, you pass a row of cells where condemned men spent their last 
night before being led to the gallows. A steep flight of metal stairs takes you 
to the first floor landing and its long rows of steel doors painted blood red, 
their shiny surfaces containing long, thin windows made of reinforced glass. In 
Wilde’s day, the doors were oak and there was only a tiny peephole for wardens 
to peer through – at the “grey figures on the floor”, as he wrote inThe Ballad 
of Reading Gaol <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Ballad_of_Reading_Gaol>.

As if to exorcise the silence and the solitude, one of Goldin’s pieces is a 
video interview with a 91-year-old man who is still campaigning for an apology 
from the government for his conviction for homosexuality 70 years ago. His posh 
voice booms out into the silence of the prison like an accusation. Next door 
are two more screens, each featuring synched videos of early silent film 
versions of Wilde’s playSalome <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salome_(play)>. 
Next door again is an edited version of French writer Jean Genet’s only film,Un 
Chant d’Amour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/oct/05/books.featuresreviews>, a poetic 
depiction of homosexual desire in a prison. It can only be viewed though the 
slim, murky window in the door.

Having just spent a few sombre minutes in C.3.3. (Wilde’s cell, though it’s 
now changed due to a revised numbering system), I ask Goldin if she has found 
it an oppressive place. “Strangely, no,” she says. “I think I’m desensitised to 
it. What has got to me is the fact that he spent so much time in solitary 
confinement with just one page of blank paper to write on a day. I cannot begin 
to imagine how someone as social and talkative and outgoing as him survived. It 
makes me angry even to think about it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F409ab6935121b2074555ff07ecab553b0df5b44f%2F0_190_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nan%20Goldin%3A%20banged%20up%20in%20Reading%20gaol%20with%20Oscar%20Wilde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nan%20Goldin%3A%20banged%20up%20in%20Reading%20gaol%20with%20Oscar%20Wilde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F409ab6935121b2074555ff07ecab553b0df5b44f%2F0_190_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 A closeup of The Boy. Photograph: James Lingwood 
Goldin has always sided with outsiders – the drag queens, drug addicts and 
wayward friends whose lives are glimpsed in her groundbreakingly raw and 
intimate photobooks, such asThe Ballad of Sexual Dependency 
<http://aperture.org/shop/books/nan-goldin-ballad> and The Devil’s Playground 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/store/collectors-editions/guido-floating-levanzo-sicily-1999-9780714844206/>
. Her art has always been infused with what might be called a gay sensibility 
that may, in part, be a result of her long friendship with the photographer 
David Armstrong, whose death in 2014 she is still, one senses, grappling with.

As a troubled teenager growing up in suburban Boston in the 1960s, Goldin was 
“shy but disruptive” until, aged 14, she made friends with Armstrong at a hippy 
high school in Lincoln, Massachusetts. In their different but overlapping ways, 
they explored, through photography, the worlds of gay men, transvestites, drug 
addicts and creative outsiders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0dd1d01b028a16680a55ae733bf825e80d1275%2F0_11_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nan%20Goldin%3A%20banged%20up%20in%20Reading%20gaol%20with%20Oscar%20Wilde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nan%20Goldin%3A%20banged%20up%20in%20Reading%20gaol%20with%20Oscar%20Wilde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0dd1d01b028a16680a55ae733bf825e80d1275%2F0_11_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 The Winter by Steve McQueen, part of Inside. Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty 
“We worshipped Wilde,” she says, smiling. “We read everything we could – by 
him and about him. We used his lines all the time in conversation. He was a big 
influence, not just creatively but in the way he lived, his attitude and his 
flamboyance, his caustic wit and his style. It’s a shame no one has broached 
that aspect of him in this show, but it’s what affected me most deeply.”

The centrepiece of Goldin’s installation is a cell filled with photographs of 
another close friend, the German actorClemens Schick 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0771332/>, whom she met and slept with in 1996. “I 
don’t know how I didn’t clock him as gay,” she says, laughing, “as I have been 
clocking men as gay before they knew it since I was 14 or 15. But somehow I 
didn’t see it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cc8bfc0fc5a8cfbd55647f059f05b48d46d6530%2F503_204_896_1119%2F896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nan%20Goldin%3A%20banged%20up%20in%20Reading%20gaol%20with%20Oscar%20Wilde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nan%20Goldin%3A%20banged%20up%20in%20Reading%20gaol%20with%20Oscar%20Wilde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnan-goldin-oscar-wilde-inside-exhibition-reading-prison-artangel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cc8bfc0fc5a8cfbd55647f059f05b48d46d6530%2F503_204_896_1119%2F896.jpg>
 ‘I cannot begin to imagine how he survived’ … Nan Goldin. Photograph: Clemens 
Bilan/Getty Images 
She photographed Schick constantly until 2012 and the images, many featuring 
him nude or striking provocative poses, cover two walls, scattered over and 
under a grim-looking iron bed. On another wall, underneath the window, there is 
a single fading image of an unknown young Victorian man, who looks debonair and 
stylish.

“I’m trying to suggest Wilde’s obsession with Bosie,” she says, referring to 
Lord Alfred Douglas <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/feb/12/poetry.books>
, Wilde’s lover and son of the enraged Marquis of Queensbury. “I wanted to 
evoke that sense of Oscar falling hopelessly and obsessively for the wrong 
person. We’ve all done it, but for him it had such devastating consequences. 
The one revelation for me in doing this project is realising how awful Bosie 
and his family were. I think he was evil.” She leads me across the landing to a 
cell in which there are two paintings by her friend Marlene Dumas: an angelic 
Oscar alongside a demonic-looking Bosie. “That’s him all right,” she says. “The 
little shit.”

As I prepare to leave, Goldin gestures at the surrounding cells and at the 
landing with its row of identical doors giving way to drab, deadening 
interiors. “In a way,” she says, “the Oscar Wilde I was so influenced by isn’t 
here. The openly gay, wittyOscar Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde> is not here – just as that 
part of him wasn’t evident in his writing from the prison. It’s like he 
disappeared into himself just to survive it.”

• Inside <https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/inside/> runs until 30 October.
 