
It wasn’t until I rushed out of my interview with Nancy Meyers, five panicky 
minutes early, in order to express some milk in Claridge’s hotel bathroom, 
having given birth three weeks ago that I realised something: I wasn’t 
interviewing Meyers – I was a character in one of her movies.

Throughout her 35-year career, Meyers – who is, by some measure, the most 
commercially successful female writer and director in Hollywood – has focused 
on what she describes as “telling women’s stories”.

These stories have included young widowhood (Private Benjamin), working 
mothers (Baby Boom), fiftysomething love affairs (Something’s Gotta Give 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/98755/something.s.gotta.give>), and 
divorce (It’s Complicated <https://www.theguardian.com/film/it-s-complicated>). 
All blend tough themes with comedic scripts, dramatic issues with light-hearted 
one-liners. Her hugely lucrative comedies, such as Father of the Bride and What 
Women Want, also maintain a deceptively easy-going focus on beady-eyed human 
stories.

This has earned Meyers millions of fans, some of whom create Pinterest pages 
about her films and throw Meyers-themed parties. It has also attracted the 
derision of (male, usually, but not always) critics and, more upsetting for 
Meyers, the occasional feminist writer. “I remember being misunderstood by 
critics 30 years ago,” she shrugs, yet recalling criticism of one of her films 
in Susan Faludi’s seminal 1990 feminist book Backlash causes Meyers, a proudly 
self-described feminist, palpable pain. (Faludi cited Baby Boom as proof that 
Meyers had “internalised” Hollywood’s anti-women messages; for whatever it’s 
worth, I disagree with Faludi about that.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-intern-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443693005750%2FKP_505291_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Intern%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-intern-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Intern%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-intern-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443693005750%2FKP_505291_crop_640x480.jpg>
Nonetheless, Meyers’ continued interest in the personal and largely female 
screenplay – especially at a time when Hollywood has never been more interested 
in what she calls “the Superman, Batman, Anythingman” films – has made her more 
of an anomaly in the business than ever. After all, she is a 65-year-old woman 
and a bona-fide A-list Hollywood director whose movies make hundreds of 
millions of dollars. She was, she says, “unusual” in 1979 when she started out, 
aged 29, with Private Benjamin. But that she is still seen as an aberration in 
2015 surprises no one more than her.

In her latest film, The I
ntern, Robert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> plays 
Ben, an unlikely work-experience placement at a New York fashion website run by
Anne Hathaway <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway>’s character, 
Jules – a hard-working woman, who is married and has a small daughter. Given 
her interest in the subject of working mothers, some might think it 
unsurprising that Meyers asks me twice about my experiences so far in 
motherhood and even remembers the names of my babies an hour later to tell her 
sister, who joins us in the hotel room at the end of the interview. But the 
truth is, most Hollywood interviewees barely bother to note a journalist’s 
name, let alone those of their offspring.

Talking with Meyers and her sister is a lot like slipping into a Meyers film: 
there is female bonding and gentle laughs. But there is also just enough 
sharpness beneath the surface to spike any suggestions of saccharine (when I 
make some clumsy comment about my mother “dragging” my father to see It’s 
Complicated, Meyers interrupts with riled briskness: “Why did he have to be 
dragged?”) Meyers admits that she has often used herself as the inspiration for 
her movies: when she and her then partner Charles Shyer made Baby Boom, they 
were expecting their second daughter (“I pretty much went into labour in the 
editing room”). Meanwhile, Something’s Gotta Give and It’s Complicated both 
feature fiftysomething divorcees, something Meyers understands well, having 
divorced Shyer in 1999, after 19 years of marriage. In this regard,The Intern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-intern> represents something of a change 
for the director, given that it lacks an obviously Meyers-esque character.

“That’s right – there’s no Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> or Diane Keaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/diane-keaton>. I can’t keep making that 
movie, and I felt I’d done it pretty well a couple of times,” she says. But she 
adds that, as “a working grandmother”, she wanted to “put that character of the 
working mother out there again, and to show that her daughter is not suffering 
because her mother works”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fnancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443700841569%2F9f67b618-b472-465b-ad2f-03ec5b4643fd-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nancy%20Meyers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20see%20a%20lot%20of%20movies%20about%20complicated%20women%20%E2%80%A6%20I%20think%20it%E2%80%99s%20gotten%20worse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fnancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nancy%20Meyers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20see%20a%20lot%20of%20movies%20about%20complicated%20women%20%E2%80%A6%20I%20think%20it%E2%80%99s%20gotten%20worse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fnancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443700841569%2F9f67b618-b472-465b-ad2f-03ec5b4643fd-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Anne Hathaway & Robert De Niro in The Intern. Photograph: Francois 
Duhamel/Allstar/Warner Bros 
I’m a big Meyers fan, but The Intern is not my favourite of her films. I never 
really believed in De Niro’s character, a 70-year-old gentleman whose only 
desire is to help out clueless millennials. Still, it is a pleasure to see a 
movie in which a woman is not punished for being professionally ambitious. This 
might seem a pretty low bar, but given the cinematic trope of female characters 
quitting their jobs to prove their love for a man (The Devil Wears Prada, 
Trainwreck), The Intern looks almost revolutionary by comparison.

“There aren’t enough movies that show working women who are content at their 
job, good at their job and good bosses. If I see one more movie where a woman 
is a horrible boss who is hated by her employees …” Meyers says with an 
eye-roll.

Nonetheless, some critics have complained that the film suggests that, as Guy 
Lodgewrote in Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/reviews/the-intern-review-anne-hathaway-robert-de-niro-1201596471/>
, “behind at least one successful woman stands an older, wiser man”.

Meyers bristles at the criticism: “It’s just a ridiculous thing to say. I’m 
very happy to go on the record saying that human beings need other human beings 
and that’s what I’m saying. Someone’s watching Jules’ back – that he’s a man is 
not the point.”

More telling, Meyers says, is the number of male journalists who have 
described Hathaway’s character as “a workaholic”, simply because she takes her 
job seriously. “Men don’t even realise they’re saying this kind of stuff,” she 
says. Then there is the eternal obsession with interiors in her films. Jibes 
about the gorgeous houses in Meyers’ movies have become something of a schtick 
among film writers and bloggers. Recently Jezebel.com ran a quiz,“Which Nancy 
Meyers kitchen are you?” 
<http://jezebel.com/which-nancy-meyers-kitchen-are-you-1733023749>, while 
Vogue.com invited readers to“Shop Nancy Meyers’s Most Enviable Interiors” 
<http://www.vogue.com/13352701/nancy-meyers-movie-interiors-shop-the-looks/>. 
It’s true, the houses in her films are lovely, but no more so than those in, 
say, Judd Apatow’s movies, which are never mentioned in reviews. Meyers is 
exasperated by this, but loath to complain and draw more attention to the 
subject. Still, I suspect that she feels, as I do, that this focus on the 
surface of her movies, reducing them to catalogues, is a way of belittling her, 
her audience and the female stories she tells.

Yet all this is small potatoes compared with the bigger problem Meyers 
contends with: sexism in the film industry. The statistics are depressingly 
well-known: of the 100 highest-grossing films in 2014 only 1.9% were directed 
by women and only 12% featured female protagonists. For Meyers, who has been 
working in this world for nearly her entire adult life, this is familiar stuff. 
When she started out on Private Benjamin, the studio wrote into her contract 
that she must never be alone on set without her male co-producers.

“Of course, me in 2015 would have taken a red pen to it and said, ‘That’s 
ridiculous.’ But 29-year-old me, making my first movie, didn’t go to the mat 
about it, so it remained in the contract. I don’t know what they were 
thinking,” she says.

Perhaps they imagined you’d spontaneously burst into pregnancy without 
supervision, I say.

“I was pregnant, but I hid it! Can you imagine? So, yes, things have moved on 
from then. But do women have equal rights in Hollywood? No.”

What I don’t understand, I say, is that given that her films are so 
successful, and made for relatively little, why don’t studios look at them and 
say: “We should make more movies like these?” or, “Maybe we should trust more 
female directors”?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fnancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443700958671%2Fff09a1b0-a23f-4faa-b10b-28e55e1bf57a-2060x1359.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nancy%20Meyers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20see%20a%20lot%20of%20movies%20about%20complicated%20women%20%E2%80%A6%20I%20think%20it%E2%80%99s%20gotten%20worse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fnancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nancy%20Meyers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20see%20a%20lot%20of%20movies%20about%20complicated%20women%20%E2%80%A6%20I%20think%20it%E2%80%99s%20gotten%20worse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fnancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443700958671%2Fff09a1b0-a23f-4faa-b10b-28e55e1bf57a-2060x1359.jpeg>
 Meyers’ career began in 1979 with Private Benjamin, starring Goldie Hawn. 
Photograph: The Kobal Collection 
She nods in agreement while making an exasperated sigh: “My kind of movie is 
not the kind of film that studios have wanted to make for a while now. Instead, 
it’s been all comic-book movies, gigantic action movies and guy comedies. As 
for why aren’t there more women [directors], there has been somewhat of a 
guilt-free environment and [studios] have been making a certain kind of film 
for a while, and, for whatever reason, they think a man would be better at 
directing dinosaurs, or flying people, or whatever. But I know there are plenty 
of super-game women who would want to make those films.”

When I’ve asked studio executives about the lack of female directors, they 
always give the same two contradictory answers: that women don’t feel 
comfortable being in charge, or that people don’t like taking orders from bossy 
women.

Meyers looks more frustrated than ever: “OK, well the first part we know is 
not true – women are in charge of so much, and enjoy being in charge. And 
people don’t like bossy women? You know, I have directed very big actors and 
what they like is leadership. So [that feeling] doesn’t exist in the acting 
community. But does it exist in the executive community? It’s obvious, it’s a 
boys club. But I honestly believe things are changing. I’ve been doing press on 
movies for 35 years, and this is the first time anyone’s talked to me about 
this, and everyone I’ve talked to has asked me about this. I think the 
conversation is out there now.”

But, in terms of depictions of women in movies, are things worse than when she 
started?

“Well, I don’t see a lot of movies telling stories about complicated women 
with real problems,” she says, “and studies tell you that’s true. So I can’t 
say it’s gotten better. I have to be honest with you, I think it’s gotten 
worse.” But in classic Meyers fashion, she delivers the bad news with a warm 
laugh.

• Nancy Meyers was one of the speakers at the BAFTA & BFI Screenwriters’ 
Lecture Series (you can read her lecture here 
<http://www.bafta.org/film/features/nancy-meyers-delivers-her-screenwriters-lecture>
). The Intern is released on Friday 2 October.
 