
At Cape Canaveral air force station on the Florida coast stands an Atlas V 
rocket bearing the Osiris-Rex probe, Nasa’s first hope to smash-and-grab 
material from a speeding asteroid and bring it safely back to Earth.

The size of a transit van, the two-tonne spacecraft is set to blast off 
Thursday night on a seven-year mission to a 500m-wide ball of rubble calledBennu
 <https://www.nasa.gov/subject/6880/bennu/>, which circles the sun at more than 
100,000km per hour.


The probe is the third of Nasa’s ambitious New Frontiers 
<https://discoverynewfrontiers.nasa.gov/program/index.cfml> missions. It 
follows on the heels of the New Horizons spacecraft, which last year beamed home
stunning images from Pluto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/15/pluto-mission-nasa-reveals-first-high-resolution-images-of-planets-surface>
, and theJuno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/05/jupiter-nasa-mission-puts-juno-spacecraft-in-orbit-after-five-year-journey>
 spacecraft, which arrived atJupiter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/jupiter> in July.


In returning a pile of asteroid to Earth, scientists hope to learn more about 
the source of water in the solar system and the origins of organic molecules 
from which life first arose. But getting their hands on pristine asteroid will 
also give researchers fresh clues about how to mine the bodies for valuable 
materials, and defend against wayward space rocks that may one day threaten our 
planet.

Collecting a sample of asteroid 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/nasa_asteroid-zip/giv-31075DsOGPD0ae64p>
On Saturday, Nasa engineers will run final checks on the $800m probe’s 
electrical systems and instruments ahead of the first attempt to launch at 
7.05pm local time on Thursday (00.05BST Friday). Shouldtropical storms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/01/hurricane-hermine-nears-florida-us-storm>
 roll in, mission controllers will go for launch on the next clear day.


The mission has a title that is unwieldy even for the US space agency. 
Osiris-Rex stands for Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification 
and Security-Regolith Explorer. “It is a mouthful,” saidEd Beshore 
<https://www.as.arizona.edu/people/faculty/ed-beshore>, deputy principal 
investigator on the mission at Arizona State University. “But the name really 
does speak to our principal mission objectives.”


Bennu orbits the sun on a similar path to Earth. Classified as a “potentially 
hazardous asteroid”, it swings close to the Earth – in cosmic terms, at least – 
once every six years. The nearest encounter scientists can predict is slated 
for 2135, when the coal-black space rock will hurtle between Earth and the moon 
at a distance of 300,000km.


One major question the mission will ask is how sunlight affects the orbits of 
asteroids. As they spin close to the sun asteroids are constantly heating up 
and cooling down. The heat the asteroid re-emits to space provides a minuscule 
thrust which over time can alter its course. But the effect is hard to 
quantify. “Often when we look at asteroids that may be a hazard to Earth, the 
limiting factor in predicting the orbit is this process called theYarkovsky 
effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2002/apr/05/spaceexploration.research>,” 
said Beshore. “We’d like to understand that and measure it much more precisely 
when we’re at Bennu and in doing so improve our predictive accuracy for other 
asteroids that may represent a future threat to Earth.”


Osiris-Rex aims to catch up with Bennu in August 2018 and spend two years 
mapping the surface. When mission scientists find a good spot, it will swoop 
down, blast the asteroid with a powerful jet of nitrogen, and collect dislodged 
material with a robotic arm. Once the material is safely aboard, the spacecraft 
will retreat and later send it home in a capsule due to land via parachute in 
the Utah desert in 2023.


The mission will not be the first to bring asteroid material home. The 
Japanese probeHayabusa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/nov/28/spaceexploration.japan> 
rendezvoused with asteroid Itokawa in 2005 and made a number of attempts to 
gather dust from the surface. A glitch led to a dicey landing on the surface, 
but the Japanese space agency managed to bring the probe home, and with it 
thousands of asteroid particles lodged in one of its sample containers. The 
material amounted to less than a milligram of asteroid, but it has still been 
valuable for scientists.


When Osiris-Rex swoops down to Bennu’s surface, it will be so far from Earth 
that communications will take 14 minutes to reach the probe and the same to 
come back. “Navigation to the surface is going to be very difficult,” said 
Beshore. “We are going to have to put all the maps in and let the spacecraft 
software guide it safely to the surface to get that sample.”

As the probe’s robotic arm touches the asteroid it will trigger a 20 
megapascal nitrogen blast to stir up the surface and drive material into a 
collector. Each attempt takes five seconds. If the first bid fails, the team 
can make two more attempts but no more. They aim to gather 60g on their first 
try, but a whopping 2kg is possible.


“We have brought back small amounts of samples from other missions, but we 
have really never returned a sample from a planetary body further than the moon 
in the kinds of quantities we are planning to here,” Beshore said. “That really 
changes the whole game for science, because when you bring back sufficient 
amount of sample, you have longer than the lifetime of the mission to analyse 
your target object.”


While Osiris-Rex will scour Bennu for organic molecules, the probe will not 
look for signs of life. “By no means do we think we will find anything living,” 
said Beshore. “Bennu has been irradiated by hundreds of millions of rads of 
radiation over the course of its lifetime, which is 10 to 20 times more than 
anything we have ever seen anything on Earth survive.”

The Atlas V rocket that will carry Osiris-Rex has a 100% mission success rate 
since it debuted in 2002. But thedramatic explosion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/spacex-explosion-launch-site-florida>
 of a SpaceX rocket this week at a launchpad one mile away is a clear reminder 
that rocket science is not simple. Elon Musk’s company is investigating why the 
Falcon 9 went up in a fireball during pre-launch tests. The blast destroyed 
both the rocket and its $200m payload, a satellite that Facebook had lined up 
to bring the internet to sub-Saharan Africa. Nasa said it was too early to say 
whether the setback would affect future SpaceX cargo launches to the 
International Space Station.

 