
Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> launched a spacecraft on 
Thursday for a mission to slap an asteroid, capture some of the debris that 
shakes off, and return more interstellar samples to Earth than any mission 
since the Apollo era.

The space agency launched its Osiris-Rex spacecraft from Cape Canaveral, 
Florida, in clear dusk skies a little after 7pm, local time, Thursday as 
scientists, reporters and spectators cheered. Within minutes, the rocket 
booster jettisoned, leaving the craft en route for a seven-year journey into 
space.

Nasa's Osiris-Rex probe set to attempt 'smash-and-grab' on speeding asteroid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/02/nasas-osiris-rex-probe-attempt-smash-grab-speeding-asteroid-bennu>
Though Atlas V rockets have had a 100% success rate, Nasa engineers combed 
over the launch procedures with extra care this week, followingthe explosion of 
a SpaceX rocket and its payload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/spacex-explosion-launch-site-florida>
 last week. Even with the extra precaution, the mission is so far on schedule 
and under budget, principal investigator Dante Lauretta told reporters earlier 
this week.

“Nobody likes to see your colleagues go through a day like they did,” Lauretta 
said. “It was a stark reminder of the risk we face in this business.”

Celebrating with his colleagues after the successful launch, Lauretta struck a 
philosophical note. “It’s the human spirit, you know? Orisis-Rex is us,” he 
said at a briefing. The mission, he added, fit Nasa’s broader quest to answer 
“the big questions: where do we come from, what is our future, and really, are 
we alone in the universe?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnasa-launches-osiris-rex-space-probe-asteroid-bennu-samples-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nasa%20launches%20Osiris-Rex%20space%20probe%20to%20collect%20asteroid%20samples%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnasa-launches-osiris-rex-space-probe-asteroid-bennu-samples-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nasa%20launches%20Osiris-Rex%20space%20probe%20to%20collect%20asteroid%20samples%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnasa-launches-osiris-rex-space-probe-asteroid-bennu-samples-video&media=>
Osiris-Rex launches from Cape Canaveral on a seven-year mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/sep/09/nasa-launches-osiris-rex-space-probe-asteroid-bennu-samples-video>
The two-ton spacecraft is on a mission to Bennu, officially classed a 
“potentially hazardous asteroid” chosen for its relative proximity to Earth and 
our orbit. The asteroid nears Earth every six years and will come closest in 
2135, when it threads between our planet and the moon. In the decades after 
that pass, to about 300,000km from the planet, Nasa calculated that Bennu has a 
one in 2,700 chance to strike the Earth.

Osiris-Rex is scheduled to meet its 492m-wide destination in August 2018, and 
it will spend as long as two years mapping Bennu. “We will be able to see an 
object the size of a penny on Bennu,” Nasa researcher Daniella DellaGiustina 
told reporters at a separate briefing.

Once it has found a suitable spot on the surface, Osiris-Rex will swing down, 
strike the asteroid with a jet of nitrogen and capture what debris it bounces 
off the surface. Christine Richey, deputy program scientist for the mission, 
called the operation a “safe, smooth, slow high-five” to collect material that 
could date back to the origins of the solar system.

SpaceX's booms and busts: spaceflight is littered with explosions and disasters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/01/spacex-falcon-9-explosion-tesla-elon-musk-nasa>
Then the craft will drift away and measure its prize: the scientist want at 
least 60 grams, and as much as two kilograms, to expel in a capsule back Earth. 
If all goes well, the chunk of asteroid will parachute down to Utah in 
September 2023. Past missions have brought scientistsless than a milligram of 
asteroid material <http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/Aug11/Itokawa-particles.html>and 
samples of solar wind <https://curator.jsc.nasa.gov/genesis/> and comet dust 
<http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/home/index.html>.

A single sample “is a lifetime of data”, Nasa astrochemist Jason Dworkin told 
reporters.

“You can take rocks and slice them up into tiny, tiny fragments and manipulate 
them using people,” he said, noting that one of his colleagues continues to 
study material from the Apollo missions. “People not yet born, with ideas we 
don’t have now, can test them in ways we can’t even conceive of.”

Richey agreed that a successful return would be “the gift that keeps on 
giving”.

The researchers hope that the asteroid material will help reveal what happened 
in the earliest stages of the solar system, including whether asteroids brought 
water and organic molecules to planets like Earth, seeding it with the 
chemicals for life.

While Osiris-Rex studies the asteroid from orbit, it will also help scientists 
learn how sunlight changes asteroids by heating them up and subtly changing 
their course. They may also learn more about how to predict their paths and 
potentially deflect larger, more dangerous rocks, such as the six-mile-wide 
asteroid believed to have killed the dinosaurs.
 