
Good news for those with plans for October and beyond: the Earth will still be 
in existence.

Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> has confirmed – after rumours 
swept the internet about an imminent asteroid strike expected between 15 and 28 
September – that the two-week period in question will be entirely free of 
Earth-destroying space attacks.

The likelihood of any known potentially hazardous asteroid striking the planet 
within the next 100 years stands at 0.01%, the space agency saidin a statement 
<http://www.nasa.gov/jpl/nasa-there-is-no-asteroid-threatening-earth>.

This is the way the world ends: not with a bang, but with a Big Rip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/02/not-with-a-bang-but-with-a-big-rip-how-the-world-will-end>
Persistent rumours on “numerous recent blogs and web postings” that an errant 
asteroid is due to wipe out not just Puerto Rico, but the Atlantic and Gulf 
coasts of the United States and Mexico, as well as Central and South America, 
persuaded Nasa scientists that they needed to speak up, the statement says.

“There is no scientific basis – not one shred of evidence – that an asteroid 
or any other celestial object will impact Earth on those dates,” said Paul 
Chodas, manager of Nasa’s near-Earth object office at the jet propulsion 
laboratory in Pasadena, California.

“If there were any object large enough to do that type of destruction in 
September, we would have seen something of it by now.”

It is not the first time Nasa has punctured the excitement of doom-mongers. In 
2012, it dismissed claims that the comet Elenin was on its way to destroy 
mankind,calling it 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/asteroids/news/elenin20111025.html> a “trail 
of piffling particles”.

The space agency was also proved right in its assertion that the world would 
not end on 21 December 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/us-news-blog/2012/dec/13/nasa-end-of-the-world-december-21>
, as the Mayan calendar came to an end,heralding the apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2012/dec/13/nasas-mayan-apocalypse-video>
.

“There is no existing evidence that an asteroid or any other celestial object 
is on a trajectory that will impact Earth,” Chodas said. “In fact, not a single 
one of the known objects has any credible chance of hitting our planet over the 
next century.”

The jet propulsion lab’s asteroid watch website 
<http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/asteroidwatch/> helpfully lists the next five close 
approaches by asteroids to the Earth. Of these, the riskiest will pass within 
1,689,811 km (1,050,000 miles) of our planet on 21 August. Which is today. So 
be careful out there.
 