
Artificial intelligence thriller Ex Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina> made a solid, if unspectacular, 
£2.4m on release in the UK in January, but it’s proved a surprise sleeper hit 
in the US.

A limited release brought in such impressive numbers that the film is now 
heading for a wide, 2,000-plus screen expansion this weekend, having already 
notched up $12m. Alex Garland, the film’s writer and director, is now 
assembling his next project and he’s lined up Oscar-winnerNatalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman> for the lead.

Ex Machina and sci-fi's obsession with sexy female robots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/ex-machina-sexy-female-robots-scifi-film-obsession>
According to Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/natalie-portman-annihilation-cast-alex-garland-1201488319/>
, Portman, who won the best actress Oscar in 2011 for her role as an 
unravelling ballerina in Black Swan, is in negotiations to star in 
Annihilation, a post-apocalyptic horror.

The film is based on a book by Jeff VanderMeer, which was published in 
February this year as the first in a trilogy.

Portman would be taking on the role of a biologist who leads an expedition to 
an area cut off from civilisation. While searching for her missing husband, she 
must deal with a contamination that threatens her safety.

She is yet to officially sign on, but sources suggest that, if she does, she 
will be paired with another female actor, possibly eitherJulianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore> or Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>.

Portman will next be seen in Terrence Malick’s Knight of Cups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/knight-of-cups>, western Jane Got a Gun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-got-a-gun> and In Love and Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/feb/12/natalie-portman-tale-love-darkness-jerusalem>
, her directorial debut, which will premiere at this month’s Cannes film 
festival.
 