
A nationwide alert has been issued to hospitals, ambulance services and GPs 
after a batch of heroin contaminated with anthrax killed six addicts inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, raising fears for drug users across 
the UK.

It is feared that the death toll will rise to at least 10 soon, the Guardian 
understands, after cases spread across Scotland from Glasgow to Lanarkshire, 
then to Dundee, Fife and now central Scotland.

The first cases came to light before Christmas, when an addict died in 
hospital in Glasgow. It emerged today that the sixth addict died earlier this 
week in Stirling. A further six users with the lethal bacterial disease are in 
hospital, in the worst anthrax scare in recent times.

Health ministers issued an alert to all primary care trusts in England tonight 
after the latest cases came to light, advising drugs workers, consultants and 
accidents and emergency units to watch out for suspected cases.

A fresh alert has also been issued by the agency Health Protection Scotland, 
which has set up an outbreak control team to investigate the source of the 
contamination, while a parallel investigation has been launched by police. 
Heroin users are being urged to stop taking the drug immediately.

Dr Colin Ramsay, the consultant epidemiologist at HPS who is leading the 
agency's inquiry, said contaminated heroin, or a contaminated cutting agent, 
could be responsible for the infections.

"The death of this patient in NHS Forth Valley indicates further geographical 
spread of the cases, meaning that heroin users all across Scotland need to be 
aware of the risks of a potentially contaminated supply," he said. "If any 
heroin users do notice signs of infection, for example marked redness and 
swelling around an injection site, or other signs of serious infection such as 
a high fever, they should seek urgent medical advice."

The Department of Health alert issued tonight states: "Investigations are 
continuing into the cause of these cases and into any heroin supply routes that 
may be affected. While cases remain confined to Scotland, you should be alert 
to the possibility of anthrax infection in injecting drug users presenting with 
severe soft tissue infections or sepsis."

Dave Liddell, of the Scottish Drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs>
 Forum voluntary organisation, said it was suspected that a large batch of 
heroin was to blame. "It was alarming when it was just centred on Glasgow; now 
it looks as if its following the drugs supply route," he said.

Gordon Meldrum, director general of the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement 
Agency, said the spate of deaths was disturbing. "Illegal drugs are often 
prepared in unhygienic surroundings and can be vulnerable to contamination from 
various harmful agents.It is highly probable that the contamination of heroin 
by anthrax is accidental and there is a history of batches of heroin being 
contaminated in Afghanistan, Turkey and other countries key to the production 
and supply of heroin.

"Production processes can be basic and often be conducted in areas where there 
is contamination from animal carcasses or faeces. Our priority remains to 
reduce the harm to drug users and the communities they live in and all cases 
will be investigated and reported where appropriate to the procurator fiscal."

The sixth casualty was named locally as Colin McPhee, 49, who was well known 
for begging in Stirling city centre. A neighbour said: "Colin was a wee skinny 
guy with dark, straggly hair, who was a junkie and begged on the streets â€” but 
he was a harmless wee guy. It's a shame."
 