
National Australia Bank has become the latest suitor to drop out of the race 
to buy 318 branches from theRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, leaving 
Spain's Santander as the clear frontrunner.

NAB has abandoned the bid because of market volatility and the risks involved 
as "it is too far from home", according to an insider. It wants to focus on 
expanding in Asia and has been in talks for five months to buyAxa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> Asia Pacific.

Santander has long been regarded as the favourite to acquire the 318 RBS 
branches in the UK, which are being sold under the Williams & Glyn's brand and 
are expected to fetch between £1bn and £2bn. Santander already runs one of the 
biggest UK branch networks after snapping up Alliance & Leicester, Bradford & 
Bingley and Abbey National.

There is one other potential bidder, Spanish rival BBVA, which has been 
sitting on the sidelines. Santander and NAB were the only two suitors who began 
scrutinising RBS's books last month. Santander is expected to complete its due 
diligence process sometime this summer. If it does acquire the RBS branches, 
Santander's UK market share would still be below 14% as stipulated by EU rules.

Early last month Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Money pulled out of the auction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/07/hsbc-strong-first-quarter-profits>
 after its offer was rejected by UBS, which is advising RBS, as too low. The 
sale initially attracted six potential buyers but buyout firm Blackstone and 
the Wellcome Trust have also dropped out.

RBS, which is 83% owned by the taxpayer, has to sell the branches and its 
insurance arm to appease EU regulators after receiving state aid. It has until 
2013 but hopes to sell the branches this year.

An RBS spokesman said: "These branches continue to perform well with an 
excellent and growing mix of corporate, commercial and retail customers. While 
things have moved quickly in recent months, we will continue to run the sale 
process to maximise shareholder value and comply with European commission 
requirements."
 