
The rain is pelting down and a cold wind whistles off the hills. Snowdon 
<http://www.eryri-npa.gov.uk/visiting/hafod-eryri/snowdon> is – apparently – 
somewhere over there but cloaked today in thick cloud. It is the sort of 
morning that would persuade even the most hardened hill walker to hunker in 
front of a warm fire.

But Caryl Hughes, who at 23 is in charge of a 614-acre farm in north Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, refuses to be put off by the challenge 
of working in such a harsh environment. "I'm loving the experience of being 
here. I don't bother about the weather or the remoteness of the place. It's a 
privilege to be doing this job. I'm enjoying every second of it," she said.

Hughes has been given the chance to manage the Llyndy Isaf farm thanks to a 
scholarship offered by the National Trust 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/article-1355803535753/>, which raised £1m two 
years ago to buy this precious parcel of land after afundraising effort backed 
by Welsh A-listers including Anthony Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/16/llyn-dinas-saved-by-national-trust>.

Llyndy Isaf is considered to be of particular importance because it has not 
been intensively managed for generations and so is a fine example of a 
traditional upland hill farm and a haven for wildlife. It compromises a 
wonderful lake, upland heath and unimproved pasture, but also has woodland, 
small hay meadows, marshy grasslands and mire.

In addition the hills around the farm are steeped in mythology. Legend has it 
that an epic battle between two dragons, one red and one white, took place on 
one of the hills here, Dinas Emrys. The red dragon won – and became the 
national emblem of Wales.
 Llyndy Isaf is a 614-acre upland farm at the foot of Snowden. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Once the farm was secured the trust worked with Wales YFC – the young farmers' 
organisation – to set up ayear-long scholarship 
<http://www.yfc-wales.org.uk/uploads/Llyndy/YFC_-_National_Trust_Scholarship_Info_Final.pdf>
 to give bright young people such as Hughes a start in agriculture. It is not a 
gimmick. Getting more talented young people involved in farming is becoming an 
important issue for both the Welsh and UK governments because of the need to 
ensure food security and to preserve landscapes like this.

The UK government's Future of Farming Review (FFR) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/21 
1175/pb13982-future-farming-review-20130709.pdf> concluded that getting more 
young people into farming was crucial. Bars to that aspiration cited in the 
review included EU grants that encourage older farmers to stay put even if they 
are not doing much farming and the sale by local authorities of thousands of 
tenant farms because of budget cuts. Figures published by the Welsh government 
reveal that aroundtwo-thirds of Welsh farmers are over 55 
<http://wales.gov.uk/newsroom/environmentandcountryside/2013/130522yess/?lang =>
 – and most are men.

The Llyndy Isaf project is just the sort of scheme that the FFR said could 
help bring a new generation of farmers, particularly women, into the industry.

Hughes, whose parents farm an hour and a half down the road in Llangollen, 
studied agriculture and science at Aberystwyth University before arriving with 
her sheepdog Mist in September. Since then she and Mist have lived in the stone 
farmhouse (waking up, weather permitting, to a lovely view of Snowdon – Yr 
Wyddfa in Welsh – from her bedroom window). Together they have been tending a 
flock of 120 Welsh mountain sheep. "They're a hardy bunch and pretty 
mischievous – they've found the holes in the fences out for me," she said. 
Woman and dog also look after a small herd of tough Welsh black cattle.

The learning curve has been sharp. Hughes's tasks have ranged from supervising 
a helicopter drop of fence posts on to the highest ground to buying rams at 
market. At times she is battling fierce wind and rain; at others she is keeping 
on top of the mound of paperwork that 21st century farming generates. "There's 
no such thing as a typical day," she said. "Every day changes."

And by all accounts she is doing well. Arwyn Owen, who runs a neighbouring 
farm and acts as her mentor, said Hughes was learning quickly. "It's important 
that we find a way of attracting new young people into farming. There's a 
chicken and egg situation. You need experience to get a job but without a job 
you can't get any experience."

Is Hughes at a disadvantage because she is a woman in what is still a 
male-dominated world? "I don't think so," said Owen. "As long as you can do the 
job I think farmers will accept you."

Hughes is grateful for the chance. "I'd never have the capital to get a 
tenancy and lease my own farm. It's hard for young farmers. All we tend to have 
is a car and maybe a couple of dogs – nothing to stand against a loan. Schemes 
like this are a great way to gain experience and hopefully the government will 
find a way of making it easier to get their own farms.

"Everyone should see that farming is really important – without farming we 
have no food for the country."

Come late summer, Hughes will be job hunting. "I've no idea what I'll do. 
Managing somewhere would be nice. I've got friends in New Zealand. I don't want 
to leave Wales but I will if I have to."
 