
The US National Institutes of Health will wind up its programme of medical 
research upon chimpanzees, announcing that 50 of its remaining great apes will 
be sent to sanctuaries.


In an email to agency administrators on 16 November, NIH <http://www.nih.gov/> 
director Francis Collins said there was “no further justification for the 50 
chimpanzees to continue to be kept available for invasive biomedical research”, 
according to Nature. The NIH will also phase out its support for chimps that it 
maintains for research but does not keep, meaning that around 360 chimps will 
be relocated.

Chimpanzee representatives argue for animals' rights in New York court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/27/chimpanzee-animals-rights-new-york-court>
The 50 transferred chimps will be kept in “ethologically appropriate” 
settings, involving them in large, complex social groups with independent 
oversight.

The decision, long campaigned for by animal welfare advocates, is an apparent 
U-turn from the NIH’s position from earlier this month, when it said it would 
keep the 50 chimps in its laboratories. An initial group of 20 chimps at the 
Texas Biomedical Research Institute will be sent toChimp Haven 
<http://www.chimphaven.org/>, a national ape sanctuary.

 “We have moved away from a time where we would consider chimps essential to 
medical research,” Collins said. He added it will take several years to 
relocate the chimps, however. Collins has been the target of a vigorous 
campaign by animal welfare activists, with Peta sending letters to his 
neighbours criticising chimp research.

 The NIH has steadily backed away from the use of chimps for medical 
experiments since 2010, when it commissioned the Institute of Medicine to study 
whether the experiments were needed.

The review <http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-12-025.html>
 found that “while the chimpanzee has been a valuable animal model in past 
research, most current use of chimpanzees for biomedical research is 
unnecessary”. However, antibody therapies, genome research and non-invasive 
research into behaviourial and social traits may still require chimps, the 
review added.

 In 2012 around 100 chimps were retired from research facilities to Chimp 
Haven but hundreds of chimps, including those privately held, remain in 
captivity. In June, the US Fish and Wildlife Service decided to list 
chimpanzees as endangered, which restricts most invasive research on the 
animals. There have also beenrecent court cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/30/new-york-judge-chimpanzee-legal-rights-research>
 launched in the US to grant chimps legal rights, similar to humans.

 “This is a historic moment and major turning point for chimpanzees in 
laboratories – some who have been languishing in concrete housing for over 50 
years,” said Wayne Pacelle, president and chief executive of the Humane Society 
of the United States.

“It is crucial now to ensure that the release of hundreds of chimpanzees to 
sanctuary becomes a reality, and we look forward to working with NIH and the 
sanctuary community to make that happen.”
 