
Mysterious structures found deep inside a French cave are the work of 
Neanderthal builders who lived in the region more than 100,000 years before 
modern humans set foot in Europe.

The extraordinary constructions are made from nearly 400 stalagmites that have 
been yanked from the ground and stacked on top of one another to produce 
rudimentary walls on the damp cave floor.


The most prominent formations are two ringed walls, built four layers deep in 
places, which appear to have been propped up with stalagmites wedged in place 
as vertical stays. The largest of the walls is nearly seven metres across and, 
where intact, stands up to 40cm high.


“This is completely different to anything we have seen before. I find it very 
mysterious,” said Marie Soressi, an archaeologist at Leiden University, who was 
not involved in the research. Unique in the history of Neanderthal 
achievements, the structures rank among the earliest human building projects 
ever discovered.


Parts of the walls show clear signs of fire damage, with the stalagmites 
blackened or reddened and fractured from the heat, leading researchers to 
suspect that theNeanderthals <https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals> 
embedded fireplaces in the structures to illuminate the cave.
 A look inside the cave and at the techniques being used to date the 
structures. Source: CNRS News 
Dotted around the construction site are round holes in the ground where the 
stalagmites were wrenched from the cave floor, demonstrating that builders have 
not cleared up after themselves since at least the Middle Pleistocene.


Local cavers happened on the mysterious formations in the 1990s, more than 
300m from the entrance to the Bruniquel cave, near the Pyrénées mountains in 
southwest France. Back then, the stalagmite structures were assumed to be 
50,000 years old, the same age as burnt animal remains found nearby.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fneanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecfa801d66cb85312a4a2f37f2b85f152f3c5c3%2F53_56_2090_778%2F2090.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neanderthals%20built%20mysterious%20cave%20structures%20175%2C000%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fneanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neanderthals%20built%20mysterious%20cave%20structures%20175%2C000%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fneanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecfa801d66cb85312a4a2f37f2b85f152f3c5c3%2F53_56_2090_778%2F2090.jpg>
 A 3D reconstruction of the structures in the Bruniquel cave. Photograph: 
Xavier Muth/Get in Situ, Archéotransfert, Archéovision -SHS-3D 
But fresh tests on the structures, reported in the journal Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature18291>, reveal the simple walls 
to be much older than thought. Stalagmite tips and pieces of charred bone found 
in the walls date them to at least 175,000 years ago. According to French and 
Belgian scientists who led the research, only Neanderthals could have built the 
structures. While bears in the cave left behind claw marks, paw prints, tufts 
of fur, and even hibernation holes, they were not able to stack stalagmites 
into foot-high walls, the researchers say.


Neanderthals lived in Eurasia from about 400,000 to 40,000 years ago and died 
out just as modern humans arrived in the region. Though often dismissed as 
thick-browed thugs, our human relatives were immensely capable, as evidenced by 
hauls of stone tools and other artefacts they left behind. The Neanderthals 
harnessed fire, lived in shelters, wore clothes, and mastered the art of stone 
tool making. Some researchers believe theydeliberately buried their dead 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/111/1/81.full>, and even adorned the graves with 
offerings such as flowers.


But that is not all. The Iberian Neanderthals had a fondness for sea shells, 
andturned scallop and cockle shells into jewellery 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/107/3/1023.full> by painting them with mineral 
pigments and probably threading them on strings. Other Neanderthals made
artificial glue <http://eja.sagepub.com/content/4/3/385.abstract> by careful 
burning of tree bark, to help fix their sharp stone tips to spear shafts.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fneanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720b766ee062f7ee3f8ac2ae27510b40f58f55ae%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neanderthals%20built%20mysterious%20cave%20structures%20175%2C000%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fneanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neanderthals%20built%20mysterious%20cave%20structures%20175%2C000%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fneanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720b766ee062f7ee3f8ac2ae27510b40f58f55ae%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Parts of the walls show clear signs of fire damage, with the stalagmites 
blackened or reddened, and fractured from the heat, leading researchers to 
suspect that the Neanderthals embedded fireplaces in the structures to 
illuminate the cave. Photograph: Etienne Fabre/SSAC 
For all the feats Neanderthals achieved, until now, building had never seemed 
one of their strong points. “EarlyNeanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals> were the only human 
population living in Europe during this period,” Jacques Jaubert at the 
University of Bordeaux writes in the journal, suggesting the early human 
species were even more sophisticated than even expert researchers appreciated.

The site is remarkably well preserved because the stalagmites became encased 
in calcium carbonate soon after the walls were built. Had they not been 
constructed so deep inside the cave, however, they would probably have 
weathered away in the 175,000 years since they were erected.


Human-Neanderthal relationships may be at root of modern allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/07/human-neanderthal-relationships-may-be-at-root-of-modern-allergies>
What the structures were for is far from clear. “At this stage, all options 
are open,” said Soressi. It is not even certain that the walls were made for a 
specific purpose. But more intriguing to Soressi is what the Neanderthals were 
doing so deep inside the cave, where the lack of natural light would have left 
them in total darkness without fires to illuminate the space. The discovery 
raises plenty of questions, she adds. Were the walls built when Neanderthals 
found themselves deep inside the cave by chance, or was making underground 
structures a common practice for them?

“It’s becoming really clear with the Neanderthals, that given their abilities 
and capacities, there is not so much of a jump between them and contemporaneous 
modern humans,” Soressi said. “But this is very strange behaviour. I’d like to 
understand why they did it.”
 