
Diseases and infections passed on by the ancestors of modern humans when they 
moved out of Africa and into Europe may have helped wipe out theNeanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals> who previously dominated the 
continent.

The unfortunate Neanderthals, who would only have developed resistance to the 
diseases of their European environment, are most likely to have been infected 
with a bacterium that causes stomach ulcers, the virus that causes genital 
herpes, tapeworms and tuberculosis.

The impact on the Neanderthals was described as catastrophic by the scientists 
behind the new research, who published their findingsin the American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)1096-8644/issues>. The 
diseases and infections to which the hunter-gatherers were exposed would have 
made them less able to find enough food and remain healthy. The diseases would 
have spread through sexual contact between the two species.

Researchers at Cambridge and Oxford Brookes Universities, who have been 
studying pathogen genomes and ancient DNA, now believe some infectious diseases 
are far older than had been believed.

Neanderthals ‘kept our early ancestors out of Europe’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/17/neanderthals-kept-early-homo-sapiens-out-of-europe>
Dr Charlotte Houldcroft, from the division of biological anthropology at 
Cambridge, said: “Humans migrating out of Africa would have been a significant 
reservoir of tropical diseases. For the Neanderthal population of Eurasia, 
adapted to that geographical infectious disease environment, exposure to new 
pathogens carried out of Africa may have been catastrophic.”

Houldcroft, who also studies modern infections at Great Ormond Street 
hospital, said the result would not have been a swift decimation of native 
populations, as happened when Europeans arrived in the Americas in the 15th 
century.

“It’s more likely that small bands of Neanderthals each had their own 
infection disasters, weakening the group and tipping the balance against 
survival,” she said.

The researchers describe Helicobacter pylori, a bacterium that causes stomach 
ulcers, as highly likely to have been passed by humans to Neanderthals. It is 
estimated to have first infected humans in Africa between 88,000 to 116,000 
years ago, and in Europe 52,000 years ago.

Herpes simplex 2, the virus that causes genital herpes, is another likely 
candidate. Evidence in the genome of the disease suggests it was transmitted to 
humans in Africa 1.6m years ago from another, currently unknown hominin species 
that in turn acquired it from chimpanzees.

Houldcroft and her colleague Simon Underdown of Oxford Brookes are challenging 
the view that the spread of infectious diseases exploded with the evolution of 
agriculture about 8,000 years ago, which saw denser and more settled human 
populations coexisting with livestock.

Instead, they believe that many diseases traditionally thought to have been 
caught by humans from herd animals were actually in the human population far 
earlier, and passed from them to the animals.

 “Hunter-gatherers lived in small foraging groups. Neanderthals lived in 
groups of between 15 and 30 members, for example. So disease would have broken 
out sporadically, but would have been unable to spread very far. Once 
agriculture came along, these diseases had the perfect conditions to explode, 
but they were already around,” she said.

Scientists have long puzzled over the disappearance of the Neanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jun/02/why-did-neanderthals-die-out>, 
a species very close in body shape and brain size to modern humans, which 
largely died out about 40,000 years ago, having dominated Europe for thousands 
of years.


The Neanderthals did not disappear without trace. Recent research 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v524/n7564/full/nature14558.html> 
suggesting that up to 3% of modern Eurasians’ DNA is Neanderthal has overturned 
earlier theories that the two species did not mate.
 