
The city has so much character. It's a sprawling place that weaves around 
bridges and harbours, and there are lots of neighbourhoods, such as Britomart, 
Ponsonby and Grey Lynn, where good things are happening. I love the Polynesian 
aspect to the city. There's a strong Maori presence and tradition but there's 
also been an influx of people from the islands, too.

Buy fish and chips and climb Mount Eden. Get your food at The Ancient Mariner 
<http://www.theancientmariner.co.nz/#!home/> and head up the nearby hill 
(Maungawhau in Maori). You get a great 360-degree view of the city and a 
volcanic crater to peer into. You can walk up or take a car … but don't leave 
the handbrake off: I once saw a car roll into the crater.

One of the venues I'm fondest of is Powerstation 
<http://www.powerstation.net.nz/> (powerstation.net.nz). I played there before 
Christmas and it's just one of those really good clubs – nothing when you first 
walk in, but with a room full of people it has a big vibe. For a more 
close-quarters gig, there's theKings Arms <http://www.kingsarms.co.nz/>. It's a 
good place to see up-and-coming bands, as is theGolden Dawn 
<http://www.goldendawn.co.nz/>.

New Zealand cuisine is about influences and fusions. I also associate it with 
tasty, fresh local produce.SPQR <http://spqrnz.co.nz/> is one of my favourite 
restaurants. It's glitzy but also relaxed. My wife and I only ever go there 
early but it gets really wild late at night, so I'm told. There are places 
worth investigating in the Britomart district: at theOrtolana  
<http://britomart.org/ortolana>bistro they grow all the vegetables used in 
their dishes, andCafé Hanoi <http://www.cafehanoi.co.nz/> round the corner does 
beautiful Vietnamese food.

For somewhere a little bohemian check out Ponsonby, one of the first of 
Auckland's inner-city areas to become an arts district. It has lots of 
designers and decent restaurants, though it has become a lot more gentrified. 
Areas such as Grey Lynn or Kingsland are worth a look, and Karangahape Road (K 
Road, as it's known) and Ponsonby Road are good places to see all sides of 
Auckland. Take St Kevin's Arcade, on K Road: there's a good cafe in there and a 
popular wine bar, plus some secondhand stores.

Dusk is a great time to see the city. Twilight in New Zealand is beautiful. We 
get a very intense light down here, but by the end of the day that intensity 
has lessened. The west coast is the place to catch the twilight. To see the sun 
go down there is magic. The evenings go on forever.
 A view of Piha beach. Photograph: Alamy 
Pacific Island Cricket is a joy to watch. You'll see it played in many of the 
city's parks, and may even get invited to play. I've seen it myself in the 
Auckland Domain (in Grafton, just west of the centre). There may be as many as 
50 people on the pitch, and they play with a huge triangular bat that looks 
like a club. It's a real community game; not guys in white uniforms.

The west coast is an amazing place. In less than an hour's drive you'll find 
great beaches likePiha <http://www.piha.co.nz/> and Karekare 
<http://karekare.org.nz/> where there's black sand, rugged hills and big surf. 
To the north,Leigh <http://www.leighbythesea.co.nz/> is in the middle of a 
lovely area that includes Goat Island, a marine reserve where you can go 
snorkelling.

Swimming in the ocean is the best. You know you're alive when you're in that 
water on the west coast because it's pretty wild. Make sure you swim between 
the flags: they can be dangerous beaches.

We sometimes head out late at night and do what we call bush bashes. You go up 
a riverside track at Piha and gradually work your way back down in the water. 
It's best to put on a wetsuit and take a waterproof torch. You get to see eels, 
and the shallow riverbed is alive with glowworms, underfoot and along the 
banks. It's like you're walking in a celestial place. You have to ask a local 
where to get in and get out of the river, but it's mindblowing.

If I could change one thing about Auckland I'd bring it a bit closer to the 
rest of the world. It's a long way to fly – anywhere! – though I know the city 
wouldn't be the way it is if it was closer.

• Neil Finn's new album, Dizzy Heights, is out now on Lester Records/Kobalt. 
He is on tour from March with UK dates in April and May. More details at:
neilfinn.com <http://neilfinn.com/>
 