
Over the past few years Amanda Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer> and Neil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> have become a kind of Kim and 
Kanye for theComic Con <http://www.mcmcomiccon.com/london/> classes, a pair 
whose couplehood now almost transcends their individual fame. She: a 
37-year-old Boston-born musician and performance artist who has ploughed a 
goth-cabaret furrow since her days with theDresden Dolls 
<http://www.dresdendolls.com/>. He: the 53-year-old British graphic novelist 
beloved for Coraline and The Sandman series.

They share a fan demographic in self-identified teenage misfits and tonight, 
at a sold-out show in New York's Times Square, the auditorium is filled with 
skinny boys dressed as Doctor Who and girl goths in rainbow-striped tights and 
dog collars, as death-obsessed as they are twee. There is lots of shy smiling 
and eagerness. The show is to accompany an album the couple have made,An 
Evening With Amanda Palmer & Neil Gaiman 
<https://amandapalmer.bandcamp.com/releases>, a three-disc, Kickstarter-funded 
album of songs and readings taken from their joint 2011 tour.

Though he reads from behind a lectern, it sounds as if it's fireside – he 
lilts through his cadences, sonorous and theatrical. He sings, too – they open 
with the duetMaking Whoopee <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ePH-TZPUjfc>.

"You know, I think I was actually better when I wasn't as good," he tells me 
later. "Because when I wasn't as good and obviously completely terrified, you 
get the entire 2,000 people just rooting for me."

But this audience couldn't be rooting for both of them harder. The show is 
shambolic, in that welcome-to-our-living-room way that Palmer – who really has 
played fans' living rooms – is so loved for. Readings and songs are punctuated 
by confusion over the whereabouts of mic stands, for example, and the crowd 
loves it. I think they would love it even if the two passed three hours on 
stage picking their noses.

When Palmer performs Map of Tasmania 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s-GQ63NStxk>, a song about female pubic hair 
the whole room, unprompted, yells the refrain: "Fuck it!" These fans are 
intense in the way that only teenagers can be, as sentimental as they are 
extreme. There's a smattering of adults, but that audience shout is distinctly 
young and female.

The following morning, I visit them in a SoHo apartment owned by their friend, 
the author and cartoonistArt Spiegelman <https://www.facebook.com/ArtSpiegelman>
. They are staying there while in New York but plan to move to the city 
properly soon – Gaiman is a professor at nearby Bard College, where he teaches 
a writing course on "the history of the fantastic, approaches to fantasy 
fiction, and the meaning of fantasy today".

The Young Punx - The Young Punx, Amanda Palmer & Peaches - Map Of Tasmania 
(Club Mix) 
<http://www.muzu.tv/the-young-punx/the-young-punx-amanda-palmer-and-peaches-map-of-tasmania-club-mix-music-video/905244/>
 onMUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Rumpled and craggy, he answers the door, as kindly as a cup of tea. We sit 
around the kitchen table where he has laid out an unorthodox breakfast of 
cheese, gluten-free crackers and rice cakes. Palmer is in a torn khaki T-shirt 
and last night's eyeliner ("we've been awake about 20 minutes") and he, as 
ever, is all in black.

"Everybody there wants to feel very together," says Palmer, when I mention the 
intense fandom of the night before, "and there's such a community vibe that 
when you start to segment it, people all of a sudden feel they're not invited 
to the party."

As she talks I notice something keeps attracting and holding her attention on 
the wall to my right. It's a large mirror. Over the next hour and a half her 
own reflection is the recipient of a lot of eye contact.

Palmer and Gaiman's relationship began over email. He blogged about liking a 
song of hers, she sent him a thank-you note and a correspondence was born. 
Eventually she asked him to caption a series of photographs she had taken of 
herself dead, originally meant to accompany her first solo album, 2008'sWho 
Killed Amanda Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/12/popreview.amandapalmer>.

"And I wrote back and said, yeah, because nobody had ever asked me to write 
captions for photographs of themselves dead." It was platonic and when they 
finally met in person (where else but the green room of New York's Comic Con), 
"I didn't even think she was cute."

"He looked like hell," she says.

Palmer was in a relationship at the time. "Long story short," she says, "I 
embarked on a very long tour and the tour pretty much destroyed the 
relationship. And somewhere in there Neil decided he was in love with me."

Amanda Palmer - Strength Through Music 
<http://www.muzu.tv/amanda-palmer/strength-through-music-music-video/229773/> on
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
"Camden," he says softly. And then explains: "She'd been an American in 
Belfast and had looked the wrong way while crossing the road so she was now 
doing gigs on crutches. I remember being in Camden. I stopped off for a day and 
popped in to see her gig and she came upstairs on crutches with her boot on and 
I looked at her and I thought:Ohhh. It was like being hit over the back of the 
head with a love-shaped brick. I just thought: 'I want to look after you.' And 
I didn't actually do anything ..."

He notices the wildly skeptical face she's pulling.

"I didn't!" he protests.

"Sooooo not true," she says. She turns to me: "Neil told me as I came off 
stage that night he would marry me."

"I don't think I said it out loud ..."

A few months later, she agreed to date him. "I wooed her," he says, proudly.

They quibble over which occasion qualifies as their first date.

"We didn't go anywhere," he says, when she suggests it was a night in LA where 
Gaiman, in his own words, "being chivalrous and noble and English", surprised 
her with a two-bed suite on the last night of a tour. "You have to go somewhere 
for it to be a date."

The suite's second bed turned out to be just a sofa.

"So," he says, "that felt like the universe telling us we should probably 
sleep in the same bed. Which we did. And ..."

She chips in: "It was our first exercise in realising that our sexual 
chemistry was very awkward."

"Incredibly awkward," he agrees. And then, sounding surprised. "It's got quite 
good since."

"It has, it's got really fantastic since, but he was used to making out with 
people in an entirely different way."

"Oh God!" he cries with a visible cringe. "See? It gets much, much, much too 
..."

"You wanted to tell the entire story," she says.

"No, I didn't, I just wanted to tell the funny bit about the bed."
 Palmer and Gaiman in Art Spiegelman's flat: 'I think Neil's fans are more 
rabid.' Photograph: Timothy Fadek for the Guardian 
In January of 2010 they got engaged and were married a year later. They remain 
as smoochy with each other as adolescents. Performative, perhaps, but I find it 
sweet. Both, in fact, seem teenager-ish in their sensibilities – here, for 
example, is howGaiman describes himself in his Twitter bio 
<https://twitter.com/neilhimself>: "Will eventually grow up and get a real job. 
Until then, will keep making things up and writing them down."

Those made-up things include comics, graphic novels, six books of fiction, 15 
young adult works, several screenplays and a trove of short stories. His latest 
novel,The Ocean at the End of the Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/03/ocean-end-lane-gaiman-review>, 
debuted at No 1 on the New York Times bestseller list. He is probably the 
higher profile of the two, although it seems her fans are fiercer. He agrees.

"Yeah. Her fans."

"Absolutely not," she says. "I think his are more rabid." She adds: "You 
rarely see men saying: 'I want to feel about my wife the wayNeil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> feels about his wife.' But you 
do see a lot of women going: 'I can't wait to find a husband like Neil Gaiman!' 
But I think that could also be that I reveal a lot more about the inner 
workings of the marriage and Neil's more stand-offish."

He mumbles, through a rice cake, something that sounds like "embarrassed".

"Embarrassed?" I say.

"British," Palmer corrects me.

He swallows his rice cake. "I said embarrassed, but either will work. We both 
have our lines in the sand on how much we communicate to the internet, it's 
just, you know, my line in the sand is in Brighton and hers is in Plymouth."

The two have an open marriage, of which Gaiman has said: "We would not allow 
another relationship to imperil what we have. We talk. And talk. And talk. And 
hug a lot. And talk some more. And then do whatever needs to be done in the 
real world."

But the difficulties and delicacies of polyamory must be compounded by their 
other very open relationship, the one they have with their public. She has 
close toa million Twitter followers <https://twitter.com/amandapalmer>, his 
number almost two million and they talk to them all the time.

"There's an art or a skill that there really isn't a name for yet," Palmer 
says, "but it's how to negotiate the intimacies of your real-life relationships 
and the intimacies of your internet sphere. Neil and I learned this lesson 
early on – you don't complain about the marriage on Twitter."

She has said before that,"when I go to the other room to Twitter with my 
followers, it feels like sneaking off for a quick shag".

She laughs when I remind her of this, but says: "If you look at the Twitter 
feed as just another relationship that you dominate and it feeds your ego, it 
does have that sense of: 'I'm tired of reality over here, I'm just going to run 
across the street and go where it's simple.'"

Twitter, though, is by no means always a refuge for her. There was the 
post-Kickstarter scandal last year, where, having raised a then unprecedented 
amount of money ($1.2m) for her new album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/26/amanda-palmer-future-of-music>, 
she asked musicians to play for free on her tour, or at least, in exchange for 
"beer, hugs and high fives". "Pretty much everybody on Earth has a threshold 
for how much to indulge an idiot who doesn't know how to conduct herself 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/47845-steve-albini-slams-amanda-palmer-for-asking-fans-to-play-in-her-band-for-free/>
," Steve Albini wrote, "and I think Ms Palmer has found her audience's 
threshold."
 Palmer and Gaiman perform a free show for fans in Tel Aviv, October 2013. 
Photograph: Guy Prives 
Then, last April, in the wake of the Boston marathon bombings, she published '
a poem for dzhokhar' <http://amandapalmer.net/blog/20130421/>, a seemingly 
sympathetic address to Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the 19-year-old charged with 
co-perpetrating the attacks that killed three people and injured more than 200 
others.As both literature and gesture it was almost universally deplored and 
derided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/22/amanda-palmer-visionary-egotist-interview>
. The parodies included one Poem for Amanda Palmer, which begins:"you don't 
know that there are ways of responding to a tragedy without being narcissistic 
and self-serving / you don't know how a national crisis and the death of at 
least three innocent people could not be about you." 
<http://fivebyfivehundred.com/2013/04/22/poem-for-amanda-palmer/>

I put to her the possibility that the devotion of her fans functions as a sort 
of cocoon, perhaps blinkering her from her own actions.

"If all my fans were doing was stroking my ego constantly, and never 
criticising me or questioning me, I'd be afraid of them."

So they do criticise her?

"Oh, absolutely. Sometimes the most wonderful thing about having an open 
dialogue and very honest relationship with my fanbase is that they're as quick 
to criticise me, albeit much more compassionately, than the haters and the 
trolls."

What was their critical response to 'a poem for dzhokhar' then?

"'Not your best poem but we know where you were coming from,'" she says 
briskly.

"And a bunch of your fans going 'too soon'," Gaiman offers.

"Yeah, but I think the difference between my fanbase and the rest of the 
outside world that came thundering in is that my fanbase understood the 
intention and didn't misconstrue it."

Gaiman seems as soft-hearted a soul as they come. I wonder how he copes with 
his wife being publicly attacked.

"I was astounded," he says gently, "It was spilling over from Amanda's stuff 
to my stuff: 'Your cunt wife should have her legs cut off and a bomb shoved up 
her cunt for writing love poems to this terrorist.'"

Amanda Palmer - Have To Drive 
<http://www.muzu.tv/amanda-palmer/have-to-drive-music-video/228147/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Last summer the Daily Mail reviewed Palmer's performance at Glastonbury by 
focusing on an errant nipple 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2351373/Making-boob-Amanda-Palmers-breast-escapes-bra-performs-stage-Glastonbury.html>
. She responded withDear Daily Mail, a blithe and deliciously witty song 
<http://amandapalmer.net/blog/20130713/> that includes the line: "Your focus on 
debasing women's appearances ruins our species of humans."

"It was one of the highlights of my life having one of Neil's aged British 
aunts clutch my hand and say" – and she puts on an impressive English accent – 
'I absolutelyadored your Dear Daily Mail song.'"

"I suddenly saw a new phrase after that," says Gaiman. "I kept seeing: 'Say 
what you will aboutAmanda Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer>, BUT ...' – and I thought, 
OK, we have turned some kind of corner from the Amanda haters."

She sees it a little differently. "The weather will just keep constantly 
fucking changing, you have no control over it, and if you let yourself be too 
pleased with yourself that you managed to get back into the good favour of the 
internet ... fuck it, it's all meaningless. The hardest thing about being 
attacked in such a way is how deeply misunderstood you feel. To feel 
misunderstood hurts a lot more than feeling disliked."

She looks at Gaiman. "I can feel ignored, I can feel irritated, but he never 
misunderstands my intentions. And that's why I married him."

"I married her," he says, "because I couldn't ever imagine getting bored of 
talking to her."

She reaches out her arm for his hand, he reaches out for hers, and the two of 
them paddle palms, looking at each other. Her eyes, I realise, are flooded with 
tears.

• An Evening With Neil Gaiman and Amanda Palmer is out now through 8ft records
 