
Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> has begun rolling out the 
ability to download videos from its streaming service to smartphones and 
tablets for offline viewing.


Offline viewing is arguably the most demanded feature by users, and one of the 
things that differentiated other services including Amazon’s Video streaming 
service and pay TV services such as Sky and Virgin.

Eddy Wu, Netflix director of product innovation, said 
<https://media.netflix.com/en/company-blog/downloads-make-it-even-easier-to-watch-netflix-on-the-go>
: “While many members enjoy watching Netflix at home, we’ve often heard they 
also want to continue their Stranger Things binge while on airplanes and other 
places where internet is expensive or limited.”

The feature is available from today on Android and iOS devices, and includes 
many TV series and movies, including Netflix’s original content such as Orange 
is The New Black, Narcos andthe recently released The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
. The company says that more will be made available soon.
 Netflix begins offline downloads. Photograph: Netflix 
Video downloads will be provided at no added cost within the service’s 
existing monthly subscription fees, which start at £5.99 a month in the UK 
($7.99 in the US).

Netflix is locked in a battle with streaming rival Amazon, as well as 
traditional broadcasters which are making in-roads into “over the top” 
streaming services.

Netflix started by using expansive libraries of previously broadcast TV and 
films to lure subscribers, but in recent years it has increasingly focussed on 
original content it pays to show first.

Netflix has bought shows such as Stranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
, Kevin Spacey’s House of Cards and Tina Fey’s Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, 
helping to push its total budget for programming this year to $6bn. It also has 
huge liabilities for its back catalogue of shows from other networks totalling 
$11.4bn.

Amazon has also put money into original shows such as Transparent, Alpha 
House, The Man in the High Castle and the recent release ofThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-grand-tour-review-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-leave-the-bbc-in-their-dust>
 – a Top Gear-like show from Jeremy Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond, 
which is being used to spearhead a global rollout to match Netflix’s 
availability in 130 countries.

Though Amazon has the advantage of bundling its video subscription as part of 
its Prime delivery service, Netflix has managed to maintain a lead in video. In 
October it reported that it had almost 87 million subscribers worldwide, and 
although Amazon does not break out the number of people who use its video 
service, estimates in the UK and US suggest Netflix is more popular.

Enders Analysis TV analyst Toby Syfret said that people who subscribe to 
Amazon are more likely to also subscribe to Netflix, and “as long as you keep 
the price down” most consumers would not feel forced to choose between the two. 
However, he said the increasing competitiveness of Amazon’s service will still 
have spurred Netflix match its ability to offer downloads.

“What they have always tried to do is make their product easy and 
uncomplicated,” he said. “But [it is now] a question of being able to offer 
what the rest of the market does, and when it is Amazon that does it....”

Though Netflix and Amazon are considered the leaders in video streaming, both 
have followed in the footsteps of the BBC, which led the way by launching 
iPlayer in 2007 and has allowed users to download programmes for offline 
watching on mobile devices since 2014.

However, Syfret said the service was no longer quite so cutting edge. “It’s 
always difficult when you start early. When you are a trailblazer really it 
looks frontline, then other things come along. At some point the BBC will have 
to decide whether it wants to re-engineer things.”
 