
Netflix's stock fell by more than 6% as investors reacted to critics' mixed 
reviews over the weekend of the first newArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> episodes since 
Fox canceled the TV series seven years ago.

The shares shed $14.55 on Tuesday to close at $214.19, marking the biggest 
one-day drop in the stock in nearly six months.

IDC analyst Greg Ireland characterized the sell-off as an over-reaction, given 
that it's too early to know whether Netflix's latest high-profile foray into 
original programming will be a hit or a flop.Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> typically announces the number of 
subscribers it added during the April-June period in July.

Netflix declined to disclose any information about how many of Netflix's 29.2 
million US subscribers have watched Arrested Development since all 15 new 
episodes were released Sunday.

Arrested Development is the third original series to debut this year on 
Netflix, but it has attracted far more attention because of its built-in fan 
base, Emmy awards and a popular cast, which includes Jason Bateman and Michael 
Cera.

The US-based company didn't make any of the new Arrested Development episodes 
available for advance viewing. Once they saw the resurrected Arrested 
Development, some influential critics panned it as a disappointment. The New 
York Times was particularly harsh 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/27/arts/television/arrested-development-on-netflixcom.html>
, asserting that Netflix had "killed" the series.

Many investors have been betting that the series will accelerate Netflix's 
subscriber growth and provide further validation of the company's decision to 
spend about $200m annually on original programming in an effort to make its
Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> video service as 
compelling as any broadcast or cable TV network.

Netflix credited the popularity of its original series "House of Cards" for 
helping its service add 2 million US subscribers during the first three months 
of this year, about 250,000 more than the same time last year.

The buildup to Arrested Development helped Netflix's stock recover from a 
backlash to price increases and proposed service changes announced nearly two 
years ago. The stock plummeted from nearly $305 in July 2011 to below $53 last 
August. Even with Tuesday's sharp decline, Netflix's stock has more than 
doubled in value so far this year.

The run-up has left investors paying about $144 for every $1 in Netflix's 
projected earnings this year compared with $23 for every $1 in anticipated 
earnings for Google, the Internet's most powerful company. Netflix's lofty 
valuation means the slightest stumble can cause many investors to dump their 
shares, Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter said.

"It's a stock that is priced for perfection," he said.

As of late Wednesday morning, Arrested Development had received a 72 rating  
<http://www.metacritic.com/tv/arrested-development/season-4>on a scale of 100, 
based on 10 professional reviews analyzed by Metacritic.com. That compared with 
a rating of 76 for the political drama House of Cards. Metacritic considers a 
rating of 61 to 80 to be signifying "generally favorable reviews."
 