
The weekend’s seemingly disjointed events – a bombing in New York City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
, severalunexploded bombs discovered in New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-both-devices-used-pressure-cooker-and-phone-reports>
, multiplestabbings in a mall in Minnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/minnesota-stabbing-somali-americans-suspect-name>
 – has set Americans on edge again.


It remains unclear if these acts were part of a grand international 
conspiracy, or whether a cell or single individuals are behind them. Yet what 
we do know is that we now inhabit an age in which it’s logistically 
straightforward to commit attacks designed to kill and create mayhem, and there 
are clear ideological rationales for doing so. This toxic combination, along 
with an occasional willingness to die while carrying out the “operation”, makes 
this new foe – call him a terrorist or a disturbed individual – particularly 
difficult to thwart.

New York and New Jersey explosive devices: what we know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-and-new-jersey-explosive-devices-what-we-know>
It used to take some degree of preparation to carry off a successful attack, 
especially in the west. The fact that some bombs inNew Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> and one in Manhattan failed to 
explode is a reminder that building explosives takes some degree of skill if 
you’re to be successful. Also, convincing your radical comrades to engage in a 
conspiracy opens you up to penetration by the cops or intelligence services. 
That is an additional challenge.

But stabbing people in a mall or shooting people in a club requires little 
preparation. You don’t need any particular specialized training anymore except 
to pull a trigger, drive a car, be willing to kill and desire to be killed.

We’ve seen this DIY violence elsewhere. For example, the atrocity in Nice, 
France, killedover 80 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-france-crash-minister-idUSKCN0ZV0BK?il=0> 
people, and while multiple suspects were arrested following the attack only one 
person carried out the operation. In this instance the assailant, Mohamed 
Lahouaiej-Bouhlel, drove a large truck into a crowd, crushing scores of people. 
The carnage only stopped after police shot him dead.

Soft, crowded targets are plentiful in our free, open societies. There is 
little the authorities can do to keep a determined attacker from striking 
pedestrians enjoying a balmy Saturday night inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City. Guns, gates and guards can 
only provide so much protection against a wily, creative adversary who is 
willing to risk oblivion.

What makes confronting these DIY terrorists even more difficult is that 
there’s an organization actively and successfully disseminating a death-cult 
message: the Islamic State. Through its slick social media messaging and global 
network of personal connections, this organization has been convincing the 
misguided – some of whom are lone wolves – to cause havoc in their home 
countries. This is no accident, but a long-held plan; terror operations outside 
Iraq and Syria have and will always bepart and parcel 
<http://thecipherbrief.com/article/middle-east/dna-isis> of the Islamic State’s 
DNA.

For those who wanted to kill people more generally for their own reasons, 
Islamic State provides them a rationale by which to do so. For example, the San 
Bernardino killer Syed Rizwan Farook bought his weaponsyears before 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/10/03/us/how-mass-shooters-got-their-guns.html?_r=0>
 he killed 14 people at a holiday party. Why didn’t he commit his crime 
earlier? We won’t ever know, since he (along with his wife, Tashfeen Malik) is 
dead, but perhaps Islamic State appears to have given him a reason and a 
mission to finally take the plunge and destroy himself.

As long as Islamic State steadfastly pursues its “victory” narrative, so long 
as it survives in one physical form or another, people will use its existence 
as a warped rationale for murderous behavior. Destroying Islamic State and 
draining the swamp will go a long way to denting the ideological allure of 
attacking civilians.

At the time of writing, we still don’t quite know the motivations of the NYC 
bomber or the Minnesota stabber. But we do know that if they were motivated by 
a jihadist ideology, crushing Islamic State will go a long way to reducing the 
rationale for this kind of behavior, making our streets safer.

This will require sacrifice and great political capital to see it through to 
the end. Islamic State is fully committed to this conflict, will give no 
quarter, and will continue to use its power to cause havoc on our streets.

Western nations must be committed to defeating Isis. In the meantime, our 
societies must be resilient enough to absorb “inspired” or “directed” attacks 
from the Islamic state and its DIY acolytes for the foreseeable future.

 