
Newcastle five-piece Shields <http://www.behindshields.com/> are producing a 
synth sensation, with catchy pop melodies, charming harmonies and layers of 
intricate indie sounds. The guys have been on their travels around Europe and 
the UK for most of the year, remixed a track forMaxïmo Park 
<http://maximopark.com/> and have been working away on their debut EP 
Kaleidoscope, which is out today.

The video for their latest single 'Mezzanine' caught the attention of new 
music master Michael Cragg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/oct/10/shields-mezzanine> a 
month ago. And it's no surprise, as the actors who star in the video are pretty 
top notch. Watch it right now and you'll be amazed. Nowadays it's hard to get 
people to watch anything for more than a few minutes without their eyes being 
diverted to another screen. But Shields pull you in immediately with lots of 
pretty colours to compliment the song's fun and poppy tone. The video cuts from 
the band performing and proving they can play instruments to a strong love 
story, which unfolds into a tragedy. Oh and if you haven't actually clicked to 
watch it yet, like I told you to, then you won't know that those remarkable 
actors are actually sock puppets. Even Kylie was impressed andshared it with 
her million plus Twitter followers <https://twitter.com/kylieminogue/followers>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FA0eqlf5k6Tg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FA0eqlf5k6Tg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FA0eqlf5k6Tg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The genius behind this video is Vicky Simmons who directed it and came up with 
the idea. Socks off to you Vicky.

"It was just unbelievable" 

Earlier this year the band self released a couple of singles and started 
impressing lots of people over here in the UK and abroad. Luke, who plays 
guitar, bass and sings in the band, said a particular highlight for him was 
playing at the Dispatch Show in Paris:

It's crazy to go to a such an amazing city in France where people are really 
enthusiast to see us. It was just unbelievable.

Luke, John, Rich, Dave and Tom make music everywhere they go. Dave even admits 
that in the middle of a conversation "it can be difficult to maintain 
concentration on what [the other person's saying] because I'm busy trying to 
hide the fact I'm making up or trying to remember a drum beat by chattering my 
teeth in rhythm." Now that's talented … maybe the boys should incorporate teeth 
chatters into their next single?
 From Left to Right: Dave Williams (guitar/keys/vocals), Luke Elgie 
(guitar/bass/vocals), Rich Sutton (guitar/vocals), John Martindale 
(percussion/bass/samples), Tom Larthe (drums/vocals) Photograph: Mike Platt 
Now when it comes to delving into how the band met John and Luke actually 
crossed paths on a ferry years before they actually met properly. They slowly 
realised this was the case when they were telling each other the same story. 
John was on his way to travel around Europe witha djembe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Djembe>. Luke then put his hand through John's 
drum during a jamming session on the top deck. I'm sure that was a bit awkward 
and sad for John. But now it seems as though John might be getting revenge on 
Luke as he's "always late" and as the designated driver that can get pretty 
annoying.

Originally Luke was in a band with Dave at the same time as being in a band 
with Tom and Rich. Both bands recorded at Blank Studios  
<http://blank-studios.com/>where John worked. Then coincidentally the band Luke 
and Dave were in parted ways when John left his current group. Are you 
following? Luke says "John had been really involved with the creative side of 
recording both bands so it made sense to bring it all together."

Each idea needs the "unanimous nod" 

The sound the band is creating is all about building up layers. After 
listening to their EP for the first time you then start to pick out each 
complex layer in a song and appreciate the effort and thought that's gone into 
the record. They use guitars, synths, drums, a bass and lots of vocals to build 
up each track and you suddenly realise – wow this is good. The band's sound is 
not the only thing full of colour and energy but their multi-coloured artwork 
"ties in with the music." Luke says:

When I listen to music it's colourful. There's lots going on and you can 
imagine lots of colour.


Making music is clearly a team process for this band, as each idea needs the 
"unanimous nod", which "generally occurs after the five of us can hear 
something new that we've previously not explored musically." Luke explains that 
a twenty second idea can often span out into a three minute song. The band 
takes influences from a wide range of artists includingEverything Everything 
<http://www.everything-everything.co.uk/>, Metronomy  
<http://www.metronomy.co.uk/>and Tune Yards <http://uk.myspace.com/tuneyards>. 
What's great about Shields is the way they don't necessarily think the sounds 
they're making need to fit into any one genre. They don't want to replicate 
something they've heard before but they take inspiration from sounds they 
admire and just go with what's working.

Away from the music the band enjoy playing FIFA, drinking single malts during 
a gig, meeting and working with lots of different people and creating games 
with their fans on Facebook. But sometimes the odd debate can crop up as they 
admit to hating

how much time [they] have wasted discussing (arguing) the meaning of irony and 
if Alanis did actually get it right.


As I mentioned earlier their debut EP, Kaleidoscope, is out today. It also 
features a cover of SBTRKT's  <http://www.sbtrkt.com/>Pharaohs, which they 
performed recently in true SBTRKT fashion, masks and all forthe 405 
<http://thefourohfive.com/>. So go take a look at that video <> and grab a copy 
of their new EP.

Emily Brinnand is a freelance journalist, radio presenter and producer. You 
can listen to her show Mixtape every Tuesday evening at 6pm on Sheffield Live! 
93.2fm or online atwww.sheffieldlive.org. <http://www.sheffieldlive.org/> 
Follow her onTwitter @EmilyBrinnand <https://twitter.com/EmilyBrinnand>

If you're in a Northern band Emily wants to hear from you so please Tweet her 
links to your music.
 