
Silent readings of Ted Dawe’s Into the River are being planned across New 
Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> tomorrow in protest at 
the much-praised young adult novel’s nationwide ban.

Following a complaint from Christian group Family First 
<https://www.familyfirst.org.nz/2015/09/family-group-puts-halt-on-explicit-book/>
 about the award-winning title’s “detailed descriptions of sex acts, coarse 
language and scenes of drug-taking”, New Zealand’sBoard of Film and Literature 
Review 
<http://www.dia.govt.nz/diawebsite.nsf/wpg_URL/Agency-Film-and-Literature-Board-of-Review-Index#FAQ>
 has placed an interim restriction order on Into the River, meaning that “no 
one in New Zealand can distribute, or exhibit, the book”. Individuals who 
breach the order face a fine of $3,000 and companies who breach it will be 
fined $10,000. The board will revise the order and consider a permanent age 
restriction for the novel in October.

Into the River, the coming-of-age story of a Maori boy whose intelligence wins 
him a place at a prestigious boarding school, where he faces racism and 
bullying, won Dawe the 2013 New Zealand Post Margaret Mahy Book of the Year 
award. Its ban has prompted a wave of outrage from New Zealanders, authors and 
the international book community, with silent readings planned tomorrow in
Auckland <https://m.facebook.com/events/526382437512847/>, Dunedin 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/1173609349322456/> and Wellington 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/831162610315753/831395933625754/> as the 
literary world throws its weight behind Dawe.

Can you pick the quotes from Ted Dawe's banned novel Into the River?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/08/can-you-pick-the-quotes-from-ted-dawes-banned-novel-into-the-river>
Auckland’s Time Out bookstore, meanwhile, has pulled together a window display 
of previously banned books from Animal Farm to The Catcher in the Rye, 
including Into the River inside a paper bag, in protest at the ban. “Into The 
River can be a confronting book, but it’s an honest one. We look forward to 
removing the paper bag and selling it again,” wrote thebookshop’s Jenna Todd 
<http://www.3news.co.nz/tvshows/newsworthy/a-bookshop-explains-why-the-into-the-river-ban-is-dumb-2015090818#ixzz3lEjyeFd3>
. “It’s gritty, unapologetic and raw. It contains sex, drugs and swear words. 
But when read in context, its confronting scenes add depth to the protagonist 
Te Arepa’s toxic surroundings. Many of the so-called scandalous and ‘offensive’ 
scenes result in negative experiences for him. It’s a good book. And this week, 
I have been told we will be fined $10,000 if we sell or display it.”

The New Zealand Book Council said 
<http://www.booksellers.co.nz/book-news/decision-place-interim-ban-river-alarming-kiwi-readers>
 it was “alarmed” by the decision to impose the interim ban, and that if an age 
restriction is imposed on the “challenging and ambitious novel that explores 
the reality of what many young people are struggling with in New Zealand 
today”, it will “set a dangerous precedent, which could lead to more books 
being restricted in New Zealand”.


The Publishers Association of New Zealand also condemned 
<http://www.publishers.org.nz/publishers-association-of-new-zealand-condemns-book-banning/>
 the ban of the “highly regarded piece of literature, charged with influencing 
and changing the lives of many of its teenage male readers”. “This is an 
unprecedented and extreme action by the Film and Literature Board of Review,” 
said president Melanie Laville-Moore. “Banning books is not the New Zealand 
way.”

Dawe, head of studies at Taylors College for international students in 
Auckland,told the New Zealand Herald 
<http://m.nzherald.co.nz/books/news/article.cfm?c_id=134&objectid=11509128> 
that “New Zealand has taken a giant step towards that sort of regulatory 
moralising that I think most people felt we had left far in our past”. He added 
that “people involved with teaching boys, especially English teachers, know how 
important books like this are because they speak to boys about the things that 
other boys’ books don’t have the firepower or the vitality to do effectively”.

Into the River “was never about sex and drugs, it was always about bullying 
and how that damages people for the rest of their lives. That is really the 
underlying theme; everything else is just the trappings that go along with 
that,” he said.

Readers and authors around the world have vowed to buy and read the novel in 
solidarity with Dawe. The award-winning young adult author James Dawson told 
the Guardian: “History does not look kindly on the banning, or indeed burning, 
of books. This is the worst kind of censorship, and doubly surprising from a 
country like New Zealand which is in so many ways forward-thinking. On the plus 
side, I hadn’t previously heard of this title, but you can bet your bottom 
dollar I’ll be seeking it out now.”
 