
It's the literary world's version of consequences: from Alexander McCall Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexander-mccall-smith> to Kathy Reichs, 26 
bestselling crime writers have teamed up to create the multi-authored mystery 
No Rest for the Dead.

Published later this week, the authors – who also include Raymond Khoury, RL 
Stine, Faye Kellerman, Tess Gerritsen and Jeffery Deaver – have taken it in 
turns to write the novel's chapters, pulling together the story of Jon Nunn, a 
detective haunted by a case he thought he'd cracked 10 years earlier. Nunn 
becomes convinced that Rosemary Thomas, executed for the brutal murder of her 
husband, was actually innocent. When he discovers that a memorial service is 
being planned for Rosemary, with all the other suspects on the guest list, he 
realises it is the ideal opportunity to find out who really did the deed.

British crime author Peter James, chair of the UK's Crime Writers' 
Association, contributed a crucial chapter to the novel, in which a decade-old 
diary is discovered, providing vital clues. "The hard thing was not knowing 
what any of the characters were like – none of us saw what the others had 
written," said James. "I'm a very detailed plotter. A big part of my writing 
technique is seeding things into each chapter, and it was hard to not have that 
flexibility – I was writing it in a complete void. In a way it was harder than 
I thought, but in a way it was liberating."

Provided with just the outlines of his scene, James compared the experience to 
a paint-by-numbers painting, as well as to the parlour game of consequences, in 
which a story is created word by word by a group of people. "It's amazing 
though – it actually works," he said. "It shows most thriller writers think in 
a similar, Machiavellian way."

The novel, which is published by Simon & Schuster, is the brainchild of Andrew 
Gulli, editor of US crime fiction specialist Strand Magazine, who said it was 
the first time so many major bestselling authors have been involved in a single 
project. Gulli edited the book with his sister Lamia, and has also contributed 
several chapters to the novel. The siblings will donate all their proceeds to 
the Leukaemia and Lymphoma Society.

"The line-up of writers who have contributed to this mystery is akin to the 
Murderers' Row of the 1927 New York Yankees 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murderers%27_Row> ... While they each deliver 
their own signature brand of storytelling to the novel, it is startling how 
these writers, several of whom are friends of mine, have woven a yarn that 
seems to be the product of one mind, one imagination (albeit schizophrenic), 
and one on steroids of such strength that even Major League Baseball would ban 
them, and that is indeed saying something," writes author David Baldacci in an 
introduction to the novel. "Yet I will add that if you were expecting an Agatha 
Christie ending where Poirot or Marple stands up, calmly lays out the case, and 
reveals the true murderer, you're in for a shock. The creators have, 
collectively, another denouement in mind. And in my humble opinion it's a twist 
that is so original you won't have to concern yourself with bragging on your 
blog about how you figured it all out long before the conclusion. Well, I guess 
you still can, but you'd be lying."
 