
New Zealand’s Labour leader, Andrew Little, is defending the decision to 
release controversial data that he says suggests non-resident Chinese buyers 
are buying more and more properties inAuckland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/auckland>.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> was criticised after its 
housing spokesman, Phil Twyford, released figures from an unnamed real estate 
firm at the weekend showing 40% of houses sold in Auckland between February and 
April went to people with surnames it identified as Chinese.


The most recent census data shows about 9% of Auckland’s population is 
Chinese, and Twyford says the discrepancy in the figures points to offshore 
Chinese investors having a significant presence in the Auckland real estate 
market.

Labour has been accused of playing the race card and others have questioned 
the reliability of the data, which covers about 4,000 transactions over three 
months.

An Auckland economist, Shamubeel Eaqub, told Fairfax 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/business/money/70155168/labours-halfbaked-property-data-turns-chinese-buyers-into-scapegoats>
 that using such “half-baked” data to draw conclusions verged on racism.

“It draws this line across race and ethnicity, which is very damaging for a 
multicultural, welcoming place likeNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>,” he said.

Eaqub said Labour was using foreign investors as a “scapegoat” for the housing 
crisis in Auckland, wheremedian prices surged 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/news/national/278612/auckland-market-pushes-up-house-prices>
 26% from $542,000 (NZ$600,000) to $835,000 (NZ$755,000) in the year to June. 
By comparison, the national median house price rose by just 5.4% over the same 
period.

The race relations commissioner, Dame Susan Devoy, has also accused 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/business/news/article.cfm?c_id=3&objectid=11480147> 
the Labour party of dumbing down the complex issue of Auckland’s inflationary 
market.

“Chinese New Zealanders deserve better than this and so does anyone keen on 
actually solving this issue,” she said.

But Little told TV3’s Paul Henry show on Monday he was satisfied the data was 
accurate.

“It is crude, but the gap is so big that you can, I think, conclude that a 
large chunk of that 40% is coming from non-resident buyers,” he said.


If it got into government, Labour would ban non-residents living overseas from 
buying existing homes and instead make them build new ones.

The building and housing minister, Nick Smith, said Labour was “playing the 
oldest political trick in the book in picking on one ethnic group”.

“Their data is not reliable – it’s from one real estate agency and makes 
guesses at who is a New Zealander and who isn’t,” he said.

The housing issue was about supply: “That’s why the government’s focus is on 
getting more houses built.”

Rob Salmond, who analysed the numbers for Labour, defended the research in the 
National Business Review 
<http://www.nbr.co.nz/opinion/house-buying-patterns-auckland>, pointing to the 
large discrepancy between the number of Chinese residents and Chinese buyers, 
plus statistics about the incomes of Chinese residents pointed to foreign 
buying.

“Can Labour prove that any individual buyer is foreign?” he said. “No. All we 
have is their last name. But can Labour conclude … from the aggregate data that 
there is likely a large impact of offshore investment fromChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in Auckland’s real estate market? 
Yes.”

A data journalist and media commentator, Keith Ng, said the conclusions 
<http://publicaddress.net/onpoint/my-last-name-sounds-chinese/> drawn from the 
data equated people who had surnames that “sound Chinese” with “foreign 
parasites”.


“You can’t magically ‘math’ your way from a last name to a residency status,” 
he said. “They have one piece of real data: ‘39.5% of last names in a list of 
house sales sound Chinese.’ ”

Ng tweeted that <https://twitter.com/keith_ng/status/620390256412483584> 
Labour exploiting fears about Chinese people was a “rallying point for 
prejudice”.
Keith Ng (@keith_ng) 
The thing about offshore Chinese: they're not here. We are. When @nzlabour 
<https://twitter.com/nzlabour> exploits fears about Chinese, it's our faces on 
the target.
 <https://twitter.com/keith_ng/status/620388953779113984> July 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/keith_ng/status/620388953779113984> Keith Ng (@keith_ng) 
When @nzlabour <https://twitter.com/nzlabour> blames offshore Chinese for NZ's 
housing problem, it's Chinese New Zealanders who are harassed and treated with 
suspicion.
 <https://twitter.com/keith_ng/status/620389505627877376> July 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/keith_ng/status/620389505627877376>  