
The theatre industry is eager to increase diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/06/diversity-creativity-british-theatre-2015>
, and so it should be.As the Bush’s Madani Younis has observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/feb/23/bush-theatre-closes-refurbishment-uxbridge-road-madani-younis>
, the days when notions of diversity are discussed in rooms full of almost 
all-white artistic directors should be long over, but are sadly not.


We need to change access to the industry and understand that who is running 
our theatres and making the work – writing the plays, directing them, designing 
them and stage-managing them – is intimately connected with who is seeing those 
plays. This is one of the issues addressed atCentral St Martins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/dec/13/central-saint-martins-review>
 art school this week as part ofLondon writers’ week 
<http://londonwritersweek.com/events/>, an initiative that looks at the 
business of writing plays, who gets the chance to do so, how the theatre 
industry can better work with schools and colleges, and what to do about the 
decline in the number of those studying arts subjects at school, as a result of
the introduction of the EBacc <http://www.baccforthefuture.com/>, and 
university level.

 It’s tied to The Student Guide to Writing: Playwriting 
<http://thestudentguidetowriting.com/>, a competition and online resource 
developed by industry professionals to give those in schools and colleges the 
tools and inspiration to write a play, even if their experience of theatre is 
limited or non-existent.Jennifer Tuckett 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/people/teaching-staff/drama-and-performance-programme/jennifer-tuckett/>
, who runs the school’sMA in dramatic writing 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/courses/postgraduate/ma-dramatic-writing-drama-centre-london/>
, suggests that if you can change the writers and the stories being told then 
you can change other aspects of the industry.

We have to fight not just for writers but to make sure their plays are 
programmed, however risky that might seem
Rob Drummer, Bush theatre 
This week’s events include Writers’ Guild sessions 
<http://londonwritersweek.com/event/the-writers-guild-of-great-britain-too-true-the-aesthetics-and-ethics-of-fact-based-theatre/>
 run byDavid Edgar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/29/playwright-death-british-dramatist-exaggerated-surge-new-plays>
, who back in 1989 set up the first university-based playwriting course at 
Birmingham; showcases of unproduced plays that deserved to be seen and heard; a 
showcase fromTamasha <http://www.tamasha.org.uk/>; and talks from Tim Crouch, 
Arts Council England and the BBC Writers Room about getting started in the 
industry.

But actually it has to be about much more than simply getting started. For 
many of those from diverse backgrounds, theatre is not a career they would ever 
consider in the first place. Those who do often discover that getting started 
can be the relatively easy bit: it’s getting programmed and developing and 
sustaining yourself as a writer that’s the really difficult bit. As the Bush’s 
associate dramaturgRob Drummer 
<https://www.bushtheatre.co.uk/about-us/the-team/> observes: “New writing is 
perceived as a risky producing model.” New writing by women, BAME or disabled 
artists is even more so. The figures from theBritish Theatre Repertoire Survey 
<https://writersguild.org.uk/why-do-women-playwrights-lag-behind/> bear this 
out. But because it’s so economically risky doesn’t mean any theatre should 
have a get-out clause.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftheatre-diversity-new-plays-london-writers-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d9e3166931b2d9f3abdf2993969dbd2bbc40ca%2F0_180_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20writing%20is%20a%20risk%20but%20it's%20one%20theatres%20must%20take&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftheatre-diversity-new-plays-london-writers-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20writing%20is%20a%20risk%20but%20it%27s%20one%20theatres%20must%20take&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftheatre-diversity-new-plays-london-writers-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d9e3166931b2d9f3abdf2993969dbd2bbc40ca%2F0_180_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 Stage presence … Susan Wokoma and Michaela Coel in Three Birds at the Bush 
theatre, by Bruntwood prize-winner Janice Okoh. Photograph: Jonathan Keenan 


“If you are a new-writing theatre, as we are at the Bush, then it’s our job to 
advocate for writers and their plays and the work that really reflects the 
country,” says Drummer. “We have to fight not just for writers but for their 
plays and to make sure that they are programmed, however risky that might seem. 
That’s our job, it’s all we do, so it must be about diversity or we are not 
doing our job.”

 He goes on to make the point that “not every artist wants to write stories 
about their own lived experience” and that includes those from diverse 
backgrounds. Yet too often writers from diverse and particularly BAME 
backgrounds get pigeonholed and are overlooked for those commissions, such as 
adaptations, that are the bread and butter of many playwrights – and may be the 
difference between keeping your head above water financially or sinking.

A decade ago I wrote a piece suggesting the proliferation of play development 
schemes was increasing the number ofwould-be or fledgling playwrights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2006/oct/30/frompagetostage> but 
wasn’t necessarily giving those playwrights access to our stages. In the rush 
to improve statistics and tick boxes, there’s a danger that something similar 
is happening to playwrights from diverse backgrounds: they end up constantly in 
development or getting play readings, but theatres won’t actually take the risk 
on programming their work, which is what allows them to learn and grow as 
writers.

It’s good to see these issues being addressed by London writers’ week, because 
theatres and companies can’t just point towards the diversity of the writers 
whose work they are developing, but must also be accountable for what they 
actually put in front of audiences.
 