
12.40am BST 00:40  <> 

What we know so far

 * Bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, was arrested after a shootout with 
police in Linden, New Jersey,and about five hours after New York police sent 
his picture to millions of people with an appeal for help. 
 * Two officers were injured in the firefight, and Rahami, who had been found 
sleeping in the vestibule of a bar, was also shot. Elizabeth mayor Chris 
Bollwage said the officers’ injuries were not life-threatening – one was shot 
in the hand, the other in a protective vest – and that Rahami had surgery for 
his leg wound. 
 * Prosecutors charged Rahami with five counts of attempted murder of police 
officers, stemming from his shootout in New Jersey. He is in custody with bail 
set at $5.2m, and federal prosecutors have not yet leveled charges related to 
the bombings. 
 * FBI agent Bill Sweeney said investigators had “directly linked” Rahami to 
several bombs: one that exploded in Chelsea, Manhattan on Saturday night, 
injuring 29 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/new-york-bombing-no-international-terrorism-link-governor-cuomo>
, an unexploded pressure cooker bomb found blocks away,pipe bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/pipe-bomb-jersey-shore-5km-run-us-marines>
 found in Seaside, New Jersey on Saturday, and a device discovered near the 
train station in Elizabeth, New Jersey, on Sunday night.

 * Rahani is a naturalized US citizen who came to the United States with his 
family from Afghanistan,reportedly when he was seven years old. Neighbors who 
knew him from his work at the family’s fried chicken shop told the Guardian 
they were surprised at his arrest. The Rahami family lost a court battle with 
the city over the restaurant, whose neighbors had complained about noise, 
loitering and litter during its late-night hours. 
 * “We have every reason to believe this was an act of terror,” New York mayor 
Bill de Blasio said. But he and other officials declined to speak about the 
suspect’s possible motivation or whether he had any links to other people or 
groups.

 * “I have no indication that there’s a cell operating in the area or in the 
city,”Sweeney said. NYPD police commissioner added: “Right now we’re not 
actively seeking anyone.” 
 * Governor Andrew Cuomo said that “foreign connections” might be discovered 
in the course of investigation.No claim of responsibility has yet been made by 
any foreign group, such as Islamic State or al-Qaida.

 * Police interviewed five people stopped on the Verrazano Bridge in Brooklyn, 
Sweeney said, when their car was identified as a possible link to Rahami. None 
have been arrested. 
 * Investigators also searched the Rahami family’s fried chicken restaurant in 
Elizabeth, which Bollwage said had been a problem for the city. 
 * NYPD are hoping to find two men who stole the bag that had contained the 
second unexploded device on Saturday, though only “as witnesses”, NYPD chief 
Robert Boyce said. O’Neilly praised “good old fashioned police work” in 
apprehending the suspect. “I know I’m a lot happier than I was at this time 
yesterday.” 
 * President Barack Obama praised law enforcement and the people of New York, 
and warned against the spread of unconfirmed reports and rumors. He added that 
he saw no connection between Rahami and a mass stabbing attack in Minnesota on 
Saturday. 
 * Hillary Clinton accused Donald Trump, her opponent in the 2016 election, of 
giving “aid and comfort” to terroristsby linking their crimes to Islam and 
embracing extremeanti-immigrant proposals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/27/donald-trump-muslim-ban-deny-changing-stance>
. 
 * Trump said Clinton and Obama had “emboldened terrorists all over the world” 
by “not taking Isis seriously enough”, although investigators have not yet 
reported any link between the terror group and Rahani. He also repeated his 
call for an ideological test for immigrants, and said that his plan to defeat 
the terrorists was to “knock the hell out of ‘em”. 
Suspect in New York bombing arrested after shootout with police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
Updated at 10.51am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1%23block-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1%23block-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1%23block-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1%23block-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1%23block-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1%23block-57e062f6e4b02fcdee725ca1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.30am BST 00:30  <> 

Law enforcement sources have now told two separate outlets news organizations 
that Ahmad Rahami had traveled to Pakistan to recent years, though the reports 
are unconfirmed and based on anonymous sources.

Rahami traveled to Pakistan in April 2013 and stayed until March 2014, 
according to a law enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymityto 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/live/new-york-explosion/rahami-recently-spent-a-year-in-pakistan/?smid=tw-nytmetro&smtyp=cur>
. The paper had previously quoted Rahami’s friends as saying that he had gone 
to Afghanistan, where his family emigrated from.

The official said that in Pakistan, Mr. Rahami stayed in Quetta with relatives 
who are refugees.

Mr. Rahami also traveled to Pakistan for three months in 2011, the official 
said.

Earlier on Monday the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/09/19/ahmad-khan-rahami-arrested-but-questions-remain-about-bombings.html>
 heard from government officials, also speaking anonymously, that Rahami had 
traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Rahami has made at least three and possibly four trips to Pakistan over the 
past 10 years, one official said. Investigators are now trying to determine 
where he traveled in the country and particularly if he spent time in the areas 
near the border with Afghanistan that have been the frequent target of US drone 
strikes aimed at terrorist groups.

Rahami’s father also was in Pakistan as recently as July 2011, according to 
the family’s attorney, who informed a judge in a civil suit to which theelder 
Rahami was a plaintiff 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/content/dailybeast/cheats/2016/09/19/rahami-family-sued-city-for-discrimination.html>
 that he was not expected back in the country in time for a court proceeding 
the following month.

In September 2011, the lawyer informed the judge that while the father had 
returned, his “family is in Afghanistan” but was expected to return within days.

Two officials told the site that Rahami was not on any government terror 
watchlists.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2%23block-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2%23block-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2%23block-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2%23block-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2%23block-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2%23block-57e073b9e4b051672d9f7ef2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.04am BST 00:04  <> 

The murder charges against Rahami are related to his shootout with police 
officers in New Jersey, and not his bombings of New York andNew Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>.

Earlier on Monday prosecutors said they were carefully drawing up what charges 
Rahami will face: terrorism charges require evidence of actions and motivation, 
and investigators have repeatedly said that they have more work to do to 
determine what moved Rahami to set bombs in Manhattan, Seaside Park and 
Elizabeth.

But charging Rahami with murder allows them to keep him under arrest and in 
custody, for now at the hospital, with bail set at $5.2m. Federal prosecutors 
said they were still weighing charges over the bombings. US attorney Preet 
Bharara said earlier Monday that he and other federal prosecutors wanted to 
have “careful and thorough” charges, backed up by evidence, before they 
formally brought a case against Rahaim on the bombings.

Updated at 10.50am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede%23block-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede%23block-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede%23block-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede%23block-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede%23block-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede%23block-57e06de7e4b051672d9f7ede&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.50pm BST 23:50  <> 

Rahami charged with attempted murder

Prosecutors have charged bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> with five counts of 
attempted murder, the Union County New Jersey prosecutor’s office has announced.

He is also charged with “second-degree unlawful possession of a weapon” and 
“second-degree possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose”.

“Convictions on first-degree criminal charges are commonly individually 
punishable by 10 to 20 years in state prison, while second-degree charges 
typically result in terms of 5 to 10 years,” the office said.

Rahami is being held with bail set at $5.2m and remained at a hospital, and it 
is not yet clear whether he has an attorney.

Updated at 10.51am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8%23block-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8%23block-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8%23block-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8%23block-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8%23block-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8%23block-57e06b0fe4b02fcdee725cb8&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.43pm BST 23:43  <> 

Two sets of scavengers played roles in the investigation of the New York and 
New Jersey bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york-and-new-jersey-bombings>, the AP 
reports.

On Sunday night, two homeless men grabbed a backpack left in the trash near a 
train station in Elizabeth,New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, only to discover that it 
contained several apparent pipe bombs. The men quickly reported the find to 
police, Mayor Chris Bollwage said.

A day earlier, two men walking down a New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City street made off with a 
rolling backpack that someone had left on the sidewalk about 15 minutes earlier.

But before they walked away, they removed a pressure cooker that had been 
concealed inside it, New York Police Department Chief of Detectives Robert 
Boyce said. The pressure cooker later was found by state police troopers after 
a similar device exploded nearby, injuring 29 people.

The unexploded device was then examined for clues to the bomber’s identity. 
Police found out that the two men had handled the device only when they looked 
at surveillance video.

“They looked like they were two gentlemen just strolling up and down Seventh 
Avenue, at the time,” Boyce said. “Once they picked up the bag, they seemed 
incredulous that they had actually picked this up off the street, and they 
walked off with it.”

Asked if it was possible that the scavengers, in handling the bomb, might have 
jostled it enough to disable its trigger, Boyce said he couldn’t say for sure.

“It’s difficult to say right now if they at all, inadvertently perhaps even, 
pulled a wire,” Boyce said.

He said the men were being sought as potential witnesses. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5%23block-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5%23block-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5%23block-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5%23block-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5%23block-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5%23block-57e05e5de4b051672d9f7eb5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.26pm BST 23:26  <> 

Local New York station ABC7 has spoken with the bar owner who reported Ahmad 
Khan Rahami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> to police 
on Monday morning, and reported his account of the morning gun battle.

“This guy is going for his gun or something because he’s going toward this, 
and that’s when the cop pulled the gun. That’s when he shot twice,” the owner, 
Harry Bains, said.

“You are the hero. You’re the guy who found the most wanted in America right 
now,” Charlesworth said.

“No, I’m not hero. Usually it has happened a couple times, I go and confront 
people, and I start yelling at them, what the hell you guys are doing in front 
of my bar? But today, I don’t know what happened. I just spoke to him nicely 
and it was my gut reaction. Something told me ‘You go call the police,’” Bains 
said.

He said, “What can I tell you, when you see something, say something.”

He said he didn’t tell the police he thought it was the suspect, and now he 
sort of wishes he had because as soon as he heard the shots fired, he was 
worrying about the police officers.

He shrugs off being called a hero. Bains said he’s always checking out things 
in the neighborhood that don’t look right. This guy did not look right and he 
just called police.

You can watch the full interview here 
<http://abc7ny.com/news/exclusive-linden-bar-owner-talks-about-finding-bombing-suspect/1517980/>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f%23block-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f%23block-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f%23block-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f%23block-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f%23block-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f%23block-57e06232e4b02fcdee725c9f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.07pm BST 23:07  <> 

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo made a brief appearance on NBC to again warn 
the residents of theNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
area that they can expect a massive increase of security in teh next few days, 
if not weeks.

At JFK International Airport, Grand Central station and transit hubs all 
around the city will have more security than ever before. “That is the world we 
now live in and you’re not going to stop it with bluster and with threats. The 
anger is real and the anger is portable and it’s here.”
Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) 
Thank you to our first responders, who are doing a phenomenal job working to 
keep New Yorkers safe.pic.twitter.com/zQpIO9mGWL <https://t.co/zQpIO9mGWL>
 <https://twitter.com/NYGovCuomo/status/777910245444218880> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NYGovCuomo/status/777910245444218880> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9%23block-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9%23block-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9%23block-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9%23block-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9%23block-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9%23block-57e05ff0e4b051672d9f7eb9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.37pm BST 22:37  <> 

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has continued to harp on the 
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> bombing as an argument 
for extraordinary immigration restrictions.

In Estero, Florida, he has repeated his demand for an ideological test for 
immigrant applicants, a spin on his plan announced last December to bar Muslim 
people from entering the US.

“You can’t have vetting if you don’t look at ideology. And Hillary Clinton 
refuses to consider an applicant’s worldview and thus their likelihood of being 
recruited into the terror cause at some later date, which is going to happen in 
many, many cases. This isn’t just a matter of terrorism.

“This is also really a question of quality of life. We want to make sure we 
are only admitting people into our country who love our country. We want them 
to love our country. And we want them to love our people.”

Ahmad Khan Rahami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> was 
only seven years old when his family arrived in the United States in 1995.

And CBS News’ Sopan Deb notes that Trump has himself described a central flaw 
with his proposal.
Sopan Deb (@SopanDeb) 
Re-up: Trump talked up his ideological test today in Florida. Look at his 
comments from Canton, and you see a fallacy by his own admission:
pic.twitter.com/4LzX3tMdgj <https://t.co/4LzX3tMdgj>
 <https://twitter.com/SopanDeb/status/777982358402236416> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SopanDeb/status/777982358402236416> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa%23block-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa%23block-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa%23block-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa%23block-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa%23block-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa%23block-57e05813e4b0ef60eaef0faa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.26pm BST 22:26  <> 

In Elizabeth, New Jersey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, the 
Rahami family has returned home, the Washington Post’s Renae Merle tweets, 
while WNBC’s Pei-Sze Cheng notes the gradual return to normalcy in New York, 
about 15 miles away.
Renae Merle (@renaemerle) 
Family of suspected bomber walking back into restaurant in Elizabeth. Father 
spotted earlierpic.twitter.com/W2xQVqtNB6 <https://t.co/W2xQVqtNB6>
 <https://twitter.com/renaemerle/status/777979318928601088> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/renaemerle/status/777979318928601088> Pei-Sze Cheng 
(@PeiSzeCheng4NY) 
Part of 23rd street still shut down as evidence markers removed from scene. 
The latest at 5.#ChelseaExplosion 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ChelseaExplosion?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/XfS0S13itA <https://t.co/XfS0S13itA>
 <https://twitter.com/PeiSzeCheng4NY/status/777974847335006208> September 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/PeiSzeCheng4NY/status/777974847335006208> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d%23block-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d%23block-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d%23block-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d%23block-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d%23block-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d%23block-57e055c7e4b051672d9f7e9d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.07pm BST 22:07  <> 

Investigators have said extremely little about Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami>, but reporters are 
piecing together some details of his life and family’s story.

Neighbors have told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/fried-chicken-store-new-jersey-new-york-rahami-bomb-suspect>
 that they suspected nothing from Rahami based on their interactions with him 
behind the counter of the family’s fried chicken shop in Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
They described the 28 year old as friendly, generous with free food to 
regulars, and at least for a time obsessed with cars souped up for racing. Some 
have said the family was quiet, and that Rahami’s father wore religious 
clothing but his sons did not.

The family immigrated from Afghanistan some time before 2002, when Rahami was 
14 and they opened First American Fried Chicken. Rahami became a naturalized 
citizen at some point;MSNBC has reported 
<https://twitter.com/elisefoley/status/777961805939412993> that the family 
arrived in 1995 and were granted asylum in 2011, though the Guardian could not 
immediately confirm the dates.


The family also had a decade-long clash with the city over the restaurant, 
whose 24-hour operations drew complaints from neighbors about rowdy crowds. 
City records show repeated complaints by both authorities and the family about 
their interactions, and one of Rahami’s brothers pled guilty at one point to 
preventing police from enforcing a city ordinance. His lawsuit against the 
city, claiming anti-Muslim discrimination, is technically still pending 
although Mayor Chris Bollwage noted that courts have ruled in the city’s favor.

Bankruptcy court documents also showed that the family struggled with money; 
in 2005 Rahami’s father filed for bankruptcy, saying in hte documents that he 
had only $100 in the bank and more than $35,000 in debt.

Buzzfeed unearthed Rahami’s freshman yearbook 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/mikehayes/here-is-what-we-know-about-the-suspected-new-york-and-new-je?utm_term=.nfBKbB7lB#.nbEE5Mb2M>
, and spoke with one of his ninth-grade classmates, who said: “Very funny, 
class clown. Got along with everyone, was a very nice kid.”

The New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Times spoke with a 
man who grew up with Rahami, 27-year-old Flee Jones, who said that around four 
years ago Rahami told him he had gone to Afghanistan with one of his brothers. 
On his return, Jones and neighbor Andre Almeida said he grew a beard and more 
often wore traditional Muslim robes.

“It’s like he was a completely different person,” he told the paper 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing-suspect.html?smid=tw-share>
. “He got serious and completely closed off.”

Updated at 10.09pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88%23block-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88%23block-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88%23block-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88%23block-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88%23block-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88%23block-57e04d3ae4b0ef60eaef0f88&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.30pm BST 21:30  <> 

New York police tested a new warning measure on Monday morning, sending an 
alert to millions of people in the city and its environs with a photo and 
description ofAhmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami>, my colleague Sam 
Thielman reports.

On Monday morning New Yorkers were surprised by a cell phone alert delivered 
by the Wireless Emergency Alert system (WEA) that told them to be on the 
lookout for Rahami and gave a brief description along with the instruction “See 
media for pic.”

Technologists balked at unorthodox use of the WEA, which is meant for public 
emergencies only. The use of the system to aid a manhunt is believed to be 
unprecedented; UC Davis law professor Elizabeth Joh said it raised a troubling 
precedent.

Urgent action was clearly needed, she said, but “that everyone with a camera & 
immediate access to social media should be enlisted by means of the cellphone 
[WEA] is a different question. It’s a difficult balance to strike.”

The WEA is limited 90 characters and is not enhanced by images or rich text, 
but Chris Soghoian of the ACLU speculated that such an enhancement to the 
system was close at hand.
Christopher Soghoian (@csoghoian) 
Texting every phone in NYC with "see media for pic" doesn't seem terribly 
effective. I predict DHS asking the FCC for amber alerts w/pics.
 <https://twitter.com/csoghoian/status/777877662731739136> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/csoghoian/status/777877662731739136> 
Emergency mobile alert on New York explosion suspect sent after incident
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-explosion-suspect-mobile-alert-ahmad-khan-rahami>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c%23block-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c%23block-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c%23block-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c%23block-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombings%3A%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20with%20attempted%20murder%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c%23block-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fus-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c%23block-57e04986e4b0ef60eaef0f7c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * Bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, was arrested after a shootout with 
police in Linden, New Jersey,and about five hours after New York police sent 
his picture to millions of people with an appeal for help. 
 * Two officers were injured in the firefight, and Rahami, who had been found 
sleeping in the vestibule of a bar, was also shot. Elizabeth mayor Chris 
Bollwage said the officers’ injuries were not life-threatening – one was shot 
in the hand, the other in a protective vest – and that Rahami had surgery for 
his leg wound. 
 * Prosecutors charged Rahami with five counts of attempted murder of police 
officers, stemming from his shootout in New Jersey. He is in custody with bail 
set at $5.2m, and federal prosecutors have not yet leveled charges related to 
the bombings. 
 * FBI agent Bill Sweeney said investigators had “directly linked” Rahami to 
several bombs: one that exploded in Chelsea, Manhattan on Saturday night, 
injuring 29 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/new-york-bombing-no-international-terrorism-link-governor-cuomo>
, an unexploded pressure cooker bomb found blocks away,pipe bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/pipe-bomb-jersey-shore-5km-run-us-marines>
 found in Seaside, New Jersey on Saturday, and a device discovered near the 
train station in Elizabeth, New Jersey, on Sunday night.

 * Rahani is a naturalized US citizen who came to the United States with his 
family from Afghanistan,reportedly when he was seven years old. Neighbors who 
knew him from his work at the family’s fried chicken shop told the Guardian 
they were surprised at his arrest. The Rahami family lost a court battle with 
the city over the restaurant, whose neighbors had complained about noise, 
loitering and litter during its late-night hours. 
 * “We have every reason to believe this was an act of terror,” New York mayor 
Bill de Blasio said. But he and other officials declined to speak about the 
suspect’s possible motivation or whether he had any links to other people or 
groups.

 * “I have no indication that there’s a cell operating in the area or in the 
city,”Sweeney said. NYPD police commissioner added: “Right now we’re not 
actively seeking anyone.” 
 * Governor Andrew Cuomo said that “foreign connections” might be discovered 
in the course of investigation.No claim of responsibility has yet been made by 
any foreign group, such as Islamic State or al-Qaida.

 * Police interviewed five people stopped on the Verrazano Bridge in Brooklyn, 
Sweeney said, when their car was identified as a possible link to Rahami. None 
have been arrested. 
 * Investigators also searched the Rahami family’s fried chicken restaurant in 
Elizabeth, which Bollwage said had been a problem for the city. 
 * NYPD are hoping to find two men who stole the bag that had contained the 
second unexploded device on Saturday, though only “as witnesses”, NYPD chief 
Robert Boyce said. O’Neilly praised “good old fashioned police work” in 
apprehending the suspect. “I know I’m a lot happier than I was at this time 
yesterday.” 
 * President Barack Obama praised law enforcement and the people of New York, 
and warned against the spread of unconfirmed reports and rumors. He added that 
he saw no connection between Rahami and a mass stabbing attack in Minnesota on 
Saturday. 
 * Hillary Clinton accused Donald Trump, her opponent in the 2016 election, of 
giving “aid and comfort” to terroristsby linking their crimes to Islam and 
embracing extremeanti-immigrant proposals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/27/donald-trump-muslim-ban-deny-changing-stance>
. 
 * Trump said Clinton and Obama had “emboldened terrorists all over the world” 
by “not taking Isis seriously enough”, although investigators have not yet 
reported any link between the terror group and Rahani. He also repeated his 
call for an ideological test for immigrants, and said that his plan to defeat 
the terrorists was to “knock the hell out of ‘em”. 
Suspect in New York bombing arrested after shootout with police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami> 
Law enforcement sources have now told two separate outlets news organizations 
that Ahmad Rahami had traveled to Pakistan to recent years, though the reports 
are unconfirmed and based on anonymous sources.

Rahami traveled to Pakistan in April 2013 and stayed until March 2014, 
according to a law enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymityto 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/live/new-york-explosion/rahami-recently-spent-a-year-in-pakistan/?smid=tw-nytmetro&smtyp=cur>
. The paper had previously quoted Rahami’s friends as saying that he had gone 
to Afghanistan, where his family emigrated from.

The official said that in Pakistan, Mr. Rahami stayed in Quetta with relatives 
who are refugees.

Mr. Rahami also traveled to Pakistan for three months in 2011, the official 
said.

Earlier on Monday the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/09/19/ahmad-khan-rahami-arrested-but-questions-remain-about-bombings.html>
 heard from government officials, also speaking anonymously, that Rahami had 
traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Rahami has made at least three and possibly four trips to Pakistan over the 
past 10 years, one official said. Investigators are now trying to determine 
where he traveled in the country and particularly if he spent time in the areas 
near the border with Afghanistan that have been the frequent target of US drone 
strikes aimed at terrorist groups.

Rahami’s father also was in Pakistan as recently as July 2011, according to 
the family’s attorney, who informed a judge in a civil suit to which theelder 
Rahami was a plaintiff 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/content/dailybeast/cheats/2016/09/19/rahami-family-sued-city-for-discrimination.html>
 that he was not expected back in the country in time for a court proceeding 
the following month.

In September 2011, the lawyer informed the judge that while the father had 
returned, his “family is in Afghanistan” but was expected to return within days.

Two officials told the site that Rahami was not on any government terror 
watchlists.
 
The murder charges against Rahami are related to his shootout with police 
officers in New Jersey, and not his bombings of New York andNew Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>.

Earlier on Monday prosecutors said they were carefully drawing up what charges 
Rahami will face: terrorism charges require evidence of actions and motivation, 
and investigators have repeatedly said that they have more work to do to 
determine what moved Rahami to set bombs in Manhattan, Seaside Park and 
Elizabeth.

But charging Rahami with murder allows them to keep him under arrest and in 
custody, for now at the hospital, with bail set at $5.2m. Federal prosecutors 
said they were still weighing charges over the bombings. US attorney Preet 
Bharara said earlier Monday that he and other federal prosecutors wanted to 
have “careful and thorough” charges, backed up by evidence, before they 
formally brought a case against Rahaim on the bombings.
 
Prosecutors have charged bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> with five counts of 
attempted murder, the Union County New Jersey prosecutor’s office has announced.

He is also charged with “second-degree unlawful possession of a weapon” and 
“second-degree possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose”.

“Convictions on first-degree criminal charges are commonly individually 
punishable by 10 to 20 years in state prison, while second-degree charges 
typically result in terms of 5 to 10 years,” the office said.

Rahami is being held with bail set at $5.2m and remained at a hospital, and it 
is not yet clear whether he has an attorney.
 
Two sets of scavengers played roles in the investigation of the New York and 
New Jersey bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york-and-new-jersey-bombings>, the AP 
reports.

On Sunday night, two homeless men grabbed a backpack left in the trash near a 
train station in Elizabeth,New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, only to discover that it 
contained several apparent pipe bombs. The men quickly reported the find to 
police, Mayor Chris Bollwage said.

A day earlier, two men walking down a New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City street made off with a 
rolling backpack that someone had left on the sidewalk about 15 minutes earlier.

But before they walked away, they removed a pressure cooker that had been 
concealed inside it, New York Police Department Chief of Detectives Robert 
Boyce said. The pressure cooker later was found by state police troopers after 
a similar device exploded nearby, injuring 29 people.

The unexploded device was then examined for clues to the bomber’s identity. 
Police found out that the two men had handled the device only when they looked 
at surveillance video.

“They looked like they were two gentlemen just strolling up and down Seventh 
Avenue, at the time,” Boyce said. “Once they picked up the bag, they seemed 
incredulous that they had actually picked this up off the street, and they 
walked off with it.”

Asked if it was possible that the scavengers, in handling the bomb, might have 
jostled it enough to disable its trigger, Boyce said he couldn’t say for sure.

“It’s difficult to say right now if they at all, inadvertently perhaps even, 
pulled a wire,” Boyce said.

He said the men were being sought as potential witnesses. 
 
Local New York station ABC7 has spoken with the bar owner who reported Ahmad 
Khan Rahami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> to police 
on Monday morning, and reported his account of the morning gun battle.

“This guy is going for his gun or something because he’s going toward this, 
and that’s when the cop pulled the gun. That’s when he shot twice,” the owner, 
Harry Bains, said.

“You are the hero. You’re the guy who found the most wanted in America right 
now,” Charlesworth said.

“No, I’m not hero. Usually it has happened a couple times, I go and confront 
people, and I start yelling at them, what the hell you guys are doing in front 
of my bar? But today, I don’t know what happened. I just spoke to him nicely 
and it was my gut reaction. Something told me ‘You go call the police,’” Bains 
said.

He said, “What can I tell you, when you see something, say something.”

He said he didn’t tell the police he thought it was the suspect, and now he 
sort of wishes he had because as soon as he heard the shots fired, he was 
worrying about the police officers.

He shrugs off being called a hero. Bains said he’s always checking out things 
in the neighborhood that don’t look right. This guy did not look right and he 
just called police.

You can watch the full interview here 
<http://abc7ny.com/news/exclusive-linden-bar-owner-talks-about-finding-bombing-suspect/1517980/>
.
 
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo made a brief appearance on NBC to again warn 
the residents of theNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
area that they can expect a massive increase of security in teh next few days, 
if not weeks.

At JFK International Airport, Grand Central station and transit hubs all 
around the city will have more security than ever before. “That is the world we 
now live in and you’re not going to stop it with bluster and with threats. The 
anger is real and the anger is portable and it’s here.”
Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) 
Thank you to our first responders, who are doing a phenomenal job working to 
keep New Yorkers safe.pic.twitter.com/zQpIO9mGWL <https://t.co/zQpIO9mGWL>
 <https://twitter.com/NYGovCuomo/status/777910245444218880> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NYGovCuomo/status/777910245444218880>  
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has continued to harp on the 
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> bombing as an argument 
for extraordinary immigration restrictions.

In Estero, Florida, he has repeated his demand for an ideological test for 
immigrant applicants, a spin on his plan announced last December to bar Muslim 
people from entering the US.

“You can’t have vetting if you don’t look at ideology. And Hillary Clinton 
refuses to consider an applicant’s worldview and thus their likelihood of being 
recruited into the terror cause at some later date, which is going to happen in 
many, many cases. This isn’t just a matter of terrorism.

“This is also really a question of quality of life. We want to make sure we 
are only admitting people into our country who love our country. We want them 
to love our country. And we want them to love our people.”

Ahmad Khan Rahami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> was 
only seven years old when his family arrived in the United States in 1995.

And CBS News’ Sopan Deb notes that Trump has himself described a central flaw 
with his proposal.
Sopan Deb (@SopanDeb) 
Re-up: Trump talked up his ideological test today in Florida. Look at his 
comments from Canton, and you see a fallacy by his own admission:
pic.twitter.com/4LzX3tMdgj <https://t.co/4LzX3tMdgj>
 <https://twitter.com/SopanDeb/status/777982358402236416> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SopanDeb/status/777982358402236416>  
In Elizabeth, New Jersey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, the 
Rahami family has returned home, the Washington Post’s Renae Merle tweets, 
while WNBC’s Pei-Sze Cheng notes the gradual return to normalcy in New York, 
about 15 miles away.
Renae Merle (@renaemerle) 
Family of suspected bomber walking back into restaurant in Elizabeth. Father 
spotted earlierpic.twitter.com/W2xQVqtNB6 <https://t.co/W2xQVqtNB6>
 <https://twitter.com/renaemerle/status/777979318928601088> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/renaemerle/status/777979318928601088> Pei-Sze Cheng 
(@PeiSzeCheng4NY) 
Part of 23rd street still shut down as evidence markers removed from scene. 
The latest at 5.#ChelseaExplosion 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ChelseaExplosion?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/XfS0S13itA <https://t.co/XfS0S13itA>
 <https://twitter.com/PeiSzeCheng4NY/status/777974847335006208> September 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/PeiSzeCheng4NY/status/777974847335006208>  
Investigators have said extremely little about Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami>, but reporters are 
piecing together some details of his life and family’s story.

Neighbors have told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/fried-chicken-store-new-jersey-new-york-rahami-bomb-suspect>
 that they suspected nothing from Rahami based on their interactions with him 
behind the counter of the family’s fried chicken shop in Elizabeth, New Jersey. 
They described the 28 year old as friendly, generous with free food to 
regulars, and at least for a time obsessed with cars souped up for racing. Some 
have said the family was quiet, and that Rahami’s father wore religious 
clothing but his sons did not.

The family immigrated from Afghanistan some time before 2002, when Rahami was 
14 and they opened First American Fried Chicken. Rahami became a naturalized 
citizen at some point;MSNBC has reported 
<https://twitter.com/elisefoley/status/777961805939412993> that the family 
arrived in 1995 and were granted asylum in 2011, though the Guardian could not 
immediately confirm the dates.


The family also had a decade-long clash with the city over the restaurant, 
whose 24-hour operations drew complaints from neighbors about rowdy crowds. 
City records show repeated complaints by both authorities and the family about 
their interactions, and one of Rahami’s brothers pled guilty at one point to 
preventing police from enforcing a city ordinance. His lawsuit against the 
city, claiming anti-Muslim discrimination, is technically still pending 
although Mayor Chris Bollwage noted that courts have ruled in the city’s favor.

Bankruptcy court documents also showed that the family struggled with money; 
in 2005 Rahami’s father filed for bankruptcy, saying in hte documents that he 
had only $100 in the bank and more than $35,000 in debt.

Buzzfeed unearthed Rahami’s freshman yearbook 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/mikehayes/here-is-what-we-know-about-the-suspected-new-york-and-new-je?utm_term=.nfBKbB7lB#.nbEE5Mb2M>
, and spoke with one of his ninth-grade classmates, who said: “Very funny, 
class clown. Got along with everyone, was a very nice kid.”

The New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Times spoke with a 
man who grew up with Rahami, 27-year-old Flee Jones, who said that around four 
years ago Rahami told him he had gone to Afghanistan with one of his brothers. 
On his return, Jones and neighbor Andre Almeida said he grew a beard and more 
often wore traditional Muslim robes.

“It’s like he was a completely different person,” he told the paper 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing-suspect.html?smid=tw-share>
. “He got serious and completely closed off.”
 
New York police tested a new warning measure on Monday morning, sending an 
alert to millions of people in the city and its environs with a photo and 
description ofAhmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami>, my colleague Sam 
Thielman reports.

On Monday morning New Yorkers were surprised by a cell phone alert delivered 
by the Wireless Emergency Alert system (WEA) that told them to be on the 
lookout for Rahami and gave a brief description along with the instruction “See 
media for pic.”

Technologists balked at unorthodox use of the WEA, which is meant for public 
emergencies only. The use of the system to aid a manhunt is believed to be 
unprecedented; UC Davis law professor Elizabeth Joh said it raised a troubling 
precedent.

Urgent action was clearly needed, she said, but “that everyone with a camera & 
immediate access to social media should be enlisted by means of the cellphone 
[WEA] is a different question. It’s a difficult balance to strike.”

The WEA is limited 90 characters and is not enhanced by images or rich text, 
but Chris Soghoian of the ACLU speculated that such an enhancement to the 
system was close at hand.
Christopher Soghoian (@csoghoian) 
Texting every phone in NYC with "see media for pic" doesn't seem terribly 
effective. I predict DHS asking the FCC for amber alerts w/pics.
 <https://twitter.com/csoghoian/status/777877662731739136> September 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/csoghoian/status/777877662731739136> 
Emergency mobile alert on New York explosion suspect sent after incident
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-explosion-suspect-mobile-alert-ahmad-khan-rahami> 