
Despite its continuing hardline 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/08/11/the-deas-latest-stance-on-marijuana-explained/>
 stance against marijuana, the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) has shown some 
signs of relenting and this summeropened the door  
<http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2016-08-11/dea-ends-half-century-pot-monopoly-but-withholds-big-prize-for-reformers>
to allowing more farms to grow cannabis for official research purposes. That’s 
an important step forward that may change the potential marijuana has for 
medical treatment. Up to this point, researchers have had to depend on just one 
farm at the University of Mississippi to supply cannabis for all studies.

Eight states have voted to legalize recreational marijuana, and 28 states now 
allow its use for medical purposes. Under federal law, however, marijuana 
continues to be classified as a highly dangerous illegal drug. Despite the 
DEA’s resistance to reclassification, marijuana has a broad list of potential 
medical applications, from treating pain to neurological diseases. Further 
study could open up many new medical treatments.

Nervous about a Trump presidency? Me too. But at least I've got legal weed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/12/legal-marijuana-weed-high-times-2016-election>
“Researchers who conduct experimental studies and administer cannabis to their 
research participants have difficulty obtaining cannabis for their research,” 
says Madeline Meier, assistant professor of psychology at Arizona State 
University, who has studied the safety of long term marijuana use. But the end 
to a 50-year monopoly on medical research marijuana will change that, 
potentially opening up new areas of medical utility and easing the way to 
federal reclassification.

Marijuana has long been categorized  
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2016/08/10/u-s-affirms-its-prohibition-on-medical-marijuana/>
as a Schedule I drug, which means that from the point of view of the government 
it has no medical benefit and a high potential for abuse. It is in the same 
category as heroin and LSD, and is in a more regulated schedule than drugs like 
methamphetamine and cocaine.

Despite that, researchers have slowly been making progress in studying it as a 
potential treatment for a host of diseases.

A small number of pharmaceutical companies are betting on cannabinoid 
treatments for a variety of diseases. GW Pharma in California markets a 
medication targeted at treating spasticity from multiple sclerosis, while 
UK-based Nemus Biosciences is developing a glaucoma treatment. Another 
pharmaceutical company,Kalytera <http://kalytera.co/>, is looking at developing 
non-psychoactive cannabinoid medicines to treat osteoporosis and bone 
regeneration.

Using non-psychoactive synthetic derivatives of marijuana is one potential way 
to get around the Schedule I restrictions of the drug, explains Seth Yakatan, 
CEO of Kalytera. But to really “move the needle” on medical applications for 
marijuana, the drug would need to be reclassified by the DEA, says Yakatan.

While pharmaceutical companies explore new potential uses for marijuana 
derivatives, there are a number of medical uses with good research behind them 
for the plant itself, says Lester Grinspoon, associate professor emeritus of 
psychiatry at Harvard University. One of the most common medicinal uses is for 
cancer, though Grinspoon emphasizes that there is not enough research into 
cannabis’ use to treat the disease itself.

“Anyone who claims it cures cancer has very little basis to say that,” 
Grinspoon says. But it is a great adjunct therapy for patients already 
undergoing traditional cancer treatment, he says, as it helps with nausea and 
other symptoms related to chemotherapy.

Marijuana has also been found to be helpful in alleviating pain for MS 
patients, as well as helping with spasms for paraplegics and quadriplegics.

Similar to its uses for cancer patients, marijuana is helpful for treating the 
wasting associated with Aids, says Grinspoon. “Aids patients were the first to 
educate their doctors about cannabis, when the Aids epidemic spread like wild.” 
Grinspoon points out that patients discovered on their own that smoking 
marijuana would help them keep food down, and doctors consequently learned 
about that use from their patients.

High art: how the creative world is helping legal weed rebrand itself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/08/legal-marijuana-rebranding-artists-richard-prince>
Chronic pain is another area where marijuana has been useful, says Grinspoon. 
While research in the area has been somewhat mixed, with a number ofstudies 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2125.2011.03970.x/full> 
finding it helps <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2338266> 
whileothers  
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304395904004415>saying 
marijuana is not an effective pain medication, opioid pain medication use has 
declined in states with liberal marijuana laws. Thatcorrelation 
<http://time.com/4404697/marijuana-opioid-epidemic/> made headlines 
<http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2016/04/26/is-marijuana-a-gateway-drug/overdoses-fell-with-medical-marijuana-legalization>
 in light of the alarmingepidemic of opioid abuse 
<http://www.hhs.gov/opioids/about-the-epidemic/> in the US.

While some people are troubled by the psychoactive effects of the drug, there 
are strains that have minimal psychoactive effects, says Grinspoon, making them 
ideal for medical use.

Researchers continue to try to tease out other potential benefits of cannabis 
and provide further evidence for its use, with the number of studies increasing 
every year. But for a promising treatment with so many applications, there is 
still a lot of stigma associated with the drug.

Studies like Meier’s, showing the safety of long term recreational cannabis 
use, chip away at that stigma. Her longitudinal study, published in June inJAMA 
Psychiatry <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27249330>, followed people who 
already used marijuana recreationally, collecting extensive health information 
on participants when they were 26 and 38 years old. The study found that 
participants had no long term physical health risks from the drug except for a 
higher likelihood of periodontal disease.

Grinspoon says it’s past time that the DEA change the classification of 
cannabis. Unlike an opioid, “no one has ever died of an overdose of marijuana,” 
Grinspoon says. “Aspirin causes about 1,000 deaths a year, so why don’t we 
schedule aspirin?”












 