
The dramatic shootout with police that led to the capture of suspected 
terroristAhmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> on Monday occurred just 
a few miles down the road from his home in the New Jersey suburbs, where locals 
knew him as a friendly fast-food worker who snuck extra fries into their order, 
but now fear they could have been injured in the bombs he allegedly planted.

Rahami was born in Afghanistan in 1988 and is now a naturalized US citizen. 
Reports differ over when he arrived in the United States – 2000, according to
ABC News, 
<http://abc7chicago.com/news/nyc-nj-bombing-suspect-in-custody-charged-in-police-shootout/1517332/>
 whileCNN says 1995 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/20/us/new-york-new-jersey-bomb-questions/index.html>
, both citing anonymous officials.

'He was my friend': customers at Ahmad Khan Rahami's New Jersey shop in 
disbelief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/fried-chicken-store-new-jersey-new-york-rahami-bomb-suspect>
Since 2002 he has lived with his parents, brothers and sisters above First 
American Fried Chicken, his father’s takeaway food business in Elizabeth,New 
Jersey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, in a predominately 
Colombian and Jewish middle-class neighborhood about 15 miles west of New York 
City. The chicken shack is a popular hang out with local middle and high 
schoolers on weekday afternoons, and gets packed with a crowd of early 
20-somethings who come for chicken and burgers late on weekend nights.

“He was my friend ... I wouldn’t think he would do something like that,” said 
Brayant Ocampo, 17, a high school senior who lived nearby and regularly stopped 
off for late night cheese fries and fried chicken at the store on Elmora 
Avenue. He said Rahami often snuck extra food into his order.

“That has to be the most popular chicken shack in town, hands down,” said 
Cesar Aranguena, 24, a public school substitute teacher who has been eating 
there since he was a child. “If you’re from Elizabeth, New Jersey, you know 
this chicken shop.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a717bdf2f470455bfe68f799666097702aa310d%2F0_0_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings%3A%20who%20is%20suspect%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings%3A%20who%20is%20suspect%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a717bdf2f470455bfe68f799666097702aa310d%2F0_0_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 This video grab image released Monday by the New Jersey state police allegedly 
shows Ahmad Khan Rahami. Photograph: HO/AFP/Getty Images 
Neighbors struggled to reconcile the man they knew with the crimes he is 
alleged to have committed: planting two pressure-cooker bombs in Chelsea, 
Manhattan, on Saturday – one of which exploded, injuring 29 – and apipe bomb 60 
miles away in Seaside Park, New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/pipe-bomb-jersey-shore-5km-run-us-marines>
, which forced the abandonment of a charity run for marines and sailors. A 
backpack of bombs was also found abandoned near Elizabeth train station on 
Sunday night, although investigators have not publicly tied Rahimi to these 
devices.

So far, Rahami has not been charged with terrorism offences, rather with five 
counts of attempted murder of a police officer and two second-degree weapons 
charges, all of which resulted from his arrest. More charges were expected to 
be brought against him in federal court, and on Tuesday the US attorney 
general, Loretta Lynch, said the explosions were being investigated “as an act 
of terror”. He is being held on $5.2m bail and remains in the hospital in 
critical but stable condition. Police have not yet been able to interview him 
in depth, New York police commissioner James O’Neill said on Tuesday.

On Tuesday the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/21/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-suspect.html> 
that Rahami’s father, Mohammed, told police his son was a terrorist in 2014 
following his arrest for an alleged stabbing. The FBI opened an assessment but 
the father later recanted.

“Two years ago I go to the FBI because my son was doing really bad, OK?” 
Mohammed Rahamitold the Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/21/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-suspect.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
. “But they check almost two months, they say, ‘He’s OK, he’s clean, he’s not a 
terrorist.’ I say OK.”


He added: “Now they say he is a terrorist. I say OK.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20bombing%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20bombing%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video&media=>
New York bombing: what we know so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/19/new-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video>
Rahami had been arrested in 2014 on weapons and aggravated assault charges for 
allegedly stabbing a relative in the leg,the NYT reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing-suspect.html?emc=edit_th_20160920&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
, citing court documents, and spent over three months in jail before being 
released without indictment. He also spent a day in jail in 2012 for allegedly 
violating a restraining order, the paper reported. He was not on any terror or 
no-fly watch lists, though he had been interviewed for immigration purposes 
traveling between the US and Afghanistan, an anonymous law enforcement official 
told the Associated Press.

The events put New York on edge and fueled a debate about US security seven 
weeks before the presidential election, with candidatesDonald Trump and Hillary 
Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/trump-ahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-bombing-immigration>
clashing once again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/hillary-clinton-new-york-new-jersey-attacks-trump-muslims>
 on Monday. The city was already on high alert for a gathering of world leaders
at the United Nations in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/sep/20/un-general-assembly-obama-final-address-syria-ceasefire-refugees-live-updates>
 for the annual general assembly this week, and an additional 1,000 officers 
were deployed.

An anonymous law enforcement official told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/nyc-nj-explosions-ahmad-khan-rahami.html?emc=edit_th_20160920&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
 that the construction of the bombs – which in the Manhattan and Seaside Park 
cases used old-fashioned flip phones, the paper reported – may mean Rahami 
received training from someone with bomb-making experience.

“If you’re working off the premise that the guy made all these devices,” the 
official said, “then the guy is a pretty good bombmaker. And you don’t get that 
good on the internet.”

Officials have said they have no other suspects at large, but cautioned they 
are still investigating. “It’s a good sign that we found him in a doorway,” 
O’Neill told CBS on Tuesday. “Hopefully that means he had nowhere to go.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ff01f98db635f73802ddffcca949aa2ea3201df%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings%3A%20who%20is%20suspect%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings%3A%20who%20is%20suspect%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ff01f98db635f73802ddffcca949aa2ea3201df%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 FBI investigators gather evidence at First American Fried Chicken, owned by 
the family of Ahmad Khan Rahami, in Elizabeth, New Jersey Monday. Photograph: 
Justin Lane/EPA 
Rahami was spotted on surveillance video in Chelsea on Saturday evening 
carrying a backpack and two other bags, theNew York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/nyc-nj-explosions-ahmad-khan-rahami.html?emc=edit_th_20160920&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
, with later footage showing him without the backpack and leaving one of the 
other bags by a mailbox.


His fingerprints and DNA were found at the scene of the Manhattan bombing, the 
AP reported, citing anonymous law enforcement officials. His uncovered face was 
clearly captured by surveillance cameras near the spot of the blast. Electronic 
toll records show a car to which he had access was driven from New Jersey to 
Manhattan and back to New Jersey the day of the bombing, according to the 
officials. Authorities pulled it over Sunday night while it was headed in the 
direction of Kennedy airport. The law enforcement officials said at least one 
of Rahami’s relatives was in the car. All five were questioned and released.

Trips abroad

Conflicting information filtered out from friends and officials about visits 
by Rahami to Afghanistan or Pakistan. Police are looking into whether he was 
radicalized while abroad, Reuters reported.

The mother of his daughter, whom Fox News identified only as Maria 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2016/09/19/bomb-suspect-rahami-deadbeat-hated-america-says-his-daughter-s-mother.html>
, said Rahami returned to his homeland for weeks or months at a time, and said 
she had heard he had once had problems trying to return to the US when Afghan 
authorities confiscated his passport. She said the last time she knew he had 
visited Afghanistan was nine years ago, and he came back with a wife and child, 
she said.

Another friend from high school days, Flee Jones, said a trip to Afghanistan 
in recent years resulted in a personality change.

“He was quiet and didn’t talk as much,” Jones told Fox News 
<http://insider.foxnews.com/2016/09/19/nyc-nj-terror-suspect-rahami-friend-completely-different-after-afghanistan-vacation>
, adding toReuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-attacks-rahami-idUSKCN11P1ZI>: “He was 
way more religious,” adopting a beard and more traditional Muslim clothing.

But an anonymous federal official told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing-suspect.html>
 that Rahami had in fact travelled to Pakistan, first in 2011 and then in 2013, 
when he stayed with family in Quetta for nearly a year, returning in March 2014 
with a wife and child.New Jersey congressman Albio Sires said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 Rahami contacted him from Pakistan in 2014 to help secure a US visa for his 
then pregnant wife, although he did not know if it was successful.

Citing an anonymous law enforcement official, CNN reported 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/20/us/new-york-new-jersey-bomb-questions/index.html>
 on Tuesday that Rahami’s wife had left the US a few days before this weekend’s 
bombings.

A number of neighbors told the Guardian a small child was often seen around 
the chicken shack, although no one was clear about exactly which members of the 
large Rahami family were the child’s parents. At least three brothers, 
including Rahami, an 18-year-old and 14-year-old Aziz, worked at the store, 
along with, it is believed, two sisters.

Maria said her former high school sweetheart appeared “standoffish” towards 
western culture, gay people and the military.

“He would speak often of western culture and how it was different back home … 
how there weren’t homosexuals in Afghanistan,”the women identified only as 
“Maria” told Fox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2016/09/19/bomb-suspect-rahami-deadbeat-hated-america-says-his-daughter-s-mother.html>
.

“One time, he was watching TV with my daughter and a woman in a [military] 
uniform came on and he told [their daughter]: ‘That’s the bad person,’” she 
added.

The pair had met at Edison high school in New Jersey, with Maria describing 
him as the class clown. But Rahami did not pay child support and had not seen 
Maria or their daughter – whose name and age is unknown – for two years.

“My heart is just broken,” his ex-girlfriend told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing-suspect.html?emc=edit_th_20160920&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
. “I don’t even know what to think.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6781aac56b7922988da6848a66aa48c055320010%2F0_59_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings%3A%20who%20is%20suspect%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings%3A%20who%20is%20suspect%20Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6781aac56b7922988da6848a66aa48c055320010%2F0_59_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Ahmad Khan Rahami is taken into custody after a shootout with police Monday in 
Linden, New Jersey. Photograph: Ed Murray/AP 
A car aficionado

A rev-head with a love of luxury cars, Rahami – who according to the New York 
Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-bombing-suspect.html?emc=edit_th_20160920&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67239970>
 was known as Mad, a diminutive of his first name – regularly attended car 
meets. He used to own an Acura TL, a popular luxury sedan, but crashed it, said 
Ocampo, who’d helped Rahami procure parts from the junkyard to fix it.

Santiago Torres, 23, a carpenter who lived a few doors down from the Rahamis 
and frequented their shop, said for the past year Rahami had been driving a 
blue BMW sedan. Authorities towed that car, along with a black Toyota, on 
Monday. In the FBI’s wanted poster, authorities asked people to look out for a 
2003 Blue Honda Civic.

“They had a whole bunch of cars: two 2x4s, that black Toyota Camry, a white 
Infiniti and a blue car,” said Torres.

He described the news of a potential bomber just doors away as “terrifying”. 
“I want to move. To find out this happened around the corner from my house is 
scary,” he said.

Between 2010 and 2012, Rahami studied criminal justice at Middlesex County 
College in Edison, New Jersey, but did not graduate,reported Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-attacks-rahami-idUSKCN11P1ZI>.

Ocampo said he knew the younger Rahami was Muslim but said he had never heard 
any extremist views from him or any discussion of politics or terrorism. The 
only thing he had encountered was some quiet religious study.

“One day I was in the chicken shack and he had a book and he was reading the 
book while he was listening to music and I asked: ‘How can you do that and what 
kind of book?’ He said it was some kind of religion book; supposedly they read 
it while they’re listening to music,” said Ocampo.

“He would always be there, and usually when there was no customers he would be 
there reading it. He said it was like a Bible but runs in his religion.”

Rahami’s father, Mohammed, was known as the most religious in the family, 
dressing only in traditional robes and praying in front of customers.

Nawaz Sheikh, president of the Muslim Community Center of Union County, which 
includes Elizabeth, said Mohammed came to the mosque every day. On a typical 
Friday around 200-300 people usually visited the mosque, and only about 10-15, 
including Mohammed, came to pray every day, he said.

How emergency text alerts became America’s digital wanted posters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/sep/20/new-york-bombings-wireless-emergency-alerts>
“He prays every morning outside of the shack and in the back and every minute 
he has a chance to,” said Alex Pareja, 13, who said he hung out multiple times 
a week at the chicken shack after school. He said Rahami’s mother wore a niqab, 
but had never seen Rahami pray or discuss religion.

The chicken store had faced complaints and problems in 2012, when the city 
council and police ruled that it should close at 10pm. Mohammed had repeatedly 
mentioned his Muslim faith in responding to these complaints.


“He brought up his faith in [a] lawsuit, he brought up his faith in 
conversations with city officials … [but the complaints against his store] had 
nothing to do with ethnicity or religious beliefs, it had to do with a lot of 
people hanging out in front of the store at all hours as well as congregating 
and code enforcement problems,” said Elizabeth mayor Chris Bollwage.

Mellany Salinas, 17, said that Rahami had not seemed to work as frequently at 
the chicken store in recent months as he used to and that he was “barely there”.

Pareja, who is friends with Aziz, Rahami’s 14-year-old brother, echoed the 
claim, noting that he’d seen much less of Rahami in the store in the past two 
years.


“He’s there like three times a week. He used to be there every day,” said 
Pareja.

Pareja messaged his friend Aziz, who was being questioned by the FBI on 
Monday, through Snapchat after he heard the news.

“I tried contacting him, but he hasn’t answered. I was like, ‘Oh hey, I heard 
your brother got arrested,’” he said.

Additional reporting by Mazin Sidahmed in Elizabeth, New Jersey, the 
Associated Press and Reuters
 