
There have been fast-moving developments following Saturday night’s explosion 
in Manhattan. Here is a breakdown of the latest key events:


Ahmad Khan Rahami named by police as New York bomb suspect - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/19/us-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates>
New York 

 * Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, a suspect in the Manhattan bombing and the pipe bomb 
in Seaside Park, New Jersey, on Saturday,is now in custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 after engaging in a shootout with police in Linden, New Jersey, local law 
enforcement officials confirmed to the Guardian. Two officers were shot, but 
their wounds are not life-threatening. Three officers were taken to the 
hospital, Captain James Sarnicki of Linden police said. Rahami, who was found 
sleeping in a bar hallway before his eventual arrest, was wounded in the 
shootout and is undergoing surgery for his injuries. 
 * Rahami was directly linked to the bombings in New York and New Jersey, the 
FBI said. He has yet to be charged, but will be later on Monday. 
 * The NYPD on Monday morning said it was seeking Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-both-devices-used-pressure-cooker-and-phone-reports>
 in connection with the bombing on Saturday in Manhattan, which injured 29 
people. New Jersey state police said he was alsowanted for questioning 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/manhattan/person-sought-connection-nyc-bombing-identified-article-1.2797960>
 over the pipe bomb that detonated in Seaside Park on Saturday, without 
injuries. Rahami was born in Afghanistan, lives in New Jersey and is a 
naturalised US citizen. 
 * Fingerprints recovered at the scene and surveillance video in New York 
helped law enforcement identify Rahami as a suspect, an official told the 
Associated Press. He was not on a terror or no-fly watch list, the official 
said. 
 * New York City mayor Bill de Blasio said the bombing was an act of terrorism.
 * The explosive device used in the bombing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/new-york-bombing-no-international-terrorism-link-governor-cuomo>
 on West 23rd Street, and a second unexploded device found nearby were made 
from pressure cookers, a mobile “flip” phone and Christmas lights, law 
enforcement sources told the New York Times.

 * Tannerite, which is used in target practice and is readily available in 
sporting goods stores, was the explosive used in the West 23rd Street device, 
federal officials said. It is also suspected to have been used in the 
unexploded device found nearby. 
 * On Sunday night, FBI agents stopped “a vehicle of interest in the 
investigation” into the Manhattan explosion, according to an FBI spokeswoman, 
Kelly Langmesser. A government official and a law enforcement official who were 
briefed on the investigation told the Associated Press that the five people in 
the car were being questioned at an FBI building in lower Manhattan. No one in 
that car was under arrest, FBI agent Bill Sweeney later said in a press 
conference. An official later said the car was associated with Rahami, had 
three men and two women inside and appeared to be heading toward the airport, 
according to the Associated Press. 
 * NYPD are hoping to find two men who stole the bag that contained the second 
unexploded device on Saturday, though only “as witnesses”, the NYPD chief of 
detectives, Robert Boyce, said. 
New Jersey

 * Five suspicious devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-both-devices-used-pressure-cooker-and-phone-reports>
 were found on Sunday night in a backpack in a bin near Elizabeth station in 
New Jersey.

 * One exploded as a bomb squad robot tried to disarm it, the local mayor, 
Christian Bollwage, said.

 * The FBI and police were attempting to disarm the other devices, he was 
reported as saying.

 * Train services from Elizabeth on the New Jersey transit system were 
suspended in both directions. 
 * In a separate incident, a pipe bomb exploded in the Jersey Shore town of 
Seaside Park on Saturday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/pipe-bomb-jersey-shore-5km-run-us-marines>
, shortly before thousands of runners were due to take part in a charity 5,000m 
race to benefit US marines and sailors. There were no injuries. 
 * The bomb that exploded in Seaside Park was constructed with a threaded pipe 
and black powder, officials told the Associated Press. Like the bomb used in 
Chelsea, it also used a flip-phone. 
 * New Jersey state police 
<https://www.facebook.com/NewJerseyStatePolice/posts/1089390797782128> said in 
a statement posted to Facebook that they wanted to question Rahami about the 
pipe bomb explosion in Seaside Park. 
 * Investigators searched the Rahami family’s fried chicken restaurant, First 
American Fried Chicken, in Elizabeth, which Mayor Chris Bollwage said had been 
a problem for the city. The Rahami family lost a court battle with the city 
over the restaurant, whose neighbors had complained about noise, loitering and 
litter during its late-night hours. City records indicated complaints by 
authorities and the family about their interactions, and one of Rahami’s 
brothers pleaded guilty at one point to preventing police from enforcing a city 
ordinance. Rahami was not involved in the suit. 
 * Bankruptcy court documents showed the family struggled with money, filing 
for bankruptcy in 2005. The family immigrated from Afghanistan in 1995, when 
Rahami was seven years old, and he later became a naturalized US citizen. 
 * Regulars at the restaurant described Rahami as a friendly person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/fried-chicken-store-new-jersey-new-york-rahami-bomb-suspect>
 who did not express extremist beliefs. New York bombings map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/09/NYNJ-bombs/> 
General developments

 * Investigators are looking into possible links between the incidents in New 
York and New Jersey. 
 * The FBI has said there is no indication of a terror cell, though the 
investigation is ongoing. Sweeney said only Rahami has been directly linked to 
the devices in New York and New Jersey. They are not looking for a second 
suspect at this time. 
 * Authorities are trying to establish whether there are any links between the 
devices anda mass stabbing in St Cloud, Minnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/minnesota-stabbing-somali-americans-suspect-name>
, on Saturday night. At least nine people were injured in the Minnesota attack 
before an off-duty police officer shot the suspect dead. Islamic State claimed 
the attack, but the FBI said no link with the group had been found.  <> Facebook
 
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-york-and-new-jersey-explosive-devices-what-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32d0231cf317525c01ce364a6c6a85a534ab2c88%2F0_547_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20explosive%20devices%3A%20what%20we%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-york-and-new-jersey-explosive-devices-what-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20explosive%20devices%3A%20what%20we%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-york-and-new-jersey-explosive-devices-what-we-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32d0231cf317525c01ce364a6c6a85a534ab2c88%2F0_547_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 An bomb disposal robot handles an unexploded pressure cooker device on West 
27th Street in New York City. Photograph: Lucien Harriot/Getty Images 
What we don’t know

 * If the events were linked to international terrorism. New York governor 
Andrew Cuomo has said there was a possible “foreign connection” behind the 
Manhattan blast. Islamic State has not claimed responsibility for the explosion 
in Chelsea or in Seaside Park. 
 * If there is a link between the explosive devices found in New York and New 
Jersey and the mass stabbing in St Cloud, Minnesota on Saturday night. Islamic 
State claimed the attack in Minnesota.  