
The government has been accused of sexism over the new UK passport, which is 
designed to celebrate arts and culture over 500 years and acknowledges just two 
women in its 34 pages.

The “Creative United Kingdom” passport, unveiled by the immigration minister, 
James Brokenshire, includes portraits of John Harrison, inventor of the 
longitude clock, painter John Constable, architect Giles Gilbert Scott and 
Charles Babbage, mathematician and father of the computer.


Watermarks of William Shakespeare adorn each page, and the works of artists 
Antony Gormley and Anish Kapoor are highlighted, as is the Stephenson rocket, 
designed by George and Robert Stephenson.


But only two women are acknowledged in what the Passport Office  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/passport-office>describes as a celebration 
of UK success in innovation, architecture, art and performance.


New UK passport design - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2015/nov/03/new-uk-passport-design-in-pictures>
Elisabeth Scott, architect of the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in 
Stratford-upon-Avon appears in portrait form, as doesAda Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace>, the mathematician who 
worked with Babbage on the Analytical Engine.


The underrepresentation of women prompted a storm of criticism on social 
media, with those who had successfully campaigned forfemale representation on 
Bank of England notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/24/jane-austen-appear-10-note> 
voicing their frustration.


Stella Creasy, the Labour MP for Walthamstow who was prominent in the campaign 
to replace Charles Darwin with Jane Austen on the £10 note,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/stellacreasy/status/661518460330090496?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “So tired of this shizzle – home office could only find 2 UK women 2 
celebrate in 500 years of history.”

Using the hashtag #tellHERstory, Creasy asked her followers to send the Home 
Office a list of “UK women creatives”, suggesting the writers Mary 
Wollstonecraft and Virginia Woolf and the artist Barbara Hepworth among 
possible contenders.

The Islington South Labour MP Emily Thornberry, a former shadow attorney 
general,tweeted <https://twitter.com/EmilyThornberry/status/661487507914235904>
: “here we go again – new UK #passport has 7 men featured and just 2 women.”

It was “quite exasperating”, she told the BBC. “This is an opportunity to 
celebrate the achievements of women as well. We have had this fight about 
banknotes and now it’s about passports. I just feel as though we are here all 
over again.”


The feminist campaigner Caroline Criado-Perez, another prominent leader of the 
campaign that led to the Bank of England reviewing its selection process,tweeted
 <https://twitter.com/ccriadoperez/status/661521880080322560> a photograph of a 
protester dressed as a suffragette hoisting a placard that read: “I cannot 
believe I still have to protest this shit”.

Catherine Mayer, co-founder of the Women’s Equality party, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/catherine_mayer/status/661535180579033088>: “Oh #FFS. New 
UK passport celebrating 500 years of creativity features JUST TWO WOMEN”.


At the launch of the passport at Shakespeare’s Globe theatre in London, Mark 
Thomson, director general of thePassport Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/passport-office>, was asked why only two 
women appeared.

“It wasn’t something where we set out to only have two women,” he said. “In 
trying to celebrate UK creativity over the last 500 years we tried to get a 
range of locations, a range of things around the country, and to celebrate our 
triumphs and icons over the years. So there we are.”


Asked why Austen or the Brontë sisters could not have been contenders, he 
said: “Whenever you do these things, there is always someone who wants their 
favourite rock band or their local icon or something else in the book. In fact, 
we have got 16 [visa] pages, and very finite space. We like to feel we have got 
a good representation. We have celebrated some real icons of the UK, like 
Shakespeare, like Constable, and of course, Elisabeth Scott herself. So we feel 
we have got a good representative sample.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnew-uk-passport-design-features-just-two-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e50ad0a85abd5cf3dd66341079cc13b800b664%2F0_165_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20UK%20passport%20design%20features%20just%20two%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnew-uk-passport-design-features-just-two-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20UK%20passport%20design%20features%20just%20two%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnew-uk-passport-design-features-just-two-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e50ad0a85abd5cf3dd66341079cc13b800b664%2F0_165_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Ada Lovelace shares her page with Charles Babbage. Photograph: HM Passport 
Office 
Thomson said the decision on who featured had been made by the Passport Office 
and approved by ministers.

Brokenshire said the design was a celebration of UK culture, and the images 
had been chosen “in homage to the successes in innovation, architecture, arts 
and performance”.


He said: “The launch of this new design is the latest step in an evolutionary 
process that began even before the time of Shakespeare with a simple scroll of 
parchment being issued as the first passport in 1378.”


Anything to declare? Yes, the new UK passport is a bad, sexist joke | Nell 
Frizzell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/03/new-uk-passprt-sexist-seven-men-two-women-history>
The design will be used for the next five years. Among other British designs 
featured are the Penny Black stamp, Edinburgh Castle, the Houses of Parliament, 
the Falkirk Wheel, Titanic Belfast and Waterloo Underground station.


The page bearing biometric details and holder’s photograph is adjoined to the 
back cover to try to prevent the passport being tampered with. Embedded 
invisible red and blue security fibres on every page are fluorescent when 
exposed to UV light. Special inks and enhanced holograms also feature, 
including the image of flowers of the UK, which look as though they are printed 
in the same ink until put under special lights.

“This is the most secure passport we have ever produced. It is the best we can 
do at this time and we think it is pretty damn good,” Thomson said.
 