
Scientists have created the most accurate way yet of simulating the way the 
universe expands.

Dubbed “gevolution”, the tool will for the first time allow researchers to 
take into account the effect of ripples in spacetime - known asgravitational 
waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/09/gravitational-waves-everything-you-need-to-know>
 - and could help shed light on dark energy, the mysterious force driving the 
universe’s accelerated expansion.

Ask a grown-up: what is the universe expanding into?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/14/ask-grownup-universe-expanding>
“I think it is an important step forward,” said Professor Jo Dunkley of the 
University of Oxford, who was not involved in the study. “It’s something that 
people have been trying to work towards for a while.”

While many models of the universe currently exist, simulations are typically 
based on those built on Newton’s theory of gravity. The new tool, however, is 
based on Einstein’s theory of general relativity, allowing scientists to create 
computer simulations based on a far wider range of models. Dr Julian Adamek, 
one of thepaper’s 
<http://www.nature.com/nphys/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nphys3673.html> authors 
now based at the Observatoire de Paris in Meudon, says that offers exciting 
possibilities. “You can see now a simulation of how spacetime is dragged around 
- the ‘frame-dragging’ effect - by the movement of matter and also how 
gravitational waves would be generated by the matter which moves around,” he 
says.

“Surprisingly, you can calculate - to really good accuracy - what the 
large-scale structure of the universe should look like by just using simple 
Newtonian gravity. Hence virtually all the large computer simulations we use to 
date just work with Newton’s laws,” says Dr Tessa Baker, also from the 
University of Oxford. However the new tool, she says, goes further. “It allows 
one to calculate the small deviations from Newtonian gravity that weren’t 
captured by any simulation to date.”

Published in the journal Nature Physics, the paper, led by scientists at the 
University of Geneva, also points out that the tool will allow researchers to 
delve deeper into the nature ofdark energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2016/mar/02/the-dark-side-of-the-universe>
 - the mysterious phenomenon responsible for the acceleration of the expansion 
of the universe. While dark energy is often given a value known as the 
cosmological constant, Adamek is quick to add that it is still an enigma. “If 
it is not [described by the cosmological constant], if it is something else, 
you need to know what kind of implications [it would] have and for this, 
simulations would be a nice way,” says Adamek.


The Dark Side of the Universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2016/mar/02/the-dark-side-of-the-universe>
But not everyone is so enthusiastic. “Einstein’s general relativity is our 
best description of gravity, but the equations are complicated and expensive to 
solve - in the sense that it takes a great deal of computer time,” says Dr 
David Seery from the University of Sussex. “To study growth of structure on 
cosmological scales we can usually make do with the older Newtonian theory of 
gravity.” Indeed, while the new tool could offer advantages, Seery believes it 
has yet to usher forth revelations. “Their computer software is an impressive 
piece of work, but at this stage the results don’t amount to significant 
changes in our understanding of the growth of structure.”

However, with large cosmological surveys in the offing, including the European 
Space Agency’sEuclid satellite <http://www.euclid-ec.org/>, Dunkley believes 
the simulations will yet prove valuable. “This is really timely because we are 
just about to embark on this whole wealth of new data - we will need these 
computer simulations available if we want to learn new physics from the new 
data that is coming,” she says.

Baker agrees. “Capturing these general relativistic effects is important 
because as our telescope technology is improves, so does the accuracy of our 
astronomical data. They may be only small corrections to the Newtonian 
predictions, but we should include them to make totally rigorous calculations 
for the next generation of telescopes.” She adds: “Also they have a bearing on 
ruling out models of dark matter and dark energy, arguably the biggest problems 
in current cosmology.”
 