
A visitor to New Zealand's biggest city is in danger of being disappointed: 
Auckland lacks the immediate buzz of Wellington or the laid-back charm of 
Dunedin. But while Auckland's centre is a little underwhelming, there is plenty 
of life in this city - and it's all in the suburbs. Food writer Simon 
Farrell-Green (eatherenow.co.nz <http://www.eatherenow.co.nz/>) took me on a 
tour of the best bits

Cafes

Ponsonby is where Auckland's well-heeled creatives hang out, and as such it's 
not for everybody (my friends from down-to-earth Hamilton refer to it as 
"Ponsnobby"). But for those that don't mind drinking coffee with yummy mummies 
and their ilk, it's full of great cafes. Try Good One (42 Douglas St, +64 9 360 
5040), a locals' haunt serving delicious rhubarb and custard muffins.

Shed 5 is a fantastically offbeat cafe-cum-motorbike-showroom in Rhubarb Lane (
victoriaquarter.wordpress.com <http://victoriaquarter.wordpress.com/>), a 
quirky development in a former bus depot not far from the centre. When we 
dropped in, classic cars awaiting auction were parked among the tables, just in 
case anyone fancied a Ferrari with their flat white.

Little & Friday (43c Eversleigh Rd, Takapuna, +64 9 489 8527) is another 
oddity: a gorgeous modern cafe, slap-bang in the middle of unfashionable 
suburbia. Elderly couples sit alongside kids with skinny jeans and enormous 
afros, united by their love for the amazing sausage rolls.

Bars
 Rooftop bar at Tyler St Garage 
Golden Dawn (134 Ponsonby Road) is the bar of the moment on Ponsonby Road. 
There's no signage and the windows are papered over, making it a magnet for the 
cool crowd.

Tyler St Garage (120 Quay Street) is a new rooftop bar near the centre, on the 
edge of the Britomart area. This district was dilapidated for years but is now 
being sensitively developed to protect its heritage buildings. The bars, 
farmers' markets and festivals springing up there are making it a new city 
hotspot.

North Wharf (waterfrontauckland.co.nz <http://www.waterfrontauckland.co.nz/>) 
is a new waterside development that should be finished in time for the Rugby 
World Cup and will house bars, restaurants and galleries. It is hoped that it 
will be an edgier version of the Viaduct (viaduct.co.nz 
<http://www.viaduct.co.nz/>), a still popular but rather soulless – and 
expensive – harbour area that was revamped for the America's Cup in 2000.

Restaurants

Scruffy K' Road is grittier than Ponsonby, and a perennial favourite with the 
local hipsters. We went to Coco's Cantina (376 Karangahape Rd, +64 9 300 7582,
cocoscantina.co.nz <http://www.cocoscantina.co.nz/>), a loud and casual local 
restaurant, for lamb and feta terrine followed by superb steaks with anchovy 
butter.

Auckland is home to some fantastic Asian restaurants. Simon recommends Ichiban 
Ramen (17 Albert Street, +64 9 303 4372), a hole-in-wall noodle bar; Mekong 
Vietnamese (106 Ponsonby Road) for the bestpho (beef noodle soup); and Grand 
Harbour (Viaduct Harbour, +64 9 357 6889,grandharbour.co.nz 
<http://www.grandharbour.co.nz/>) for top yum cha (dim sum).

Mexican Specialities (5-92 Marua Road, Ellerslie, +64 9 580 2497, 
mexicanspecialities.co.nz <http://www.mexicanspecialities.co.nz/>) only opens 
for lunch, and only Thursday-Saturday, but serves very fresh and authentic 
Mexican food. Dida's (glengarry.co.nz <http://www.glengarry.co.nz/>) started 
life as a wine shop and has now expanded to serve tapas-style food in two swish 
suburbs, Herne Bay (54 Jervois Road, Herne Bay, +64 9 376 2813) and Devenport 
(54 Victoria Road, Devonport, +64 9 445 1392).

Accommodation
 Hotel de Brett 
The Auckland branch of Base Backpackers (from £9pp for a shared dorm, 229 
Queens St,stayatbase.com 
<http://www.stayatbase.com/base-auckland-central-backpackers/>) is a reliable 
choice for cheap, central accommodation. Jucy Hotel (doubles from £35, 62 Emily 
Place,jucyhotel.com <http://www.jucyhotel.com/>) is a good budget alternative. 
The Quadrant (studio apartments from £75, 100 Waterloo Quadrant,thequadrant.com 
<http://www.thequadrant.com/>) is a hip and reasonably affordable option for 
self-caterers.

If money is no object, the pick of Auckland's boutique accommodation is Hotel 
de Brett (from £130 a night, 2 High St, +64 9 925 9000, hoteldebrett.com 
<http://www.hoteldebrett.com/>), a central, stylish 1930s hotel with a mix of 
vintage and contemporary furniture. Its classic bar was once a regular hangout 
of the city's hard-drinking hacks.

Culture

The Michael Lett gallery (285/2 Great North Road, +64 9 376 1266, 
michaellett.com <http://www.michaellett.com/>) is in an willfully perverse 
location: a former car mechanics on a busy road in Grey Lynn. I couldn't make 
head nor tail of thesound installation 
<http://www.michaellett.com/artist/?artist=et+al.&show=trans-cryption%0D%0Aincludes+original+sound+compilation+by+Ivan+Mr%9Ai%26%23263%3B&info=work#trans-cryption%0D%0Aincludes+original+sound+compilation+by+Ivan+Mr%9Ai%26%23263%3B>
, but fans of cutting-edge contemporary art will no doubt fare better.

ArtSpace (300 Karangahape Road, +64 9 303 4965, artspace.org.nz 
<http://www.artspace.org.nz/>) has great exhibitions; the lovely old Mercury 
Theatre (9 Mercury Lane, Newton) is putting on plays again for the first time 
in around 20 years; and radio station 95bFM (95bfm.co.nz 
<http://www.95bfm.co.nz/>) showcases new local bands.

Shopping

La Cigale (69 St Georges Bay Rd, Parnell, lacigale.co.nz 
<http://www.lacigale.co.nz/wawcs0111832/ln-Market.html>) is the best of 
Auckland's many farmers' markets. It's a mix of excellent local produce and 
great immigrant-run stalls selling delicacies such as spicy Serbian sausage, 
plus a restaurant. But don't take my word for it: John Key, the prime minister, 
shops here most Saturdays. I spotted him buying French cheese, casually dressed 
in shorts and T-shirt, with one burly minder a discreet distance away.

The Department Store (10 Northcroft Street, Takapuna, 
blog.thedepartmentstore.co.nz <http://blog.thedepartmentstore.co.nz/>) is a 
"concept store" stocking local designers – and is also New Zealand's only 
Topshop outlet. Shoppers queue down the street on Thursdays when the new 
consignment arrives from the UK.

St Kevin's Arcade (179 Karangahape Road) has some lovely boutiques and vintage 
shops, including Children of Vision and Fast and Loose. Nearby Ironbank (150 
Karangahape Road,ironbank.co.nz <http://www.ironbank.co.nz/index.cfm>) also 
houses some interesting shops. Douglas + Bec (9 St Mary's Road, Ponsonby, +64 9 
551 3685,workroom.net.nz <http://www.workroom.net.nz/news/?page_id=780>) are a 
father and daughter design team making simple homeware out of reclaimed timber 
– their shop is well worth a browse.

Beaches

One of Auckland's best beaches can only be found with a little insider 
knowledge. Park near the Takapuna Beach Cafe and Store (22 The Promenade, North 
Shore, +64 9 484 0002,takapunabeachcafe.co.nz 
<http://www.takapunabeachcafe.co.nz/>) and pick up an ice-cream – I can 
recommend the passion fruit sorbet – then leave Takapuna beach to the tourists 
and walk over the black volcanic rocks to Thorne Bay. This secluded little 
beach has trees providing shade and is a safe place to swim (though not when we 
visited, as there was a tsunami warning). And don't attempt to cross the rocks 
at high tide.

Outside the city
 Mudbrick Vineyard 
Beautiful Waiheke Island (waiheke.co.nz <http://www.waiheke.co.nz/>) is a 
30-minute boat ride from central Auckland, and is unmissable. Go wine tasting 
at Mudbrick Vineyard (mudbrick.co.nz <http://www.mudbrick.co.nz/>), try the 
olive oil at Rangihoua Estate (rangihoua.co.nz <http://www.rangihoua.co.nz/>), 
and treat yourself to lunch at Cable Bay (cablebayvineyards.co.nz 
<http://www.cablebayvineyards.co.nz/>) – the wine bar is a cheaper alternative 
if you can't stretch to the restaurant.

• Tourism New Zealand's Rugby World Cup site is at newzealand.com/rugby 
<http://www.newzealand.com/rugby/>. Remaining tickets go on sale on 4 July at 
tickets.rugbyworldcup.com <http://tickets.rugbyworldcup.com/>. The Real New 
Zealand Festival (realnzfestival.com <http:>) will feature more than 1,000 
cultural events nationwide during the tournament. Emirates (0844 800277,
emirates.com/uk 
<http://www.emirates.com/uk/english/index.aspx?cid=Google07SEMUK124956&pkw=yes>
) flies to Auckland daily from Heathrow, Gatwick, Manchester, Birmingham, 
Glasgow and Newcastle from £950 return
 