
The homeless man who found a backpack of bombs in Elizabeth, New Jersey, on 
Sunday night spoke publicly about his shock at finding the explosive devices 
allegedly planted by Ahmad Khan Rahami, who remains in a New Jersey hospital 
afterbeing captured in a police shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 on Monday.

“Under the so-called hero’s cape, I’m just a regular dude,” said Lee Parker, 
50. “I still have my nine lives, I guess, and I’m going to keep trying to live 
them well.”

Parker and his friend Ian White found the abandoned backpack near the 
Elizabeth train station. After taking it, they walked down the street and 
realized the backpack had wires coming out of it. They immediately contacted 
police, who attempted to disarm the bomb, although one bomb exploded in the 
process.


Parker says he replays in his mind what would have happened if the backpack 
exploded while they carried it.

“I see it sometimes in the back of my mind and I know I need to get past it,” 
said Parker. “But, I feel good. I’m OK, and I’m grateful.”

A GoFundMe page <https://www.gofundme.com/2pu6gkc> set up as a thank you from 
the community has already raised more than $17,000, with the funds to be split 
among Parker, White and the Elizabeth Coalition to House the Homeless. That 
local non-profit is currently paying for Parker to stay in a hotel, and he’s 
received donated food and clothes.

Elizabeth mayor Chris Bollwage hailed the pair on Monday as saviors to their 
community – and very lucky in their own right.

“Those two people go through life on the edge and in a very difficult position 
and yet they probably saved hundreds of lives by walking over to Elizabeth 
police headquarters,” he told reporters outside Rahami’s family home on Monday.

“They’re also walking on the side of angels, they picked up that backpack ... 
and they carried [it] 800-1,000 feet before they realized what was in it,” said 
Bollwage.

Authorities are investigating whether Rahami, 28, planned the attack as a 
“lone wolf” or if others were involved in bombings inNew Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> and New York over the weekend.


New York and New Jersey bombings: who is suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings>
“As far as whether he’s a lone actor, that’s still the path we are following 
but we are keeping all the options open,” said William Sweeney, the FBI’s 
assistant director inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>.


Late Tuesday, authorities charged Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey>
 with bombing, property destruction and use of weapons of mass destruction 
regardinga bombing in Chelsea on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-city-blind-home-chelsea-bombing-selis-manor>
 that injured 29 people, as well as pipe bombs plantedin Seaside Park, New 
Jersey, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/pipe-bomb-jersey-shore-5km-run-us-marines>
 on Saturday and Elizabeth on Sunday night. However, no terrorism charges were 
filed .

Police have not yet been allowed to speak with Rahami, who remains in a 
hospital in Newark, New Jersey, after being captured by police in nearby Linden 
on Monday.

New Jersey congressman Tom MacArthur, who was briefed by the FBI, said 
yesterday that Rahami required multiple surgeries due to gunshot wounds to his 
leg, forearm and shoulder from his gun battle with police.


Preet Bharara, the US attorney in Manhattan, said prosecutors plan to move 
Rahami to New York once his medical condition improves.

On Wednesday, the FBI released a photo 
<https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/seeking-info/unknown-individuals-new-york> showing 
the two unidentified men who found a second bomb allegedly left by Rahami, made 
from a pressure cooker, inside a piece of luggage in Chelsea on Saturday night. 
The men removed the bomb – presumably unaware of what it was – and stole the 
luggage. The FBI is seeking the men as witnesses, not suspects.

“The FBI is interested in speaking to these individuals and recovering the 
luggage,”reads 
<https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/seeking-info/unknown-individuals-new-york/@@download.pdf>
 the FBI poster.
 