
The father of New York bombing suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> said on Saturday the 
FBI had made “mistake after mistake” in handling the case and was now 
“punishing” the family for his son’s wrongdoing by barring them from travelling 
to the US.

Mohammad Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-father-fbi-terrorism-bombing>
 said by phone that the FBI did not “do its job properly” by failing to act 
when he contacted investigators in 2014 with concerns his son could be a 
terrorist. He said he told investigators that his son had become “bad” and his 
personality had changed after returning from trips to Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Ahmad Khan Rahami spent time at Pakistan seminary tied to Taliban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/ahmad-khan-rahami-pakistan-taliban-new-york-bombing-terrorism>
A senior FBI official last month contested the elder Rahami’s claim that he 
had warned agents about his son. FBI agents interviewed the father after a 2014 
incident in which Rahami was arrested on charges – later dropped – that he had 
stabbed one of his brothers in the leg, according to the FBI official, who 
insisted that Rahami’s father “at no time” discussed his son’s radicalization 
or potential interest in al-Qaida, the Taliban or their propaganda.

The official was not authorized to discuss the case by name and spoke to the 
Associated Press on condition of anonymity.

Rahami said US authorities had recently turned back his wife and one of his 
sons when they tried to travel fromAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to the US. He said Ahmad Khan 
Rahami’s wife was also refused entry into the US. He would not reveal where his 
daughter-in-law was living, but said her family was from the Pakistani city of 
Quetta.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffather-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Father%20of%20bombing%20suspect%20says%20he%20contacted%20FBI%20in%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffather-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Father%20of%20bombing%20suspect%20says%20he%20contacted%20FBI%20in%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffather-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video&media=>
Father of bombing suspect says he contacted FBI in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/20/father-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video>
He urged US authorities to allow his relatives to travel to the US, saying 
they were law-abiding citizens.

Rahami is accused of planting bombs in New York and New Jersey that wounded 31 
people last month. The Afghan-born US citizen remains hospitalized with gunshot 
wounds after a police shootout.

Prosecutors said that when he was arrested, Rahami was found to be carrying a 
journal that praised Osama bin Laden and other militants and that fumed about 
what he saw as the US government’s killing of Muslim holy warriors.

The elder Rahami said he had been given no information on his son’s condition 
in hospital.

He expressed his “sympathy for all those who suffered” in the blasts. 

“My son’s bad act damaged our repute, it defamed my motherland and it caused 
bad impression about Islam, which stands for peace,” he said.
 