
Hometown: London.


The lineup: Edwin Fry (music, production).

The background: Nice to see ELO getting rave reviews for their gig last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/15/jeff-lynnes-elo-review-radio-2-hyde-park-london-electric-light-orchestra>
. It got us thinking about how people, critics, even John Lennon himself (and 
Alan McGee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2008/oct/16/elo-better-than-beatles>
), used to declare ELO the band the Beatles could have been if they had 
remained together in the 70s. Nice also to see Aphex Twin re-emerge from the 
deep web (or perhapsElephant and Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/oct/05/artsfeatures3>) with a new 
album. Again, that got us thinking (twice in a week – steady) about progress 
and context. You could reasonably argue that a 90s Beatles, with a similar 
sense of radical intent and invention, might have sounded something like Aphex 
Twin. They certainly wouldn’t have been Oasis. But following that logic, what 
would a 21st-century Aphex be like? You could see reviewers grappling with that 
conundrum in their reactions toSyro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/aphex-twin-syro-review-brain-bending-richard-d-james>
. They were like: we’re delighted he’s back, but if it’s recognisably Aphex, 
has he effected a similar leap forward to the one he made when he first arrived 
with Selected Ambient Works? And if he hasn’t, then is he doing his job? 
Wouldn’t a true modern equivalent of Aphex be a series of barely assimilable 
noises, so futuristic we’d need a different system to enjoy or understand them?

Which brings us not very neatly at all to AxxoN N, a music producer based in 
London, about whom little is known except that his real name is Edwin Fry and 
his pseudonym is an obscure reference to David Lynch’s Inland Empire. 
Apparently, it has taken him four years to painstakingly assemble the 
hypertracks and bleak atmospherica featured on his debut album Heal out of 
samples and percussive micro-bytes, “drawing on the surrounding popular culture 
that is the early 21st century,” according to the press release. You can hear 
an internet dial-up from circa 2001 through the hiss, drone and static of 
Defamation.

Issued by Domestic <http://www.domestic-records.com/> – a hub for exploratory, 
leftfield music housing the likes of Mink Freud and Hektagon – it is the 
amalgam of cultural detritus and dream sequences from one young man’s 
childhood, projected through a science-fiction approach to electronic 
music-making. But these 19 intense tracks are more than a series of sterile 
exercises and cold technological feats. “This work takes on conceptual form, 
each track addressing and coming to terms with states of deep depression and 
anxiety,” continues the release. We’re joining the dots here, but we’re 
guessing that Heal (and there’s another clue) is as much art of self-expression 
as Art of Noise, as emotional an exercise as any acoustic singer-songwriter LP. 
As the disembodied voice asks on Time of Need, “Make me happy, make me happy.”

If this is the sound inside Fry’s head, then it’s a place of dread. Actually, 
Mind Interference could be the inside ofHenry Spencer’s 
<http://www.tasteofcinema.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/eraserhead.jpg> brain, 
amplified severalfold, or the terror dimension of a black hole. On the opening 
track, Passenger, a man enquires: “You have a lot of voices, huh? What are they 
saying?” A female replies: “They’re saying …” This album is an opportunity for 
Fry to calm the white noise of shouts and demands, the competing voices he 
can’t turn down. Often, he manages to form utterly entrancing – literally, 
trance-worthy – dance tracks from the mental melee. There are moments on the 
album, such as Petri Dish, that recall Chicago’s footwork at its most
rampagingly frenetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/20/new-band-dj-nate>. Others could 
soundtrack a Lynchian psychodrama. Overall, Heal sounds like the album that 
Lynch might have made for Warp. In a way, it’s music of the future. In another, 
it’s simply an extension of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop’s experiments of 
decades ago, or an extrapolation of the Beatles’ Revolution No 9. Really, the 
nicest thing you could say about it is, if Aphex Twin had presented this 
cacophony on Syro, the reviews would have been just as favourable.

The buzz: “Bears some resemblance to a version of Kraftwerk that’s been turned 
on its head.” <http://www.nofearofpop.net/blog/axxon-n-petri-dish> 

The truth: Imagine a less playful, dour Aphex consumed with dread. 

Most likely to: Declare war on Drukqs 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/225-drukqs/>. 

Least likely to: Tour with the War on Drugs. 

What to buy: Heal is released on 13 October by Domestic.

File next to: Actress, Autechre, Aphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin>, Art of Noise.

Links: facebook.com/Axxon-N 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Axxon-N/276949075793635?fref=ts>.

Ones to watch: Deaths, Memotone and Soosh, Spookyland, Emperor Yes, Pearls 
Negras.
 