
All scheduled flights were prevented briefly from taking off in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> on Tuesday after a radar fault 
struck.

Airways New Zealand, which manages air traffic control, grounded all 
commercial airlines at airports across the country.

The fault struck at 2.48pm and led to delays, with passengers sitting on 
planes on the tarmac.

 A spokesman for the aviation authority said the fault was eventually 
rectified and services resumed about 4.20pm. Astatement 
<http://www.airways.co.nz/about_Airways/media_releases/2015_airways_network_failure.asp>
 from Airways New Zealand said: “At no point was the safety of any airport 
operations compromised.”


Delays were expected to continue throughout the afternoon.

Earlier, after the grounding order was put out, a spokesman said: “There has 
been a radar failure that has occurred at 2.48pm [02.48 GMT] this afternoon; we 
are working on the issue at the moment.

“The impact is that all aircraft have been held on the ground. There are no 
aircraft taking off across the country. The aircraft that are in the air have 
been cleared to land.”

Airways New Zealand (@AirwaysNZ) 
At 2.48pm today 23/6/15 we experienced a radar failure. We are working on the 
issue, and will provide an update.
 <https://twitter.com/AirwaysNZ/status/613189657052975104> June 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AirwaysNZ/status/613189657052975104> Airways New Zealand 
(@AirwaysNZ) 
rtpt We are holding all aircraft on the ground, however those in the air will 
be cleared to land.
 <https://twitter.com/AirwaysNZ/status/613189775202353153> June 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AirwaysNZ/status/613189775202353153> Airways New Zealand 
(@AirwaysNZ) 
We will provide an update on the radar fault once we've determined the cause 
of the issue. Flights are being grounded at the moment.
 <https://twitter.com/AirwaysNZ/status/613193424360091650> June 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AirwaysNZ/status/613193424360091650>  