
Which newspaper group has been responsible for the largest number of 
complaints upheld by the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso)?

What’s that I hear? Associated, publisher of the Mail titles? Wrong. And wrong 
by a substantial margin.

In fact, according to Ipso’s annual report for 2015 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/news-press-releases/opinion/annual-report-2015/>, the 
worst offender was News UK, publisher of the Sun, Times and Sunday Times. It 
was responsible for the press regulator upholding 11 complaints in the course 
of last year.

Incidentally, of that number, the Times had most (five) - including two 
interesting cases,here 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/rulings-and-resolution-statements/ruling/?id=04034-15> 
andhere 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/rulings-and-resolution-statements/ruling/?id=03125-15>) 
- while the Sun had three, the Scottish Sun one, and the Sunday Times, two.

In second place, with 10 upheld complaints, was Northern & Shell, publisher of 
the Express and Star titles plus celebrity magazines. Of those, four were 
against theDaily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, one 
was against the Sunday Express and one involved the Express website. The others 
were the Daily Star (three) and the Daily Star Sunday (one).

In joint third place, with nine upheld complaints, were the Telegraph Media 
Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> and Trinity 
Mirror.

Since I’m sure you are wondering, Associated’s total was a mere two. Yes, 
Ipso’s complaints committee ruled only twice against the Daily Mail (here 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/rulings-and-resolution-statements/ruling/?id=04839-15> 
andhere 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/rulings-and-resolution-statements/ruling/?id=00585-15>).

A closer look at the statistics also shows that Associated was the most 
assiduous group at resolving complaints, having done so on 23 occasions.

Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror>, which 
publishes the Mirror titles, plus the Record in Scotland and 150 regionals, 
successfully resolved 17 complaints.

It was also responsible for attracting the largest number of complaints, but 
58 of those were not upheld. I have no idea if that’s due to the skills of Paul 
Mottram, Trinity Mirror’s editorial and legal and compliance officer, but it 
ranks as something of a record.

(I should add that Trinity Mirror’s total includes complaints received by 
Local World before it was acquired by TM in November 2015).

Two regional groups - Newsquest and Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> - also feature in the list 
with a relatively large number of complaints: 32 (six upheld) in the former 
case and 19 (five upheld) for the latter.

Overall, there were 307 complaints about publications signed up to Ipso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> during 2015. Of those, 60 were upheld; 
64 were resolved; and 183 were not upheld.

It would appear that two publishers (Associated and Trinity Mirror) have been 
extremely good at resolving complaints.


In his statement in the report, Ipso’s chairman, Sir Alan Moses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses>, wrote of the body having 
had “a significant effect on the approach of the press to the standards they 
have set themselves in the editors’ code.”

He wrote: “Their change of attitude is demonstrated in their internal 
procedures by which they seek to avoid adverse rulings, their recognition of 
the importance of speedy resolution and in their acknowledgement that they 
cannot resist the consequential requirements we impose.”

PS: Far and away the most interesting complaint currently under consideration 
by Ipso is the one against the Sun’s columnist, Kelvin MacKenzie, for his 18 
July column, “Why did Channel 4 have a presenter in a hijab fronting coverage 
of Muslim terror in Nice?”

According to the latest update on Ipso’s website 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/news-press-releases/news/update-on-the-sun-column-of-18-july-2016-headlined-why-did-channel-4-have-a-presenter-in-a-hijab-fronting-coverage-of-muslim-terror-in-nice/>
, it has attracted more than 1,900 complaints. Most allege breaches of three 
clauses of the editors’ code of practice: accuracy, harassment and 
discrimination.

Ipso states that the matter is “ongoing” and that it will proceed with the 
complaint from the party directly affected, Fatima Manji, who made a formal 
complaint to the regulator,as did ITN’s chief executive, John Hardie. 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-07-22/channel-4s-fatima-manji-makes-official-complaint-over-kelvin-mackenzie-column/>

PPS: The Guardian is not regulated by Ipso. Nor is the Observer, the Financial 
Times, the Independent and London Evening Standard.
 