
All national newspaper websites reporting officially audited figures except 
Independent.co.uk saw their traffic fall month on month in December, with 
theguardian.com suffering the biggest decline.

Guardian.co.uk, the Guardian News & Media website network that includes 
MediaGuardian, recorded a 20.61% dip in daily online browsers to 2,937,070 in 
December, traditionally a quiet news month.

The Guardian's month-on-month decline, exacerbated by comparison with a record 
traffic high in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/dec/22/mail-online-tops-80-million?INTCMP=SRCH>
, nevertheless represented a 31.45% increase compared with December 2010, 
according to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulation figures published on 
Thursday.

News International's Sun website was the next biggest faller, reporting a 
10.44% month-on-month decline in daily online browsers to 1,339,077. Monthly 
browsers also fell by 8.63% to 22,132,021.

Independent.co.uk, which relaunched on 31 October, was the only UK national 
newspaper website to increase traffic between November and December, overtaking 
Mirror Group Digital in the process.

Daily online browsers increased 10.56% month on month in December to 758,524. 
Monthly browsers rose 16.45% to 15,833,084.

On a year-on-year basis Independent.co.uk increased its daily users by about 
50% and monthly users by just over 40%.

Mirror Group Digital, the Trinity Mirror website network that includes 
3am.co.uk and MirrorFootball.co.uk, saw daily online browsers fall 4.23% 
compared with November to 726,653.

Monthly browsers grew 0.04% to 16,311,555. Trinity Mirror increased its daily 
and monthly users by about 45% compared with December 2010.

Telegraph.co.uk fell back by 8.16% month on month to 2,156,001. Monthly 
browsers fell 4.74% to 42,699,603. However, daily and monthly user numbers have 
grown by more than third since December 2010.

Mail Online, still by far the largest UK newspaper website, recorded a 5.03% 
fall in daily online browsers in December to 4,838,140. The Associated 
Newspapers website network has now overtaken the New York Times to become the 
most popular newspaper on the internet worldwide,according to the latest 
comScore figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/jan/25/dailymail-internet>.

Monthly UK online browsers fell 0.95% compared with November to 84,172,568. On 
a year-on-year basis both daily and monthly user numbers were up almost 60%.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 4,838,140

Month-on-month change: -5.03%

Year-on-year change: +58.89%

Monthly browsers: 84,172,568

Month-on-month: -0.95%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 2,937,070

Month-on-month change: -20.61%

Year-on-year change: 31.45%

Monthly browsers: n/a

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 2,156,001

Month-on-month change: -8.16%

Year-on-year change: +36.17%

Monthly browsers: 42,699,603

Month-on-month change: -4.74%

Sun Online

Daily average browsers: 1,339,077

month-on-month change: -10.44%

Year-on-year change: N/A

Monthly browsers: 22,132,021

Month-on-month change: -8.63%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 758,524

Month-on-month change: +10.56%

Year-on-year change: +43.40%

Monthly browsers: 15,833,084

Month-on-month change: +16.45%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 726,653

Month-on-month change: -4.23%

Year-on-year change: +44.19%

Monthly browsers: 16,311,555

Month-on-month change: +0.04%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 