
Media lawyers have warned that the next national newspaper found guilty of 
identifying the alleged victim of a sexual assault is likely to face a 
six-figure penalty, following the latest case, which has resulted in an £80,000 
fine for the Telegraph.

The Telegraph’s use of a pixelated image of the teenage victim of former 
England footballer Adam Johnson in March this year came after unlimited fines 
were introduced to stop newspapers flouting a law that has existed since at 
least 1976.

One senior media lawyer, who declined to be named, described the Telegraph 
fine as being “three strikes and you’re out” for newspapers. He echoed others 
in saying that fines could easily go over six figures if the industry continues 
to ignore the aim of prosecutors and courts to protect anonymity for victims.

In May this year, Associated Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>, publisher of the 
Daily Mail, wasfined £40,000  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/12/daily-mail-publisher-fined-40000-over-pixelated-photograph>
after pleading guilty to identifying a man who claims to be the victim of a VIP 
paedophile ring.

In March 2015, the Sun used the same pixelated image of Johnson’s 15-year-old 
victim. Its then editor, David Dinsmore, was ordered topay £2,300 in costs and 
compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/07/adam-johnson-former-sun-editor-david-dinsmore-convicted-victim-picture>
 to the young victim after a court ruled in March this year that he had broken 
the law. At that point fines were capped at £5,000.

Victim support groups are furious at the continued flouting of the law. Their 
argument that anonymity is more necessary than ever to encourage victims to 
come forward when so many sexual offences go unreported is gaining traction 
among prosecutors, as is evinced by the introduction of unlimited fines.

Sarah Green, co-director of the End Violence against Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> coalition, said: “Newspaper 
editors know the difference between right and wrong [yet] there is a temptation 
for some media outlets to put the desire to tell a story above this.

“I am really disappointed that people who make these decisions don’t exercise 
more restraint when covering an issue that causes such distress.”

Yvonne Traynor, chief executive of Rape Crisis South London, said: “It’s vital 
the media understands and respects the severity of these cases and the damage 
that can be done to survivors who are already traumatised and have made a brave 
decision to speak out and give evidence at court.

“The media needs to take a more responsible attitude, and the justice system 
needs to act quickly and forcefully when the laws protecting a survivor’s 
anonymity are wilfully flouted by the press.”

The repeated use of this particular image of a 15-year-old girl shows how 
mainly male newspaper editors, faced with making a speedy decisions, are 
struggling to stay within the law in the era where private images are 
widespread on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fnewspapers-warned-of-heavy-fines-if-they-identify-victims-in-sex-cases%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33fde9091dda14e5399dc17d0a1b31b54af11324%2F0_248_7380_4428%2F7380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newspapers%20warned%20of%20heavy%20fines%20if%20they%20identify%20sex%20case%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fnewspapers-warned-of-heavy-fines-if-they-identify-victims-in-sex-cases%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newspapers%20warned%20of%20heavy%20fines%20if%20they%20identify%20sex%20case%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fnewspapers-warned-of-heavy-fines-if-they-identify-victims-in-sex-cases%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33fde9091dda14e5399dc17d0a1b31b54af11324%2F0_248_7380_4428%2F7380.jpg>
 Sun editor David Dinsmore argued unsuccessfully that the newspaper had done 
enough to obscure the girl’s identity. Photograph: Sarah Lee/the Guardian 
In the case against the Sun, the paper’s then editor, David Dinsmore, argued 
that he and his team thought they had taken enough steps to protect the girl’s 
anonymity by obscuring her face, changing the colour and length of her hair and 
altering the background.

Yet, as the original picture of the victim had been widely disseminated on 
social media, it was possible to spot similarities between the original photo 
and the altered one published by the Sun with a story headlined “Soccer ace and 
girl he bedded”, with the subheading “Johnson in pose with his 15-year-old fan”.



The detective in charge of the case, DI Aelfwynn Sampson, said: “What Dinsmore 
did in the Sun was legally and morally wrong.”

Days before the verdict against Dinsmore, the Telegraph had taken a similar 
decision to publish the pixelated image of the same victim as part of its 
coverage of the end of theJohnson case, in which the footballer had been found 
guilty of sexual activity with a child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/02/adam-johnson-not-guilty-one-count-of-sex-with-schoolgirl>
.

The Telegraph is understood to have argued in court that it took legal advice 
and was told to go ahead with publication as the girl’s image was obscured.

The paper also argued that as there were only four Telegraph readers in the 
victim’s postcode, identification must have been minimal. However, the judge in 
the case threw out this argument, pointing out that the Telegraph has 4.7m 
average daily browsers and a far greater reach than many of the social media 
users.

The reach and impact of newspapers is still cited by judges as a reason why 
fines are merited even though, as Judge Riddle acknowledged, “more distress was 
caused by social media”.

The Telegraph apologised unreservedly to the victim in a statement. “The 
picture should not have been published and we have put in place robust 
procedures to ensure that such an error can never happen again.”

A spokesman for the Telegraph Media Group, which admitted the charge and was 
fined £80,000 and ordered to pay the teenager £10,000 in compensation, as well 
as £1,473 in prosecution costs and a victim surcharge of £120, declined to 
describe such procedures.



End Violence against Women’s Sarah Green believes that the culture in 
newspapers as well as society needs to change if this behaviour is to stop. “If 
there had been a better outcome from the Leveson inquiry [into press standards] 
and we had a newsroom culture that we wanted, this might have changed. I hope 
this fine acts as a deterrent.”
 