
Patients could get drugs and treatment sooner under an “ambitious” plan, 
according to a new report.


NHS to have one website for appointments, prescriptions and advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/nhs-one-website-appointments-prescriptions-advice>
The UK has been known to be slower than other countries when it comes to 
providing life-changing treatments as soon as they are available, officials 
said. Making the newest treatments available more quickly is among the 
recommendations in the Accelerated Access Review.

The report, commissioned by the government, suggests patients could have 
medications four years sooner than at present if NHS processes were 
streamlined. Officials said the report will help the UK “embrace new 
opportunities” as it prepares to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

The review said patients and medical staff become frustrated as they wait for 
much-needed treatments and said innovators have to “navigate multiple 
processes” to get their products to the market.

Chair of the Accelerated Access Review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/accelerated-access-review>, Sir 
Hugh Taylor, said: “This ambitious plan will prepare the health system for an 
exciting era in medical innovation. We’ve listened to the views of the NHS, 
patients, clinicians, the life sciences industries and academia – and it is 
clear we need to act now to make the most of the tidal wave of new drugs and 
technologies that are being developed.”

UK doctors told to halve inappropriate antibiotic prescriptions by 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/26/uk-doctors-told-to-halve-inappropriate-antibiotic-prescriptions-by-2020>
NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, said the review could help create 
opportunities as Brexit approaches. “Across the NHS we’re going to create 
headroom for faster and wider uptake of important new patient treatments. In 
doing so we’re going to create new opportunities in the run-up to Brexit for 
our globally successful UK life sciences sector. If we get this right there are 
huge gains within our grasp, for patients across theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and for the wider success of our 
country.”

Health charities have welcomed the recommendations. Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK’s chief executive, 
Harpal Kumar, said: “The voices of patients have been crucial to this review. 
They have a critical role in advising how research priorities should be set and 
how they would like to be involved in developing new treatments to meet their 
needs.”

Hilary Evans, chief executive of Alzheimer’s Research UK, said the review has 
come at a “crucial” time for thousands of dementia patients awaiting the 
results of trials of a number of potential new treatments. “If these are shown 
to be positive then the recommendations in this report, including the creation 
of a new strategic commercial unit, could help these treatments get to patients 
more rapidly, while ensuring that appropriate reimbursement to innovators is 
balanced against good value to the NHS.”
 