
Ashya King <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king>, the boy with a 
brain tumour whose parents disappeared with him to Spain because they did not 
want the kind of radiotherapy available in the UK, will have his treatment paid 
for by the NHS after all, it has been revealed.

NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England has agreed to fund 
proton beam therapy for Ashya under the reciprocal healthcare arrangements that 
exist within the EU, on the basis that the five-year-old needs a course of 
radiotherapy as a matter of urgency and, if he is to recover, he must have it 
now in Prague, where he has been taken by his family.

Ashya’s case had previously been turned down by a specialist expert panel of 
doctors, on the basis that proton beam therapy offers no benefit that the child 
could not get from standard radiotherapy in the UK.

The specialist panel examines all the cases of children who might benefit from 
proton beam therapy brought to them by NHS hospitals and can make the decision 
to send them abroad – usually to the United States – for treatment.

The U-turn by NHS England, because of the application within the EU rules 
rather than normal NHS protocol, may make other parents who would prefer proton 
beam therapy to standard radiotherapy for their child, seek to take them abroad.

In Ashya’s case, however, doctors were clear that proton beams offered no 
advantage, because the entire brain and spine would have to be irradiated, 
whichever method was used.

In a statement, NHS England said: “Our thoughts are with Ashya and his family 
as he begins follow-on radiotherapy. Now that Ashya is in Prague, it is clearly 
best that Ashya continues to be treated uninterrupted so the NHS has agreed to 
fund this care, as requested by his parents, in accordance with relevant 
European cross-border arrangements. We all join in wishing him well, and 
greatly hope he makes a full and successful recovery.”
 