
An NHS trust has apologised after it admitted selling surplus skin for 
chemical weapons research without explaining to patients what it would be used 
for.

Salisbury health care trust said that, until a fortnight ago, it sold surplus 
skin to the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency (DERA) at Porton Down for an 
annual fee of Â£17,000 a year.

The admission will refuel the ethical debate over the appropriate use of human 
tissues and the extent to which patients' informed consent should be required 
for medical research purposes. The trust only stopped the practice in the wake 
of last month's Alder Hey children's hospital organs storage scandal.

The skin, which was removed during breast and abdominal surgery at Salisbury 
district hospital, was used in "chemical absorption studies" as well as 
investigations of drug delivery and barrier cream formulation, the trust said.

Patients were required to sign a consent form but this did not fully explain 
the purpose of the research, the trust admitted.

A statement from the trust said: "The trust now recognises that this did not 
inform patients of the specific use of the skin and that some individuals may 
not have wished for the skin to be used by DERA and offers its sincere 
apologies for this."

The chemical and biological warfare research centre at Porton Down, Wiltshire, 
carried out the world's longest-running programme of chemical warfare 
experiments on humans between 1940 and 1989.

The consent form that patients were required to sign, which was updated in 
1996, read: "I agree/ disagree to any tissue that is removed in the normal 
course of the operation being used for medical research."

The trust's statement said: "The trust thought it appropriate for patients' 
consent to be sought for the use of surplus skin in all forms of medical 
research through a consent form." It went on: "The trust made a decision to 
stop providing skin to DERA two weeks ago in the light of issues raised in the 
Alder Hey report.

"The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> is 
currently considering the issue of guidance on the appropriate use of human 
tissue and on gaining informed consent from patients and relatives for its use 
for medical purposes."

A spokesman for the trust added: "We are stopping the process until we get 
further guidance from the Department of Health."

The trust said the money it received from DERA went back into patient care. 

As well being sold to DERA, skin was also used within the trust to investigate 
wound healing and the preparation of artificial skin, as well as the treatment 
of burn wounds.

A Ministry of Defence spokeswoman, speaking on behalf of DERA, confirmed the 
skin was used in chemical warfare tests. She said the tests were to discover 
how the skin absorbs chemicals that might be used to attack British servicemen 
and women.

She added that chemical tests on the skin were also done for the benefit of 
civilians, for example, to see how the skin would be effected by a spillage of 
corrosive chemicals used in the home and at work.
 