
Another television brand has joined the kids’ coding bandwagon, with 
Nickelodeon UK’s launch of a website calledCode-It 
<http://www.nick.co.uk/_/code-it/> that aims to teach programming skills to 
6-12 year-olds.

The site uses various characters from the network’s shows, including SpongeBob 
SquarePants and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, to help children learn and 
practise various coding tasks.

While they will earn badges for their progress through the site’s set lessons, 
children will also be able to write their own programs animating the 
characters, and share them with their peers.

“Through Code-It we hope to help kids enhance their coding skills in a fun and 
engaging way and give them an opportunity to create with their favourite 
characters,” said Nickelodeon’s digital director Suzie Adams.

Nickelodeon joins several other TV brands that are trying to tie in to the 
recently updated computing curriculum in English schools, which includes 
programming for children as young as five.

In May 2014, producer Aardman Animations launched Shaun’s Game Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/15/aardman-kids-coding-shaun-the-sheep>
 - a website challenging children to create and share their own games based on 
its Shaun the Sheep show. The site used established kids-coding platform 
Scratch.

In October, the BBC followed with The Doctor and the Dalek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/20/doctor-who-web-game-bbc-programming-coding>
, a web game based on Doctor Who that featured a series of programming 
challenges, as young fans upgraded a Dalek character controlled by the Doctor.

Other children’s brands that have dipped their toes in the coding waters 
include Angry Birds, whichlaunched a set of programming challenges 
<https://learn.code.org/hoc/1> as part of the Hour of Code initiative, and 
Moshi Monsters, which worked with build-a-computer startup Kano on abranded 
version of the Pong video game <http://moshi.kano.me/#> that children could 
change.

The theory behind all these launches is that familiar characters and brands 
may help children take their first steps in programming without feeling 
intimidated, although for the brands, there is clearly also a benefit in being 
associated with a high-profile educational trend.

• ‘Great big poo balls!’ Making a Kano computer with your kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/02/kano-computer-kids-pong-sharing>


• Coding at school: a parent’s guide to England’s computing curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/04/coding-school-computing-children-programming>


• Seven kids coding projects that crowdfunded their first steps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/26/kids-coding-kickstarter-crowdfunding-programming>

 