
Nicki Minaj <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj> is well-known for 
her theatrical performance style and penchant for accents, but now the rapper 
turned pop star will swap the studio for the small screen when she films an 
autobiographical comedy show for ABC Family.

Minaj will serve as executive producer on the show that revolves around her 
upbringing in Queens after she moved to New York at age five from Trinidad and 
Tobago, where she was raised by her grandmother.

Nicki Minaj: 'I have bigger balls than the boys'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/27/nicki-minaj-bigger-balls-than-the-boys>
“This is one of the more unique adventures I’ve ever embarked on,” Minaj told 
Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2015/09/nicki-minaj-comedy-series-abc-family-1201554286/>. 
“I couldn’t be more proud and excited to team up with an amazing group of 
people to give the world something really special.”

Minaj trained as an actor at LaGuardia high school before pursuing a career in 
music, where she has become one of the most well-known pop acts in the world. 
The plan is to film a pilot in New York this winter before completing the 
series, which will be written by Sex Tape writer Kate Angelo.

She has spoken about her upbringing in interviews revealing that her father 
was an alcoholic and drug addict, while her mother worked as a nursing 
assistant and took care of Minaj and her younger brother.

“It’s weird, because when he was on crack, he was more peaceful, and when he 
would drink, he became loud and violent,” she told the Guardian’s Simon 
Hattenstone. “We moved so many times when I was a kid. We were always running 
away from him. Whenever we got to a new house, he would find us.”

ABC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> Family’s executive vice-president 
of programming and development, Karey Burke, added: “Nicki is an international 
superstar, yet not everyone knows how inspiring and hilarious her true story 
is, and we can’t wait to share it with the world.”

Minaj has acted before, impressing on Saturday Night Live, and she also has 
feature credits on comedyThe Other Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/27/the-other-woman-review-cliched-women-on-top-revenge-comedy>
, where she starred alongside Cameron Diaz.
 