
I spent a few weeks recently reading through 10,000 of the 13,000 entries for 
the National Poetry Competition. Many were very good; a few hundred were 
excellent. Of those, I picked my final 50, as did myfellow judges Vicki Feaver 
and Bill Herbert 
<http://www.poetrysociety.org.uk/content/competitions/npc/judges/> and, over 
the course of a long day, we whittled down our combined 150 to a few 
prize-winning poems, which you can read, and read about, at theNational Poetry 
Competition website <http://www.poetrysociety.org.uk/content/competitions/npc/>.

The winning poem, by Patricia McCarthy, which comes at its subject, the Great 
War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/27/read-national-poetry-competition-2013-winner>
, in a tender, oblique fashion, convinced us with its quiet technique and 
subtle observations. Jane Draycott's runnerup was dense, mysterious, and swept 
from a London living room across the whole world. John Freeman's third-place 
entry was neatly constructed, both love poem and elegy.

It was heartening to see poetry take a central role in so many people's lives, 
to read the evidence that thousands of people frequently sit alone for an hour 
or two, trying to capture or clarify something in words. Still, reading the 
poems was also, sometimes, depressing. There were poems that weren't good, and 
they tended to have features in common: a lack of control or occasion, a lack 
of linguistic felicity or surprise. A judge must be hard-hearted, looking for 
anything that will let him drop the poem into the No box. He wants to fault the 
poem.

Life works by a process of connotation, an evolving multisensory apprehension 
of the shifting world. We get impressions of things. They don't have sharp 
edges: they have atmospheres, and a poem is off to a bad start when the poet 
has spelled necessary wrong in the first line. (I know: some great poets 
spelled terribly; Yeats for one. But if the poet can't get their spelling right 
in a competition entry, it's tricky to hold out much hope for syntax, diction, 
imagery.) So although poetry doesn't have rules, after 10,000 submissions, one 
might discern some general principles for the competition entrant. A judge is 
hopeful for talent, what Whitman termed "personal force". In order to let that 
force show through, a writer must avoid obvious missteps, demonstrating mastery 
over his materials and effects.

If the title is a ready-made phrase such as A Falling Star, the poet already 
has a distance to claw back. So scrap the cliches: his breath is not bated, the 
contrast is not sharp. We want the language of a poem to renew our experience 
of life, not dull it with rote phraseology. A title can do various work but in 
a competition a smart move is to be interesting. Think of a poet such asWallace 
Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
, whose titles compel us to read on:"The Emperor of Ice Cream" 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-emperor-of-ice-cream/>, "The Plot against 
the Giant <http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-plot-against-the-giant/>", 
"Anecdote of the Jar <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/3778>
". Even a poem that says upfront what the poem is about (like, say, "The Blue 
Dress" by Sharon Olds 
<http://www.wisdomportal.com/PoetryAnthology/SharonOlds-Anthology.html>or "My 
Shoes" by Charles Simic <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171684>) 
is immediately intriguing. An abstract cliched phrase isn't going to cut it. 
Interesting things happen when you try to, in Pound's phrase, make it new.

Making it new doesn't, though, include illustrating your poems, unless you're 
William Blake <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/william-blake> or Stevie 
Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/sep/15/highereducation.poetry>
, and putting a border like a frame around your sonnet isn't going to help 
either. Please don't set your font to eight and please refrain from using 
dingbats. Nor is your poem aided by jpegs you've pulled off the internet. Don't 
use an epigraph that's a proverb, or a line from something really well known 
by, say,Sylvia Plath <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sylviaplath>. Trust the 
reader (you don't need footnotes such as "the poet I refer to here is John 
Clare" or "Aung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/12/aung-san-suu-kyi-burma> is 
currently held under house arrest in Burma"), but don't trust them too much: 
don't pick for your epigraph a massive chunk of Heidegger in the original 
German. And don't just chop up prose.Frank O'Hara <http://www.frankohara.org/> 
puts it nicely: "As for measure and other technical apparatus, that's just 
common sense: if you're going to buy a pair of pants you want them to be tight 
enough so everyone will want to go to bed with you. There's nothing 
metaphysical about it. Unless, of course, you flatter yourself into thinking 
that what you're experiencing is 'yearning'."

O'Hara's sarky quotation marks touch on another problem: diction. The register 
has to be controlled, and preferably not helplessly imitative or archaic. Be 
careful with words such as whence or din or guffaw or russet. Also, contorted 
or caress or ochre. Or clad or crave or pale or engorged. Or gossamer. Don't 
write about things frosted with dew. Don't write about a true gent of the road 
or heroic fragility. These words, to me, smell of the lamp, are chintzy, 
"poeticky", Victoriana. They're the sort of words you only find in poems but 
they're old currency: you can buy nothing with them.

As for content, anything goes, though try to avoid walking down paths too well 
travelled. Also, be careful how you approach that content: don't picture 
yourself or remember back or recall the sweet smell. And don't just say 
something nobody could disagree with: yes, war is bad, and it's terrible the 
ice caps are melting.Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> has to 
be capacious enough to surprise or confound.

Despite my grouching, reading so many poems is a renewing activity: contra 
Auden, poetry makes a great deal happen, at least in the mind of the writer and 
reader. What exactly it does, though, is endlessly different and complex. I 
like O'Hara's reasoning: "It may be that poetry makes life's nebulous events 
tangible to me and restores their detail; or conversely, that poetry brings 
forth the intangible quality of incidents which are all too concrete and 
circumstantial. Or each on specific occasions, or both all the time."
 