
Radio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> breakfast DJ Nick Grimshaw 
lost just over 300,000 listeners in the third quarter, and is now more than one 
million below the audience level enjoyed by his predecessor Chris Moyles.

Grimshaw's breakfast show attracted 5.58 million listeners on average each 
week in the three months to 24 October, according to the latest official Rajar 
figures published on Thursday.

This was down 305,000 on the previous quarter's 5.88m, when Grimshaw managed 
to stem the exodus,posting a slight increase in listeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/01/nick-grimshaw-bbc-radio-1-breakfast>
, and 17% on the same quarter in 2012.

The 29-year-old's audience is now 1.12 million below that of Moyles' last 
quarterly listener figure of 6.7 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/16/nick-grimshaw-chris-moyles-bbc-radio-1>
.

Grimshaw is on the brink of breaking Sara Cox's 2003 audience low of 5.5 
million listeners, recorded in her last three months in the job before she was 
replaced by Moyles.

Radio 1 had an average weekly audience of 10.8 million, a 1.8% 
quarter-on-quarter fall, during the three-month period.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> defended the 1.1 million 
decline in Grimshaw's weekly listeners in a year, pointing out that 72% of 
those switching off are 30 years old or more.

Radio 1 and 1Xtra controller Ben Cooper appointed Grimshaw to replace Moyles 
as part of his strategy to make the station more appealing to younger 
listeners. The BBC Trust told executives in 2009 to refocus Radio 1 around its 
target demographic of 15- to 29-year-olds – Moyles' audience included about 1 
million 45 to 54-year olds.

"After the biggest set of changes to Radio 1 for a generation, we're really 
happy that the Breakfast Show sounds fresher, younger and more vibrant than 
ever," said Cooper. "As a result 833,000 of the show's '30 and over' listeners 
have moved on to other stations."

Radio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> breakfast presenter Chris 
Evans also lost listeners, down 405,000 quarter on quarter, although he remains 
the UK's most popular breakfast DJ.

Evans' show attracted 9.34 million weekly listeners on average in the third 
quarter, up 800,000 on the same period last year.

 Overall, Radio 2 lost 3.3% of its listeners quarter on quarter, down to 14.9 
million.

 The Radio 1 breakfast show once again trailed behind Radio 4's Today 
programme, which slightly dipped quarter on quarter to 6.8 million listeners.

Radio 4's total audience fell by 1% quarter on quarter to 10.86 million.

Radio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> saw another drop in its 
breakfast audience, from 615,000 to 533,000. But the station's total listener 
numbers rose 1.5% quarter on quarter to just over 2 million, during a period 
that included its annual coverage of the Proms.

BBC 6 Music <https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> attracted 1.73 million 
listeners on average in the quarter, down 3.4% over the previous three months, 
but up 6.9% year on year.

BBC Radio 5 Live grew its audience by 1.4% in the quarter to 6.12 million, 
rising 0.5% year on year. Digital sister stationRadio 5 Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-5-live> Sports Extra, which carried 
live Test Match Special coverage of England's Ashes cricket victory over 
Australia, attracted a record 1.52 million listeners, up 60.7% quarter on 
quarter and 51.4% year on year.

BBC's Asian Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> fell 
5.5% quarter on quarter and 5% year on year to 555,000 listeners on average 
each week.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 