
Nine of the UK's 100 biggest listed companies were forced to issue 
clarifications to their boardroom pay plans before their annual meetings, as 
they attempted to avoid revolts by large City investors.

The companies – Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement>, Compass, 
GlaxoSmithKline, HSBC, IMI, Imperial Tobacco, Pearson, Tui Travel and Unilever 
– all published updates on their remuneration policies to clarify how they 
intended to pay their top executives.

The list of statements, published on the website <https://www.ivis.co.uk> of 
the Investment Management Association, includes public clarifications issued by 
a total of 32 companies since a new vote on remuneration policies was 
introduced on 1 October last year. The IMA merged with the Association of 
British Insurers in June and this included the transfer of the ABI's 
institutional voting information service (IVIS), which publishes alerts on 
corporate governance issues at companies.

The annual general meeting season is drawing to a close and was the first in 
which investors received a vote on remuneration policies. These set the process 
by which a company intends to hand out bonuses over the next three years.

The clarifications issued by the FTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 companies came because they 
were keen to avoid their remuneration policy being thrown out, since the vote 
is binding, unlike the existing separate vote on remuneration reports, which is 
merely advisory.

Andrew Ninian, the IMA director, said the clarification statements were a 
"good thing", adding: "It shows the process is working and shareholders and 
companies are working together."

Many of the clarifications involved the use of discretion of boards in setting 
bonuses, a feature of pay deals that makes shareholders uneasy, and were not 
all confrontational situations.

Outside the FTSE 100, the engineering company Kentz was the first company to 
have its policy voted downwhen 51% said no to the proposals at the annual 
meeting in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/16/kentz-shareholders-first-vote-down-pay-policy-remuneration-report-revolt>
. According to the IMA's website, it did not issue a clarifying statement. One 
which did, the insurer Hiscox, still had a 42% vote against its remuneration 
policy but this was not enough to block it.

Some of the FTSE 100 companies which did issue statements still faced 
protests: about 20% of investors voted against the remuneration report ofHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings>, for instance, as did 14% 
at Aberdeen Asset Management.

Companies do not need to put their remuneration policy to the vote next year – 
unless it was voted down during this season – and experts are still assessing 
the impact that it has had this year.

Sarah Wilson, the chief executive of advisory body Manifest, questioned 
whether the binding vote had been used by investors. She said that the 
shareholder spring in 2012 – before the policy vote was introduced and when a 
record number of remuneration reports were voted down – had been more 
important. Wilson pointed to data showing that pay awards for company bosses 
had fallen by 7% since 2012, following a 5% fall the previous year.

The FTSE 100 company to suffer one of the most bruising shareholder revolts 
this season was the upmarket fashion business Burberry, where almost 53% of 
investors voted against its remuneration report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/11/burberry-shareholders-revolt-christian-bailey-pay-package>
in protest against pay awards to its new boss, Christopher Bailey. Some 16% of 
investors voted against the remuneration policy, which is binding on the board.

One meeting still to come is at drinks company Diageo, which could face an 
investor rebellion on Thursday over its bonus payments to senior executives.
 