
A blueprint to end the scourge of antimicrobial resistance proposes that drug 
companies should foot the bill for the development of new antibiotics and that 
patients should not be able to get them without a test to ensure they are 
needed.

Economist Jim O’Neill, charged two years ago by David Cameron with finding 
answers to one of the most pressing problems in the world today, says the 
global financial cost of no action would be the loss of 10 million lives a year 
by 2050 and £69tn ($100tn) a year.

“One million people have died while we have been doing this review,” said Lord 
O’Neill, who became a minister while completing the report. Without action, he 
said, there would be more people dying in the future than are dying of cancer.

Many antibiotics that were once thought to have put an end to infectious 
disease are no longer working because the bugs have become resistant to them. 
Tuberculosis was thought to be no longer a killer because of antibiotics, but 
multi-drug resistant forms are exacting a death toll around the globe.


The two most eye-catching proposals advanced by O’Neill are: 

 * To force the pharmaceutical industry to “pay or play”. Drug companies must 
either research and develop new antibiotics or be prepared to fund other 
companies to do so. “We think there is a credible case for the pharmaceutical 
industry itself to pay, given how important antibiotics are for 7 billion 
people around the world,” he said. 
 * To ban doctors from prescribing antibiotics until they have carried out 
rapid tests to prove the infection is bacterial. “We must stop treating 
antibiotics like sweets, which is what we are doing around the world today,” he 
said. However, there must be incentives to develop such tests which do not yet 
exist.

The pay or play idea was immediately rejected by trade body the Association of 
the British Pharmaceutical Industry. “[It] fails to recognise the need for a 
collaborative response which this long-term review has consistently 
identified,” said Dr Virginia Acha, director of research, medical and 
innovation at the ABPI. “Putting the onus on any one group will not solve the 
problem and is not a sustainable solution.”


She said the industry had already done more than anyone to tackle the issue, 
investing 3.7% of its annual $137bn (£94bn) global R&D spend in anti-infectives 
as well as vaccines, which the report says should be used more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fno-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F064d12e5cc461003c212af035e5b811d53e61e6c%2F0_78_3064_1838%2F3064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20antibiotics%20without%20a%20test%2C%20says%20report%20on%20rising%20antimicrobial%20resistance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fno-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20antibiotics%20without%20a%20test%2C%20says%20report%20on%20rising%20antimicrobial%20resistance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fno-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F064d12e5cc461003c212af035e5b811d53e61e6c%2F0_78_3064_1838%2F3064.jpg>
 Lord Jim O’Neill. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
Companies already involved in antibiotic research were less hostile. Sir 
Andrew Witty, GlaxoSmithKline’s chief executive, called the report helpful and 
added: “Governments, industry and other relevant groups must now work together 
to develop these ideas into practical steps that encourage and reward further 
research and ensure a supply of effective new antibiotics for future 
generations.”


O’Neill said that stopping the over-use of antibiotics – also fed in vast 
quantities to animals for growth promotion as well as to treat disease, 
especially in the United States – may be even more important than incentivising 
the development of new drugs.


Antibiotics <https://www.theguardian.com/society/antibiotics> are wrongly 
prescribed for coughs and colds caused by viruses because GPs do not have 
instant tests that can tell them whether their patient really does have a 
bacterial infection. The report says the development of rapid diagnostic tests 
must be an urgent priority.

“I find it incredible that doctors must still prescribe antibiotics based only 
on their immediate assessment of a patient’s symptoms, just like they used to 
when antibiotics first entered common use in the 1950s,” O’Neill said in the 
report.

Doctors and policymakers need to get out of their comfort-zone, he added. “By 
2020 it should become mandatory to use rapid diagnostics before antibiotics are 
prescribed.”

That would be an incentive for industry to invent the rapid diagnostic tests 
needed and a new Global Innovation Fund worth $2bn over five years would help 
pay for this and other research. Low and middle-income countries should be 
subsidised to buy the tests.

There must be urgent action to stop the use of highly critical antibiotics in 
animals, which are the last line against infection in humans, said the report. 
Recently bugs resistant to Colistin, one of the antibiotics of last resort, 
were found in China, where the drug has been used in farm animals.


UK farmers to cut antibiotic use to combat drug resistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/19/uk-farmers-to-cut-antibiotic-use-to-combat-drug-resistance>
“In some parts of the world, probably in the largest emerging economies and 
almost definitely in the United States, the use of antibiotics in animals is 
greater than in humans and that means the misuse is probably higher too,” said 
O’Neill.

A change in consumer habits might help. O’Neill said: “An emerging generation 
is becoming more choosy about what they eat.” Products should be labelled so 
consumers could see where antibiotics have been used, he added.

O’Neill said too few people really understood the AMR problem and he wanted “a 
massive global public awareness campaign” which would cost between $40m and 
$100m a year. He estimates his entire package of proposals would cost $40bn 
over ten years. “This is tiny in comparison to the cost of inaction,” said the 
report. “It is also a very small fraction of what the G20 countries spend on 
healthcare today: about 0.05%.”

O’Neill, now a minister in the Treasury, is looking to the G20 meeting in 
China and a special session of the UN general assembly to take the proposals 
further.

The man he described as his boss, the chancellor, George Osborne, was one of 
those who applauded the report, saying that antimicrobial resistance “is not 
just a threat to health but also to the world economy. Apart from the moral 
case for action of the sort Lord O’Neill proposes, the economic cost of failing 
to act is too great to contemplate.”

Margaret Chan, director general of the World Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation, called it “a 
thorough and compelling review” which tackled “the burning need to find 
incentives that can get new products into the pipeline”.
 