
The plan was simple enough. For his 14th record, Oneohtrix Point Never, 
mercurial producer behind countless works of bizarro electronica, would train 
his magpie gaze on to the world of pop. He had meant the album Garden Of Delete 
to be his definitive, arch commentary on mainstream music, its songs based on 
cheap scraps bought from industry songwriters. He was aiming high, to build his 
music around saccharine snippetsdropped from Taylor Swift records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/23/taylor-swift-shake-it-off>, or 
theBieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/06/justin-bieber-says-achieving-fame-young-nearly-destroyed-him>
 hooks that had remained unsung, and then filter it through echoing 
synthesizers and discombobulating rhythms. “I’d see if they’d give me their 
cold-cut ends, their dollar-fifty-a-pound bullshit,” he crackles over Skype 
from New York. The plan was simple but the plan didn’t work.

New band of the day – No 886: Oneohtrix Point Never
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/13/oneohtrix-point-never> 
“None of the top-line writers wanted to talk to me,” he recalls. “So I was 
like: ‘I’ll just pretend to be them.’” He started creating his own 
approximations of what he thought those offcuts would sound like. “I started 
working 15-hour days. I was like: ‘I’m gonna make this fucking crazy record.’ 
It was the only thing on my mind for the entire winter and into spring. 
Psychologically, it took its toll on me, it was intense.”

Intense seems an apt word to describe OPN, real name Daniel Lopatin. Similar 
in aesthetic to hisWarp labelmate Aphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/29/aphex-twin-soundcloud-dump-shock-and-delight>
, his compositions are chaotic tempo switching collisions of deformed synths 
and garbled samples. They draw unlikely links between outsider genres; Lopatin 
namechecks influences that range from “industrial cyber metal” to new-age 
ambient. The results batter listeners with guitar stabs and hectic drums before 
melting into blissful passages of tranquillity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Foneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447326172721%2F485f81f2-35bf-45d1-a7be-68982288df22-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Bieber%3F%20No%20problem!%20How%20Oneohtrix%20Point%20Never%20made%20a%20pop%20album%20without%20the%20pop%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Foneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Bieber%3F%20No%20problem%21%20How%20Oneohtrix%20Point%20Never%20made%20a%20pop%20album%20without%20the%20pop%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Foneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447326172721%2F485f81f2-35bf-45d1-a7be-68982288df22-1020x612.jpeg>
 Glitch in the system: Oneohtrix Point Never. Photograph: Other 
His subversive sound has made him something of a cult figure among a 
generation raised on YouTube; his aesthetic mirrors a world where the distance 
between styles once considered mutually exclusive has shrunk to the size of a 
clickable link. In the past few years, though, Lopatin’s profile has risen 
above underground notoriety. Now he finds favour with edgier curators of the 
mainstream. Sofia Coppola called on him to score2013 teen drama The Bling Ring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/04/the-bling-ring-review>; Saatchi & 
Saatchi commissioned him to compose a soundtrack 
<http://www.dummymag.com/reviews/song-of-the-week-oneohtrix-point-never-meet-your-creator>
 for 16 flying robots to “dance” to at a 2012 Cannes showcase.

Laughing myself to death. That’s been my strategy to avoid massive bouts of 
depression
Daniel Lopatin 
Why then, after all these accolades, would he want to make a pop record? 
Lopatin points out that he has already made one “pop” record (the 
as-yet-unreleased Antony Hegarty album Hopelessness, which is only pop by 
Lopatin’s out-there standards). He then lapses into a mush of critical theory 
about how he assembles his influences. “I like to loosely analyse my 
surroundings and formalise them in whatever vague way possible,” he explains. 
“I’m looking for a technique or idea, or psychological plateau or emotional 
resonance to explore or exploit to make new stuff out of.” He pauses, and 
switches tack: “I was also obsessively watching this show, Nashville, and I was 
being influenced by seeing all these people sitting in writing rooms, coming up 
with the perfect [chord] progression that’ll raise the hair on your skin or 
whatever.”

Garden Of Delete may make your hair stand on end for a different reason: 
Lopatin’s attempt to imitate pop svengalis has manifested in battling sounds 
that are swamped by noise and distortion, as if he is trying to suffocate them. 
So it’s hard to tell whether he’s joking when he enthuses about Nashville. Is 
he laughing at pop culture or does he love it? “There’s a healthy amount of 
laughter,” he says. “But I like everything, even when it traumatises me. 
There’s an element of laughing myself to death. That’s been my strategy to 
avoid massive bouts of depression.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Foneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447326242346%2Ff27227c0-7dba-4673-b2c8-360e66efd09c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Bieber%3F%20No%20problem!%20How%20Oneohtrix%20Point%20Never%20made%20a%20pop%20album%20without%20the%20pop%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Foneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Bieber%3F%20No%20problem%21%20How%20Oneohtrix%20Point%20Never%20made%20a%20pop%20album%20without%20the%20pop%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Foneohtrix-point-never-garden-of-delete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447326242346%2Ff27227c0-7dba-4673-b2c8-360e66efd09c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mac attack: Oneohtrix Point Never performing live. Photograph: Tabatha 
Fireman/Redferns 
This, at least, goes some way to explaining the esoteric promo campaign Garden 
Of Delete has come with. His strategy has been to invent a fictional character 
and attribute the record to them: an otherworldy child named Ezra, who Lopatin 
claims handed him the entire record on a USB stick, then vanished. To round out 
this conceit, the release of Garden of Delete is accompanied by a website 
called Kaossed, a collection of songs, spoof interviews and fake band 
biographies, all purportedly created by Ezra. The concept bears little relation 
to his idea of making a pop record, but then, maintaining a linear narrative 
seems low on his to-do list. “I was just entertaining myself and trying to make 
cool work at the same time.”

It turns out that Lopatin isn’t much of a fan of flogging his album, either. 
“The promotional cycle’s this staging area for failure,” he says. “I hate it! 
Why bother when everyone’s either gonna steal the album or copy it?” (As it 
happens, Garden Of Delete has already been leaked).

Would he be happiest if he could avoid the public completely? In answer, 
Lopatin reels off a typically tangential ramble, then stops to think: “Yeah it 
would be really cool to disappear. Like Jack Nicholson in The Passenger. Isn’t 
that the final frontier? Being able to erase everything everyone knows about 
you and just be a stranger has become extremely seductive.”

Then, improbable as it is, as perfect as it is, at this point that the Skype 
connection cuts out.

Garden Of Delete is out now on Warp
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D49EXKsu-jTs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D49EXKsu-jTs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D49EXKsu-jTs&media=> 