
Village England: a place where there are roses round the door but also burglar 
alarms nestling in the thatched eves. A place where the post office has closed 
and the buses run twice a week, yet where, only a generation ago, you could 
still find men who knew how to kill a pig and women who could "lay out" a dead 
body.

So where do you find a playwright who can encapsulate the fundamental changes 
in our green and pleasant land? Try Hackney - home of April De Angelis, who 
wrote A Warwickshire Testimony for theRoyal Shakespeare Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>.

De Angelis is hardly your traditional English rose. With a Sicilian father who 
could speak little English when he started washing up in London restaurants, De 
Angelis was brought up in Shepherds Bush and has spent most of her 39 years in 
London. Now she is set to take over David Edgar's MA course in play-writing at 
Birmingham University. She starts in October, soon after Warwickshire Testimony 
finishes at the RSC's Other Place.

Testimony was the idea of director Alison Sutcliffe, who lives in Clifford 
Chambers, a few miles from Stratford in gently undulating countryside. 
Sutcliffe acquired transcripts of taped interviews done with the occupants of 
every house in 1970: "Reading the stories," she writes in the play's programme 
notes, "with their tantalising glimpses of quiet tragedies, acts of kindness, 
cruelty and endurance, seen from the 1970s and overlaid by my own 1990s 
perspective, convinced me that there was material here for a play."

De Angelis was less convinced at first. "After reading all the stories, I put 
them in a bag and did nothing about them for 18 months," she admits. "I was 
worried that this sort of social history was outmoded and dull."

But she began researching the death rituals of animals and human beings, which 
were so much part of rural life in England before the second world war. And 
then she visited an old people's home to interview Ethel Clark, whose testimony 
had come alive on the printed page.

Ethel's story is not the same as that of the play's main character Edie, whose 
long, painful life runs through the play like a thread. Edie may be fictional, 
but through her we learn some universal truths about country life. 
Instinctively, De Angelis is on the side of Edie's niece, Dorothy, and her 
husband, Tom, who are being forced to sell their post office to a wealthy 
couple who want it as a commuter home. "People are being priced out," she says. 
"They can't live where they were brought up."

De Angelis was determined, however, to avoid the suggestion that there was 
once a golden age of rustic bliss. "I don't want to celebrate feudalism, God 
forbid. The argument at the end of the play is about how much you stay in the 
past and how much you let go," she says. At one point, Dorothy says to Tom: 
"Sometimes you have to take sides to show you're human." In some ways, Tom is 
the more sympathetic character - forcing his wife to face up to a tragedy in 
their past and to move on.

Just how much April De Angelis <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/angelis> has 
moved on can be gauged by contrasting her early work for the women's theatre 
group ReSisters with more recent plays like The Positive Hour. Staunch messages 
about feminism and social justice gave way to a reflection on the moral and 
intellectual confusion among those on the Left.

So is that where her own political beliefs still lie? "Well, you can say 
you're on the Left, but what do you do? Vote Labour? I joined the Labour Party 
two years before the election because I desperately wanted the Tories out. But 
I left in disgust when a Labour government colluded with the bombing of Iraq."

It all seemed so much simpler in 1980, when she went to Sussex University and 
"bought into the women's movement hook, line and sinker." But, she says, "I'm 
not knocking feminism. It's created lots of changes for the better, but perhaps 
I expected more. The organisation of childcare, for instance, is still 
appalling." Being a playwright gives her a flexibility denied to women stuck 
with conventional office hours. At the moment, she writes in the time between 
dropping her six-year-old daughter Holly at school and picking her up.

The prospect of taking over from David Edgar is "totally daunting," she says. 
And as to whether you can really teach the art of writing plays: "You can teach 
the basic skills of anything. It doesn't mean to say that the pupil is going to 
be any good at it. All I know is that it would have been less of an uphill 
struggle if I'd done this course when I was starting out."

She has, however, had the benefit of formal training in the art of writing 
libretti for opera. "Somebody asked if I wanted to be part of a 'performing 
arts lab' for librettists. There were five writers, five composers and five 
singers and we just jammed for 10 days in this old manor house in Kent. I 
always thought the words had to be fitted into the music, but it's the other 
way around. A singer can make one line last 10 minutes."

She has since formed a partnership with the composer Jonathan Dove. "He wanted 
me to write a comedy that wasn't in a domestic setting, so eventually I based 
the story on that guy who spent a long time living in Charles de Gaulle 
Airport." For De Angelis the opening night at Glyndebourne, was a return that 
was nearly 20 years overdue. She worked in the singers' "canteen" when she was 
a student; now she's going back in style - with a bottle of champagne in a 
plastic cool-box from the Hackney branch of Woolworth's.

Â• A Warwickshire Testimony is at The Other Place, Stratford, till September 
23. Flight is at Glyndebourne till Saturday.
 