
If you were worried that Saturday Night Live didn’t have time to incorporate 
all the“pussy”-grabbing news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/john-mccain-donald-trump-sex-boast-tape>
 that even the New York Times saw fit to print on Friday, Melissa Villaseñor’s 
cold open as Tuesday’s vice-presidential debate moderator Elaine Quijano 
probably struck fear into your heart.

But, luckily, the cameras lingered on “America’s dad” (Democratic 
vice-presidential nominee Tim Kaine) and “America’s stepdad” (Republican 
vice-presidential nominee Mike Pence) only as long as Americans actually did on 
Tuesday night.
Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Fact checking the #VPDebate <https://twitter.com/hashtag/VPDebate?src=hash>. 
pic.twitter.com/gi2pSv3cJx <https://t.co/gi2pSv3cJx>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784966959045627904> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784966959045627904> 
After one reference to Pence’s denials that Trump was perhaps actually a 
short-fingered vulgarian 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/10/graydon-carter-donald-trump> after 
all, Cecily Strong interrupted the “debate” with Friday’s news than Donald 
Trump had been caught on camera suggesting that he liked to kiss women and paw 
at their genitals without consent.

Alec Baldwin-as-Trump’s response? “Are you not entertained?”
Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Live from New York, it's Saturday Night! #SNLinManuel 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SNLinManuel?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/qiiEjKud0W 
<https://t.co/qiiEjKud0W>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784962547199934464> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784962547199934464> 
Trump then insisted on “apple-gizing”, because he couldn’t possibly apologize, 
and said what everyone’s been thinking since the news broke that he engaged in 
“locker room talk” with the Bush family scion turned entertainment television 
anchor: “What normal red-blooded American doesn’t want to impressthe Billy 
Bush?”

Finally he made a vow to America’s offended women: “Listen, women, if you give 
me a chance, I promise I can do a whole lot more than just grab it – I can bop 
it, twist it ...”

And that wasn’t even a hot mic incident.

Kate McKinnon’s Hillary Clinton was called upon for her reaction. It went 
about as one might expect.
Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Current look at @HillaryClinton <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton>. 
#SNLinManuel <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SNLinManuel?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/2KfwR0OIZN <https://t.co/2KfwR0OIZN>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784962135818379264> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784962135818379264> 
Though, to be fair, she did attempt to address female voters who were still 
planning to back him.
Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Hillary Clinton has a message for women still voting for Trump. #SNLinManuel 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SNLinManuel?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/c5lPrlWVr2 
<https://t.co/c5lPrlWVr2>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784981814574059520> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784981814574059520> 
Lin-Manuel Miranda then took the stage, rapping about how excited he was, as a 
native New Yorker, to get his chance to host an episode, while working in a 
couple of digs at a former host:Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. There weren’t a lot of belly 
laughs in it, but it was the thing that Miranda all but had to do after the 
success of the musical Hamilton – and it was cute and endearing.

Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Not throwin' away his shot. #SNLinManuel 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SNLinManuel?src=hash> @lin_manuel 
<https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel> pic.twitter.com/7bQwXuCQ52 
<https://t.co/7bQwXuCQ52>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784987636322578432> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/784987636322578432> 
His first skit, though, was not: after its adorable opening, in which Miranda 
played guitar and sang Blowin’ in the Wind in harmony with Strong, the skit 
turned into a look at an uninvited, possibly incestuous brother-sister pair who 
couldn’t sing. There was lots of yell-singing Footloose and Danger Zone on the 
stage, and probably lots of channel surfing in the television audience.


Up next was a pre-taped sketch of the cast party after a high school 
production of The Crucible, a musical number featuring the line “25 virgins and 
a lot of Sprite” and a little too much truth for non-drama-club geeks to be 
privy to, during which Manuel, of course, rapped.

It was only then that Leslie Jones made her first appearance as a high school 
principal, introducing substitute teacher Miranda to his class of inner-city 
students, as the “cool” high school teacher trying to teach William Shakespeare 
through hip-hop music. But, surprise! It was an AP English class sick of having 
“cool” substitute teachers use hip-hop music to teach them. (Jones got the 
funny line about the proliferation of Axe body spray among the high-school set, 
which perhaps is less funny if one spends a lot of time around American high 
school boys.)

McKinnon then starred in a laugh-out-loud parody of Trump campaign manager 
Kellyanne Conway’s supposed day off, which was set today, though obviously 
pre-taped earlier in the week. In between breakfast with the family, yoga, 
painting, roller skating, grocery shopping and a bath with her husband, Conway 
is constantly getting called into CNN by Jake Tapper to defend whatever 
insanity Trump has been tweeting, from claiming that Hillary Clinton cheated on 
her husband to suggesting that black people can’t read. Again, possibly a 
little too real.

Finally, viewers got to the segment this week’s news was made for: Weekend 
Update, which opened up with “The week we almost heard Wolf Blitzer say 
‘pussy’”.

It was all the Trump jokes you wish you’d made yourself, from “Which locker 
room? Penn State?” to, in reference to Trump’s use of Tic Tacs to freshen his 
breath before going in for a non-consensual kiss: “I don’t think the problem 
women have with sexual assault is bad breath. It’s like Bill Cosby using a 
coaster for one of his love potions.”

They also offered the candy a new slogan, if its makers decided to lean into 
their new reputation: “Tic Tacs – grab bad breath by the pussy.”


Then, after a few jokes about Propecia, Kim Kardashian, defecating in an Apple 
store and the forthcoming “clown lives matter” rally, hosts Colin Jost and 
Michael Che introduced two undecided voters from outside of Philadelphia, 
played by Tina Fey (with a spot-on accent) and Jimmy Fallon (with what 
eventually morphed into a southern accent). Yes, Fey did crack a joke about 
Fallon petting Trump’s hair; it was the best line of the skit.

The back half of the show – the usual wasteland for sketches like the 
incestuous campfire singalong – instead featured a Miranda-fronted take-off on 
The Music Man, in which the con man Professor Harold Hill hawked banking 
products from Wells Fargo instead of band instruments and music lessons, as 
well as a pre-taped, mostly Spanish sketch of Miranda as a Latino dishwasher in 
North Dakota in a Brokeback Mountain sort of situation.

Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live> also attempted 
to solve the problem of Lucas’s missing parents in Stranger Things, with a 
“season two preview” in which Leslie Jones and Kenan Thompson tell their son: 
“People who look like us already live in the upside down” and then hold their 
hands up, unprompted, when the sheriff arrives. (It probably helps if you’ve 
seen the show.)

Next up, the second Melania Moments (numbered 78), in which Cecily Strong’s 
Melania Trump awakens from a dream and the narrator says: “She could sense that 
her replacement had just been born in rural Latvia.” Like an evil queen, 
Melania ponders finding her and eliminating her rival – “not for my sake, but 
for hers” – as the camera pans to a portrait of Donald Trump over her bed.

The episode ended with a sketch about a soldier’s dying wish that his 
commanding officer go to his house, tell his wife he loved her ... and remove 
his extra-large butt plug from the garage. It was mostly just an excuse for 
everyone in the skit to say the word “butt plug” over and over again but, hey, 
it aired at 1.25am on a Sunday morning. Who doesn’t want to say “butt plug” 
repeatedly at that hour for no reason?
 