
In New York, a fan buys snacks to eat while watching a Giants game. In rural 
Vietnam, a mother purchases her daughter’s first deodorant in a local store. 
Despite being thousands of miles apart, these consumers are experiencing what 
the marketing community calls the “moment of truth”: the point at which a 
shopper chooses one brand over another. Across the globe this moment varies, 
not only depending on product but country.

One shopping trolley doesn’t fit all, but by identifying demands shared by 
consumers on a global scale marketers and brands can plan for the future. In 
the modern world, the demand for convenience is the driving force behind 
consumer behaviour and trends seen across the globe.

Within arm’s reach

Ease of access is vital when it comes to fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) 
shopping. No one wants to travel a mile out of their way for a pint of milk 
after work. Rather than condemning themselves to a life of black tea, shoppers 
seek a store nearby. In China, for example, 79% of shoppers favour a store 
close to home; the same goes for us Brits, with half the population citing 
location as the key reason for choosing their supermarket, ahead of price and 
range.

The way we shop varies hugely across the globe. In the Philippines and 
Thailand modern trade such as supermarkets accounts for only 30% of sales, 
compared with around 80% in western Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fdeveloping-global-brand-marketing-strategy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2956f613b0564e7b5caba5e8dfe34561120ece%2F0_0_1099_389%2F1099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20one%20size%20fits%20all%3A%20developing%20a%20global%20brand%20marketing%20strategy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fdeveloping-global-brand-marketing-strategy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20one%20size%20fits%20all%3A%20developing%20a%20global%20brand%20marketing%20strategy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fdeveloping-global-brand-marketing-strategy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2956f613b0564e7b5caba5e8dfe34561120ece%2F0_0_1099_389%2F1099.jpg>
In part, this is because of logistics. For example, the Indonesia archipelago 
has more than 18,000 islands, creating difficulties for brands in making 
themselves accessible to shoppers. Yoghurt drink Yakult has solved this problem 
by making its brand available via more than 5,000Yakult Ladies 
<https://next.ft.com/content/e8e517c8-5387-11e3-9250-00144feabdc0>, who deliver 
the products to individuals in their homes. The product is sold in 31 countries 
around the world, but Yakult Ladies only sell and distribute in Asian 
countries. The dedicated workforce of mainly women fulfils the dual role of 
brand ambassador and product deliverer.

The Uberisation of FMCG

In the FMCG market, technology is redefining what it means to “go” shopping. 
Lines between the physical and digital worlds are blurring. Shoppers are 
growing accustomed to the benefits of digital in other retail settings and are 
beginning to expect them in grocery as well. Mobile accessibility is changing 
how shoppers interact with e-commerce, and using a phone or tablet is becoming 
the normal way to shop online. By 2018 it is projected that 71% of global 
internet users will have a smartphone.
 South Korea continues to lead the way when it comes to FMCG sales online 
Whether accessed through mobile or more traditional computers, e-commerce FMCG 
sales continue to grow strongly, up by 15% globally in 2015. South Koreans lead 
the way, buying 14% of their groceries online. What is perhaps surprising is 
how the take-up of e-commerce doesn’t necessarily follow the national take-up 
of technologies such as broadband. While the French and British have embraced 
online grocery shopping, it has yet to make a serious impact in the US. Latin 
America and large parts of Asia need to address issues of infrastructure and 
geography before e-commerce can thrive. Despite these challenges, e-commerce is 
projected to command a global 9% share of FMCG sales by 2025.

However, the trickiness comes when these virtual transactions become physical 
objects in the shopper’s hand. The cost of picking, packing and delivery can 
potentially wipe out any retailer margin. French retailers have had success in 
easing some of these costs and growing the online channel through the “drive” 
model, where shoppers come to the store to pick up their pre-ordered baskets.

Amazon clearly sees an opportunity in this market, rolling out same-day 
delivery options in the UK. While not necessarily cheap, quick delivery brings 
more shopping experiences, such as “dinner for tonight” into the e-commerce 
realm. While fast delivery by drone looks some way off, retailers like Amazon 
are also exploring working in an Uber style with freelance drivers, like 
Deliveroo and UberEATS are doing for restaurants.

The ‘Lidl’ effect

Thanks to low prices and agile advertising, discount retailers have thrived in 
Europe in recent years. In opening more stores the retailers have increased 
their physical availability and convenience.

Some consumers consider the smaller range of products on the shelves in 
discount retailers to be a good thing. Shoppers, usually overwhelmed by choice, 
have much simpler decisions to make when faced with only a few varieties of 
cola or toilet roll. Whether or not the consumer prefers it, having fewer lines 
on the shelf and in the warehouse definitely makes for a leaner, lower-cost 
business, ultimately passed on in cheaper prices.

Mainstream retailers have reacted by also streamlining their offerings. For 
example, last yearTesco removed Carlsberg from shops 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/tesco-pulls-carlsberg-products-from-supermarket-shelves-a3072391.html>
 in a bid to reduce the number of beer brands on its shelves. As the big 
retailers reduce lines, discounters may well consider introducing more branded 
and premium own-label items to widen appeal and avoid a growth plateau. In the 
UK, only 10% of lines in discounters are brands, however in Germany, where 
discounters possess around a quarter of the market, these stores are around 30% 
branded.

The ultimate inconvenience for a shopper is when the retailer is closed, a 
problem that has been solved by one entrepreneur who has opened Sweden’s first 
unstaffed convenience store. Open 24 hours a day, seven days a weekthe store 
has no staff <http://phys.org/news/2016-02-sweden-1st-unmanned-food.html>, and 
is completely self-service for pre-registered shoppers. Barcode scanning is 
used to enter the store and to select items for purchase.

Each country, market, demographic and lifestyle is different; it is the 
marketer’s job to tailor its messaging and strategies to these varying local 
trends. By spotting these patterns and the economic, social and technological 
impacts that influence them across the globe, FMCG brands can better prepare 
for the future and thrive in the present.

Data above comes from Kantar Worldpanel’s Brand Footprint Annual Report 2016 
<http://www.brandfootprint-ranking.com/#/>

Alison Martin is the director of Kantar Worldpanel 
<http://www.kantarworldpanel.com/global>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 