
On Wednesday it was Chris Gayle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/chris-gayle-hammers-england-with-century-for-west-indies-at-world-t20>
; it will be AB de Villiers. There is no obvious respite on the horizon for 
England’s young bowlers. There is not much time to ruminate and none to feel 
sorry for oneself or fretful about taking on a powerful South African side.

As Jos Buttler <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jos-buttler>, the 
vice-captain, a relative veteran at the age of 25 and the rare English owner of 
a lucrative IPL contract, pointed out in a pre-match interview that was bound 
to be positive: “That’s tournament cricket. If we lose one game and win five in 
a row and win the World Cup we’ll be happy with that.”

It seemed churlish to point out that England, a month ago, lost five matches 
in a row <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-in-south-africa-2015-2016> 
against South Africa – as well asbeing blown away by Gayle on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/chris-gayle-hammers-england-with-century-for-west-indies-at-world-t20>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-du-plessis-england-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa's%20Du%20Plessis%20confident%20ahead%20of%20England%20clash%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-du-plessis-england-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%27s%20Du%20Plessis%20confident%20ahead%20of%20England%20clash%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-du-plessis-england-video&media=>
South Africa’s Du Plessis confident ahead of England clash – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/17/south-africa-du-plessis-england-video>
“That’s the beauty of it,” said Buttler. “There is a game in two days’ time so 
you don’t get caught up in what’s just happened. It’s irrelevant now. So go on 
to the next game and focus on all that we can do to win it”.

The beauty of tournament cricket, when the format makes sense, is that there 
is very little leeway for a losing side to hang on. However that is now a 
beastly prospect for England.

It is possible for Eoin Morgan’s side to lose to South Africa on Friday and to 
qualify, but it is a path fraught with difficulty and enough permutations to 
have you searching for the paracetamol. So England badly need to beat a South 
Africa side which probably contains more match-winners than West Indies. Yet 
inevitably the focus will be on one man: De Villiers.

Recently Buttler has witnessed two of the most intimidating batsmen in the 
world from a distance of about four feet, a privilege albeit a painful one on 
Wednesday night. “They are very different”, he says. “Chris never looks under 
pressure. He feels like he can hit sixes at will. They are two great players. 
De Villiers has a much greater range of shots but Gayle has that power and he 
doesn’t really need to try anything else.

World Twenty20 2016: team-by-team guide | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/14/world-t20-2016-team-guide> 
“We weren’t the first side and we certainly won’t be the last either [to be 
blown away by Gayle]. I think it highlights that you really have to be 100% on 
your game against someone who’s capable of that sort of innings. You’ve got 
very small margins.”

Too small for England bowlers who were hindered by their inexperience and by 
having to operate with a wet ball once the dew had set in on a balmy Mumbai 
night.

Buttler did add that England make sure they practise with a wet ball in 
training, sometimes in a swimming pool (for the fielders). However the fruits 
of their labour were not obvious on Wednesday. Mind you, it is hard enough 
bowling at Gayle with a dry ball. At the Wankhede Stadium the spinners were 
unable to grip the ball or to spin it sufficiently to find any deviation. 
Likewise when the quicker bowlers turned to their devilish array of cutters and 
slower balls there was no knowing where the ball would land.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fengland-south-africa-world-t20-ab-de-villiers-jos-buttler-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23cf46757871c4413e0e2e6f062d3067d3855792%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20respite%20for%20callow%20England%20as%20South%20Africa%20and%20AB%20de%20Villiers%20await&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fengland-south-africa-world-t20-ab-de-villiers-jos-buttler-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20respite%20for%20callow%20England%20as%20South%20Africa%20and%20AB%20de%20Villiers%20await&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fengland-south-africa-world-t20-ab-de-villiers-jos-buttler-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23cf46757871c4413e0e2e6f062d3067d3855792%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 England struggled badly bowling with a wet ball under lights. Here, Ben Stokes 
reacts after Gayle hits him for one of his 11 sixes. Photograph: Gareth 
Copley/Getty Images 
It will be a shame if the outcome of many games in this tournament are to be 
heavily influenced by the toss of a coin. But there have been two “big” tosses 
already, won by New Zealand on a dustbowl in Nagpur and West Indies in Mumbai.

Whoever wins the toss on Friday night will bowl first and hope to avoid some 
of the dew. It would be fairer to schedule these matches earlier in the day 
but, of course, there is as much chance of the ICC sacrificing the commercial 
attractions of a 7.30pm start as there is of driving on a deserted Mumbai road.

England’s batsmen were competent enough without being devastating on Wednesday 
but their bowlers were found wanting in mighty difficult conditions. It did not 
help them that when the ball was new and relatively dry, Gayle was invariably 
off-strike.

They never threatened to dismiss him. They will have to remove De Villiers 
relatively early to prevail on Friday. The only possible change to England’s 
side – and it is an unlikely one – would have them turning to the extra pace of 
Liam Plunkett.

The situation could offer a wonderful test of temperament as well as skill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/14/world-t20-england-india-mumbai>. 
Of course Buttler is confident. “This is a great place to come and play [as he 
hopes to discover when turning out for the Mumbai Indians in the IPL next 
month] and we’ve got characters in that dressing room who enjoy the big 
occasion, who will stand up to it and look to take the game on”.

Encouragingly Buttler gives the impression that he has an appropriate sense of 
perspective about it all. He was one of the England players returning from 
lunch on a rest day who stopped to have a look at a game in the park before 
joining in.

“Having a hit with some locals is a nice thing to do and a fun way to get used 
to local conditions,” said Buttler. It may be slightly trickier at the Wankhede 
Stadium come Friday night.
 