
In competitive terms this was a fence Spurs could not fail to hurdle, holding 
a 6-1 advantage from the first leg, but for Martin Jol this was a test of 
dressage with several of his team's key components under scrutiny. One of 
which, Paul Robinson, had volunteered to play on a trip he would normally have 
been spared, but this was hardly the confidence-building exercise he had 
counted on.

For the fifth time in less than 72 hours Robinson glanced forlornly over his 
shoulder as Fabinho's snap-shot took a deflection off Anthony Gardner's shin. 
Having spotted a clear handball in the build-up, the England goalkeeper 
protested and was booked. Once again he wore the expression of a wronged man. 
"I'd been hoping for a clean sheet and then the player catches the ball in the 
box and scores. That is just the way it is going at the moment but I can't beat 
myself up about it," he said.

Robinson was one of only four players to retain his place from Monday night's 
4-4 draw with Aston Villa, but Jol's changes taught him little of value. 
Kevin-Prince Boateng, the Â£5.4m signing from Hertha Berlin, made a prickly but 
inconsequential debut and the combined forces of Darren Bent and Jermain Defoe 
rarely prospered before Robbie Keane's 78th-minute equaliser.

With the on-pitch temperature nearing 30C and a place in the group stages all 
but assured for the visitors, both teams could be permitted a lack of urgency. 
Spurs' lackadaisical approach was summed up early on when Defoe shanked a shot 
over the bar after Bent's willing run. Defoe had the mitigation of playing on 
an increasingly degraded pitch but Jol's case against handing him a regular 
starting spot was underlined just before half-time when he could only strike 
the post from Steed Malbranque's centre.

Anorthosis fully merited their second-half lead and Spurs could only equalise 
after Jol replaced the faltering Lee Young-pyo and Boateng with Keane and 
Gareth Bale. Jol had wanted to rest Bale but the Welsh teenager was once again 
instrumental, breaking down the left flank and sending a cross which Bent 
stepped over and Keane sidefooted past Zoltan Nagy.

"It would have been an escape if they scored four but you want to win games, 
and it is important for Tottenham to be in Europe again," said Jol, who has 
supposedly been given one game, at Liverpool on Sunday, to keep his job. If he 
was looking for incontrovertible evidence to appease a sceptical Tottenham 
board he has yet to find it.
 