
On Saturday Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> voters will 
pass judgement on one of the most controversial terms of government in recent 
history.

It’s difficult to measure the level of dissatisfaction among voters in the NT, 
if only because small electorates and a fluid population mean making any 
scientific prediction is difficult.

This election also sees redrawn electoral boundaries, new 100m exclusion zones 
stopping the handing out of how-to-vote cards around booths, and the 
introduction of optional preferential voting, with the hope the latter reduces 
informal votes in the bush.

But after four years of chaos the polls, pundits, and betting agencies predict 
annihilation for the incumbent Country Liberals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/20/northern-territory-election-labor-to-reap-benefit-of-chaotic-clp-rule>
. Onlyan ageing psychic crocodile named Burt thought otherwise 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/news/only-in-the-territory/burt-the-pyshic-crocodile-picks-adam-giles-to-win-reelection/news-story/8928929d00c1fe62423e052ee012496e>
.

On the final day of campaigning, chief minister Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-giles> hit the airwaves 
promising a Labor government guaranteed economic recession. He denied it was a 
last-ditch scare campaign.

The opposition leader, Michael Gunner, on an apparent clear run to victory, 
avoided some last-minute scrutiny by declining interview requests from both 
local and national ABC radio, ostensibly to go doorknocking, before holding a 
press conference that afternoon.

At a people’s forum on Thursday afternoon, Gunner swayed 58% of the undecided 
voters. Giles swayed 12%. Nearly a third remained undecided.

Northern Territory election: Adam Giles admits failures over insurance 
privatisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/northern-territory-election-adam-giles-admits-failures-over-insurance-privatisation>
Much of the population had already checked out by then. More than 50,000 
people – almost 40% of eligible voters – had cast their ballots by the end of 
Friday.


The rest will line up at local schools on Saturday, free from harassment 
thanks to the new exclusion zones, pick up a snag sandwich, and number as few 
or as many boxes as they like.


What are the main issues?

The last term of government has been extraordinary for the scale and number of 
scandals. They don’t necessarily matter to everyone but they have undoubtedly 
played a part.

Ken Parish, a law lecturer and former Labor MLA, said the chaos of the CLP’s 
term was probably not much greater than that during the Rudd and Gillard Labor 
years, and voters were just equally sick of it.

“My perception is that the big issues for Territorians are the chaos, 
dysfunction, disunity, the revolving door, members leaving and getting down to 
a minority, the successful leadership coup, followed by the unsuccessful coup 
because Giles refused to go, and then a succession of tawdry misdeeds by 
assorted people culminating in Mr Barrett, and … the privatisations were a big 
thing.”

Privatisation

The 99-year lease of the Darwin port made national headlines and put the wind 
up the White House, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/19/malcolm-turnbull-shrugs-off-us-concern-over-darwin-port-lease-to-chinese-firm>
 but closer to home people are much more upset about the CLP’ssale of the 
Territory Insurance Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/northern-territory-election-adam-giles-admits-failures-over-insurance-privatisation>
.

The sale of the last state-owned insurance company caused huge distress among 
Territorians needing affordable insurance against natural disasters in a small 
and uncompetitive market.

Parish said the port, TIO, and the Darwin bus service privatisation were all 
things the government “had really little or no mandate for, hadn’t really 
consulted about, and people didn’t consent to.”

“They might well have been sensible economic decisions, but people I think 
certainly felt and still feel like the CLP were high-handed and didn’t take 
notice of what people wanted.”

Northern Territory detention inquiry must address racism, say Indigenous 
advocates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/northern-territory-detention-inquiry-must-address-racism-say-indigenous-advocates>
Giles concedes they did not bring the people along with them in making the 
decision, and has pledged – several times over the last two years – to become 
more consultative. On Thursday he said he would resign if a CLP government sold 
the Power and Water company.

The economy

The Northern Territory is facing tough times with shrinking GST returns, a 
falling housing market, predicted unemployment rises, and the winding down of 
the major Inpex resource project.

The CLP campaign has largely centred on the Territory’s financials, spruiking 
the government’s reduction of “Labor debt”, and its plans for jobs, almost a 
third of which they said would come from an expanded onshore gas industry.

“We know there are heavy economic challenges coming,” Giles said on Friday 
morning.

“We spent the last four years getting the budget back on track, paying back 
debt and getting an economic plan to go ahead. And we have tabled our plan for 
24,000 new jobs.”

“Labor has not tabled any plan on bringing any investment dollars to the 
Territory. They have not brought forward a plan to grow private sector jobs,” 
he said.

“There is no way that the Territory won’t go into recession under Labor.”

Labor has promised a surplus by 2019-20, provided it can find enough savings 
to cover the extra $223.5m needed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/labor-win-in-northern-territory-would-mean-delay-or-cuts-of-223m-in-projects>
 to cover their election commitments, pledging to “make the tough decisions” on 
funding projects instead of going over budget.

It plans to consolidate public service departments, axing 26 executive roles 
to save $9m annually in salaries, and redeploying another 80 positions.

It has also labeled the CLP jobs promise “misleading” and containing 
exaggerations of the gas industry’s projected jobs figures.

Personality

This is unavoidable. During the campaign Giles has repeatedly said the public 
is sick of “personality politics”, but has it ended?


Giles has been implicated in many of the CLP scandals, but his inconsistent 
messaging has also tired voters. It was near impossible to keep track of his 
position following the Don Dale footage, and he has backtracked on a number of 
statements, sometimes within days. On Thursday he told the people’s forum he
would not introduce the Safe Schools program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/adam-giles-says-he-wont-support-sexuality-element-of-safe-schools-program>
 to prevent bullying of LGBTQI kids, a week after he told a social services 
debate that he would.


The well-documented individual clashes dominated the narrative of 
parliamentary sittings and were behind more than one resignation from the CLP.

Two of the CLP’s most controversial figures, David Tollner and John Elferink, 
are leaving politics at this election.

The CLP instability began just seven months into the term, when Giles rolled 
chief minister Terry Mills, in a move ABC election analyst Anthony Green 
described as “reminiscent of politics in newly emerging African nations in the 
1960s”.


Mills returned as an independent just a few weeks ago, vowing it had nothing 
to with revenge.

Delia Lawrie, the former Labor leader who was replaced by Gunner after she 
lost credibility over a union scandal, is also running as an independent, as is 
ex-CLP member and parliamentary speaker Kezia Purick, and former CLP minister 
Robyn Lambley.

Indigenous activist and artist Jack Green is running on an anti-fracking 
platform for the seat encompassing his home town of Borroloola, but faces tough 
competition.

Trevor Jenkins, rubbish warrior, is having another tilt.

Alison Anderson, former Atsic commissioner, former member of Labor, the CLP, 
Palmer United, and current independent, announced she would not contest the 
election and was then pictured in a Labor T-shirt helping with the campaign.

And who knows what Larisa Lee <http://gu.com/p/5v2f4?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other> 
will do if she retains her seat.

The ballot paper holds a record number of candidates, including a significant 
proportion of independents, but as is evident many of them are people who 
abandoned one of the majors. 1Territory, founded by two former CLP presidents, 
touts itself as an alternative conservative party but with policies such as 
legalising marijuana.

Indigenous affairs

The 2012 election was won on the “bush vote”, but how the Northern Territory’s 
Indigenous population has or will vote this time is unknown. The small 
electoral population and low enrolment mean seats could be swung on a strong 
family or community network, butissues such as juvenile justice, housing and 
jobs hit particularly hard in remote communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/19/political-leaders-urged-to-reform-ways-of-dealing-with-northern-territory-youth-offenders>
.

The CLP got rid of the Indigenous affairs portfolio when it took office, and 
then reintroduced it last year. It introduced a number of programs including 
“community champions” tomentor small business ventures in remote communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/03/crocodile-eggs-and-3d-printing-could-these-be-champions-of-the-top-ends-indigenous-communities>
. Both parties have made promises on remote housing and employment programs.

Labor accused the CLP of an “outrageous, cynical betrayal” when it released 
costings showing far less than their promised $1.6bn for remote housing, after 
most remote-living Territorians had already voted.

The environment 

It’s the nature of the Territory that environmental and economic concerns 
often overlap and sometimes compete. The cattle industry is a lifeblood 
industry, but then so is the resources sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/23/timing-of-nt-governments-secret-deal-with-tri-star-coal-company-queried>
 and tourism.

The environmental defenders office (EDO) NT scored the available written 
policies of four parties – the CLP, Labor, the Greens, and 1Territory. The CLP 
failed, scoring just 12.5/36, with a noted lack of transparency, climate change 
policy, and commitment to enforce planning law breaches.

Labor and the Greens policies scored 31 and 25 respectively, and 1Territory 
was given 22.

The CLP faced criticism in the last week of the campaign over a perceived lack 
of action over an oil spill in Darwin harbour, but Giles said it was his party 
to establish the “policeman-like” Environmental Protection Agency, a move the 
EDO called a step forward.

After the embarrassment of Port Melville on the Tiwi Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/19/tiwi-islands-port-project-needs-no-environmental-risk-assessment-epa>
, which was built without environmental assessment, both major parties have 
pledged to close the legislative loopholes which allowed it to happen.

They part ways significantly when it comes to fracking. Labor has promised a 
moratorium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/fracking-northern-territory-referendum-labor-delia-lawrie>
, followed by either a ban or a highly regulated industry to be decided in its 
first term. The CLP has pegged a third of its jobs plan to onshore gas.

Law and order, alcohol, and Don Dale 

Is Don Dale a factor?

Yes and no. The entire country was shocked by the footage broadcast on Four 
Corners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/northern-territory-youth-detention-no-excuse-for-not-knowing-of-abuse>
, but Territorians have also been dealing with high rates of property and 
violent crime, particularly by young offenders. It has meant that the CLP’s 
continued push for a “tough on crime” approach, once they had made appropriate 
noises about the royal commission, played relatively well. So did some of the 
attacks launched against Four Corners.

Parish said the report horrified people but it was more a “nail in the coffin” 
for the CLP, further highlighting “disunity and incompetence”.

The cost of the commission is an unknown for the next government, with a 
possible $32m payable by the NT. Gunner referred to it a “legacy issue” because 
it wasn’t sorted out before caretaker period stepped in.

The royal commission is also looking into child protection, a fraught issue in 
the NT with an overworked and frequently criticised Department of Families and 
Children struggling to deal with the rates of children at risk. The ALP, CLP 
and Greens were all given a tick by the NT council of social services for 
policies to outsource out of home care services and to establish an 
Aboriginal-controlled service.

As part of its “tough on crime” measures the CLP government will introduce a 
bill to remove the presumption of bail for repeat offenders, and Labor has 
pledged to focus on early intervention and rehabilitation.

The two parties are split on alcohol policy, another highly contentious and 
divisive NT issue. Labor has pledged to bring back its Banned Drinkers Register 
in concert with a suite of complementary measures, and to end mandatory alcohol 
treatment. The CLP says its temporary beat locations policy is working, but 
critics say it’s too resource-heavy on police, and impossible to implement in 
places such as Darwin with multiple bottleshops.

The Making Justice Work campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/northern-territory-political-parties-called-upon-to-address-justice-crisis->
 said Labor and two independents, including Lawrie, were most aligned with 
their vision for reform.
 