
A Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> MLA has lost 
the use of a government car for the second time in a few weeks, after she lent 
it out and it was implicated in the unlawful killing of a cow on a private 
cattle station.

Independent parliamentarian Larisa Lee had been loaned the four-wheel drive by 
the chief minister’s office. She lost her own government car in June after 
allegedly allowing an unlicensed 17-year-old to drive it. The matter is 
currently before the courts.

The car was confiscated until 29 August, at which time it would be returned to 
her if she was reelected on the 27th. The loan car was ostensibly for the 
purpose of getting around herelectorate of Arnhem 
<http://www.ntec.nt.gov.au/ElectoratesAndBoundaries/DivisionProfiles/Pages/Division%20of%20Arnhem.aspx>
 during the election campaign.

NT government's hold on power in limbo as backbenchers resign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/04/nt-governments-hold-on-power-in-limbo-as-backbenchers-resign>
But last week Lee’s car was allegedly used to assist in the killing of a cow 
on a private cattle station outside of her electorate, near Tennant Creek.

The cattle station manager came across two men chopping up the animal on his 
property,the NT News reports 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/news/northern-territory/mla-larisa-lee-allegedly-used-government-vehicle-she-was-loaned-by-chief-ministers-office-to-aid-in-killing-cow-on-private-cattle-station/news-story/5b3feb60cf18ee6fe12134a4585f4750>
. The manager reportedly identified the 2011 Toyota Prado at the edge of the 
property, and said the two men agreed to pay him $600 to settle the matter.

 Lee was not at the scene and is not believed to be aware 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-15/larisa-lee-has-car-confiscated-after-cow-killed/7736628>
 of what was occurring.

She has been contacted for comment.

The chief minister, Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-giles>, confirmed the vehicle 
had been taken off Lee.

“I considered it was fair and reasonable for Larisa Lee to have access to a 
government vehicle to get around her electorate,” he said in a statement.

“Once it became known that she had been using the vehicle outside her 
electorate, she was immediately asked to return it.”

Lee was elected as a member of the governing Country Liberal party, but quit 
in March 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/04/nt-governments-hold-on-power-in-limbo-as-backbenchers-resign?CMP=soc_567>
.

The crossbench later grew as more CLP MLAs resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/18/adam-giles-has-driven-me-out-robyn-lambley-quits-nt-ruling-party>
, and the government wasplunged into minority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/20/nt-government-loses-majority-speaker-kezia-purick-quits>
.

In November Lee began to support the government in parliament, and speaker 
Kezia Purick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/01/kezia-purick-northern-territory-speaker-genghis-khan>
 accused the government of doing a deal with her.

Who else have you given a car to, or concessions, or gifts, or things of that 
nature to curry favour?
Kezia Purick 
On Tuesday Purick said the chief minister had rewarded Lee in lending her the 
new car.

“The chief minister has seen fit … to give her a car, either out of the chief 
minister’s office or out of NT fleet, which as a member of parliament she is 
not entitled to,” Purick told local radio.

“The question to the chief minister is who else have you given a car to, or 
concessions, or gifts, or things of that nature to curry favour?”

Purick alleged the treasurer, Dave Tollner, had also been loaned a second car, 
which she described as a “fully-equipped four wheel drive”, and questioned why 
an “urban based member” needed an off-road vehicle.
 