
Both major parties contesting the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> election on 
Saturday are yet to release fully analysed costings of their campaign and other 
commitments.

The governing Country Liberal party released its costings on Tuesday afternoon 
– past their own deadline of Monday but well before Labor’s release, planned 
for Thursday.

The CLP has claimed its costings would see a positive balance of $35.78m over 
three years from 2018-18 and said its analysis of Labor’s commitments had found 
a debt of $523.51m over the same period.

Timing of NT government's secret deal with Tri-Star coal company queried
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/23/timing-of-nt-governments-secret-deal-with-tri-star-coal-company-queried>
However, the CLP costings have not yet been assessed by Treasury, meaning 
voters will receive fully analysed data from both parties at about the same 
time.

The deputy chief minister, Peter Styles, said he hoped Treasury would return 
the CLP costings soon.

The CLP figures show a $21.95m debt created by capital expenditure over the 
three years, with the largest amount of $150m going towards a remote housing 
strategy.

The CLP has promised 2300 new houses for remote Indigenous communities and 
another 100 upgrades. In December Labor released a 10-year, $1.1bn policy for 
new housing and has since matched the CLP’s promise for more than 1,000 new 
builds by 2017/18 using federal money allocated for that purpose.

Despite resisting its establishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/21/nsw-icac-style-corruption-body-not-needed-says-nt-attorney-general>
 for a number of years, the CLP has since committed to creating a Northern 
Territory independent commission against corruption (Icac). Its costings have 
allocated $5m a year over three years, compared with the $3m a year promised by 
Labor.

The chief minister, Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-giles>, on Monday labelled 
Labor’s promise an “Icac light”, offering less than the predicted cost of the 
commission, and said his party would implement the recommendations from a May 
inquiry.

Giles said among the first referrals to a new Icac would be the Stella Maris 
controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/19/nt-labor-leader-delia-lawrie-resigns-days-into-leadership-battle>
, which saw a Darwin property granted to a union in a rent-free lease shortly 
before the Labor government went into caretaker mode.

The Labor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> on 
Sunday said it had accepted 50 of the 52 recommendations made by a May inquiry, 
rejecting the two that suggested the South Australian commissioner lead the 
Icac part-time for the first two years.

Spendings are offset by savings of $57.73m in operational expenditure, the CLP 
said, and it did not include potential revenue from onshore gas royalties.

Northern Territory election: Labor to reap benefit of chaotic CLP rule
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/20/northern-territory-election-labor-to-reap-benefit-of-chaotic-clp-rule>
The Labor party has pledged a moratorium on fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/fracking-northern-territory-referendum-labor-delia-lawrie>
 should it win power, which the CLP said had already cost jobs in the territory 
due to the uncertainty it created for businesses. The CLP plan for 24,000 jobs 
included more than 7,000 in the gas industry.

Whoever wins government on Saturday will face economic troubles. The Northern 
Territory credit rating was recently downgraded, due to “weakening revenue 
projections, larger deficits, the expectation that demand pressures would make 
the low-expense growth projections difficult to achieve and the continuing 
weakness in the Power and Water Corporation’s financial performance”, Treasury 
said.

There are also pressures as the $34bn Inpex plant construction winds down, 
house prices fall and unknown costs mount up from the royal commission into 
child protection and juvenile detention.

The pre-election fiscal outlook said these costs were not just the expense of 
setting up the commission – expected to be $7m in this financial year and 
potentially $50m total – but also the implementation of recommendations to come.

Labor this week promised a first homebuyer’s grant of $24,000 for properties 
worth up to $650,000, with further grants for renovations and white goods 
purchases.

The CLP accused Labor of taking renovation vouchers away from thousands of 
home owners and work away from local businesses if it scrapped the $20m home 
improvement scheme, which it claimed had already generated $15m in work for 
tradies.
 