
The Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> government 
failed to properly communicate to the public when it made big decisions such as 
privatising the Territory Insurance Office, the chief minister, Adam Giles, has 
said.

He also said party instability was behind it now that a number of MLAs were 
retiring or had resigned over the past term.

The NT goes to an election on 27 August and, while it is widely predicted the 
Country Liberal party will lose government, a string of resignations, 
retirements and changes to electoral boundaries has created a relatively 
unpredictable playing field.

Jeff Kennett attacks ABC over Don Dale reporting at campaign launch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/jeff-kennett-attacks-abc-over-don-dale-reporting-at-campaign-launch>
Giles told local radio on Monday morning there was “no doubt” his government 
had not communicated the sale of TIO properly, which sparked widespread 
condemnation among Territorians whofeared greater premiums or restrictions on 
insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/07/nt-insurance-privatisation-worries-residents-in-flood-prone-areas>
 against weather events such as flooding and cyclones.

“We never sold the message about the problems,” he told Mix 104.9. “TIO wasn’t 
properly reinsured … If we got hit by a cyclone TIO couldn’t afford to pay the 
bill. Government wouldn’t have been able to pay the bill because it’s more than 
the government budget if we got hit by the cyclone.”

At the CLP campaign launch on Sunday, Giles challenged the Labor party to 
commit to buying TIO back if it believed it should be publicly owned. He also 
committed a future CLP government to not privatising other state assets such as 
water and electricity providers.

Giles said on Monday he believed people understood that the lease of the 
Darwin port to the Chinese company Landbridge was “the best infrastructure deal 
in the country” and praised CLP industry subsidy programs and a plan for 24,000 
jobs.

The CLP jobs plan includes 7,200 in an onshore gas industry. Fracking for 
onshore gas has sparked heated division between the parties and led to frequent 
protests by environmentalists, pastoralists and Indigenous traditional owners. 
Labor hascommitted to a moratorium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/fracking-northern-territory-referendum-labor-delia-lawrie>
 on fracking should it win government.

“Just because you support something like the gas industry doesn’t mean you’re 
not an environmentalist,” Giles said. “I’m the biggest environmentalist and 
conservationist around. But I support a well-regulated, a well-ruled industry 
of gas.”

He said environmentalists had yelled and spat at him and claimed that if 
Australia switched from coal-powered stations to NT-supplied gas it would “cut 
emissions by 50%”.

The CLP is going to the election with a markedly different team to the one it 
had in 2012. Neitherthe attorney general, John Elferink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/20/northern-territory-attorney-general-says-he-will-not-contest-the-next-election>
, nor thetreasurer, Dave Tollner 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-11-28/tollner-fails-to-win-preselection-for-nt-election/6983652>
, are contesting their seats, anda number of MLAs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/14/nathan-barrett-sex-scandal-politically-motivated-says-country-liberals-president>
 left the party amid infighting and scandals. Giles said the “personnel 
changes” meant a more stable government should the party win another term.


“We’ve had a couple of personnel changes,” he said. “Some of the people that 
weren’t able to work in a team, likeKezia [Purick] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/20/nt-government-loses-majority-speaker-kezia-purick-quits>
 andRobyn [Lambley] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/18/adam-giles-has-driven-me-out-robyn-lambley-quits-nt-ruling-party>
, they’ve gone.Alison Anderson, 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-03/alison-anderson-to-retire-from-northern-territory-politics/7686504>
 I mean, talk about a fire. They’re gone, and since they’ve been gone the 
instability has sort of been taken off. There’s been a few issues but they were 
the three who caused the instability.”

Adam Giles says ABC aired report on Don Dale juvenile detention to damage him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/adam-giles-says-abc-report-on-don-dale-juvenile-detention-aired-to-damage-him>
 Giles said there had been a “change in dynamic” and that many first-term 
governments “found it very difficult in finding their feet, settling in and 
moving from opposition to government”.

“We’ve got a fresh team with a greater balance of people from different 
backgrounds, a better balance of men and women, of Indigenous and 
non-Indigenous, so I I think we’re more reflective of the community.”


He also responded to revelations the former corrections commissioner Ken 
Middlebrook, who has borne the brunt of much of the blame for juvenile justice 
failings,had been appointed to the parole board 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/news/northern-territory/sacked-don-dale-boss-ken-middlebrook-was-later-appointed-to-parole-board/news-story/141ae5542c39973323944040ac71e884>
 after he resigned over the escape of a convicted rapist and murderer from a 
work camp.

Middlebrook was appointed as a “community member” of the board but has since 
said he would not participate 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-12/ken-middlebrook-appointed-to-nt-parole-board/7730116>
 until after the royal commission into child protection and juvenile detention.

Giles said he had raised the matter with Elferink but there was nothing he 
could do about it while the government was in caretaker mode. “To be frank, I 
don’t think he should have been on there and it’s certainly something to look 
at after the election.”

He praised former the Victorian premier Jeff Kennett, who appeared at the CLP 
launch andused part of his speech to accuse the ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/jeff-kennett-attacks-abc-over-don-dale-reporting-at-campaign-launch>
 of using public funds to “set us all up” and create biased reporting on the 
Don Dale youth detention centre.
 