
The Northern Territory government has dropped its counter-suit against two 
teenage boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/nt-government-countersuing-boys-allegedly-abused-in-juvenile-detention>
 who were teargassed in Darwin’s Don Dale youth detention centre, five hours 
after news broke of the legal action.

But the chief minister, Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-giles>, said he would not 
settle the detainees’ claims for compensation out of court, saying his 
government was “standing up for Territorians” by fighting the matters in court.

Six teenage detainees gassed at Don Dale on 31 August 2014, are suing the 
Territory government, saying their treatment in custody, which included being 
handcuffed, shackled and hooded, as well as being gassed, ammounted to battery 
and assault.

Adam Giles suggests lawyers who spoke to Four Corners had political motives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/adam-giles-suggests-lawyers-who-spoke-to-four-corners-had-political-motives>
The teargas incident and other alleged assaults were shown on Four Corners on 
Monday, prompting the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, to calla royal 
commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/former-chief-justice-named-as-head-of-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-inquiry>
 into the child protection and youth detention systems of the Northern 
Territory.

The NT government denies it shackled the boys and is contesting all six 
claims, denying it has vicarious liability for the alleged actions of prison 
guards.

But it ​ filed a counter-claim in respect of only two boys, whose identities 
have been suppressed. The boys, represented by the Northern Australian 
Aboriginal Justice Agency (Naaja),were accused of causing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/nt-government-countersuing-boys-allegedly-abused-in-juvenile-detention>
 between $160,000 and $200,000 damage to Don Dale in three incidents that 
occurred in the first half of 2015.

A spokesman from Giles’s office said the government had decided a counter-suit 
was appropriate to recover the cost of the damage, but decided on Friday to 
drop the suit.

In a statement, Giles said he had been asked to settle the boys’ claims to the 
tune of $250,000 each, but would not do so. He said he hoped the matters could 
be resolved before the ​start of the royal commission, which is expected to 
begin hearings as early as September.

Northern Territory juvenile detention: ABC air scenes likened to Abu Ghraib
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/northern-territory-juvenile-detention-calls-royal-commission-shocking-footage>
“I’m standing up for Territorians,” he said. “I don’t believe taxpayer money 
should be going towards windfall.”

Naaja managing civil solicitor, Philippa Martin, told Guardian Australia she 
had not been advised of the government’s decision.

“We haven’t been formally advised, but we are very pleased if it’s true,” 
Martin said.

Paperwork to drop the counter-suit was not filed with the supreme court by the 
time the registry office closed on Friday. The registry office will not reopen 
until 8am on Tuesday.

Naaja filed civil claims on behalf of four ​ boys last year, and submitted an 
updated statement of claim, seen by Guardian Australia, in June. The 
government’s now-rescinded counter-claim was filed in July.

All four cases are listed for call-over in the NT supreme court on 5 August.

The other two detainees, including 18-year-old Dylan Voller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/teenager-in-four-corners-juvenile-detention-expose-fears-for-his-safety>
, are not represented by Naaja. Their lawyer, Peter O’Brien, told Guardian 
Australia those civil actions had been temporarily put on hold.
 