
The life of a teen star used to take place in two acts. In the first, they 
would reach unfathomable heights of fame as an all-singing, all-grinning puppet 
forSimon Fuller  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simon-fuller>or Mickey 
Mouse, living out a highly merchandisable bubblegum dream. In the second, once 
they had turned 18, they would do something sexy-messy with their hair and make 
new songs where they’d sing about how badly they wanted a bonk (women) or stand 
meaningfully in a polo neck next to someone playing an acoustic guitar (men).

Zayn Malik: Mind of Mine review – downbeat sex jams drive assured rebrand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/25/zayn-malik-mind-of-mine-review-assured-rebrand>
The play nearly always ended the same way, with the quest for grown-up 
acceptance feeling hollow, a lack of acceptance from the “real music” 
establishment, and often with some kind of public breakdown. Ben from A1, Abs 
from 5ive,Robbie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams>, Britney, 
Christina, most of theSpice Girls <https://www.theguardian.com/music/spicegirls>
, the Jonas Brothers, the Olsen sisters, various members of S Club juniors and 
seniors, Hilary Duff, the cast of High School Musical: we have seen the same 
story play out so many times it feels as if we’re rewatching an old film.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC_3d6GntKbk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC_3d6GntKbk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC_3d6GntKbk&media=>
Yet in the past year that scenario has been turned on its head. The most 
inventive music and interesting stories to emerge in pop music have come from 
former child stars. In nightclubs from Peckham to Miami, on the covers of style 
magazines, in academic thinkpieces, it’s been graduates of the Disney Channel, 
Nickelodeon and talent-show academies who have been fuelling popular culture. 
The narrative has changed, a third act added to the story – the one where the 
child star strikes out as a groundbreaking “artist” in their own right, with 
the traditionally “cool” music world doubled-up in praise for them. It’s more 
than just stars trying or being told to be mature, or growing with their 
fanbase – their audience has actually shifted. Before, the only adults at these 
gigs were parents accompanying their kids; now music fans who left their teens 
behind long ago are baying for tickets, too.

Zayn Malik on leaving One Direction: I thought 'I just need to be me now'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/18/zayn-malik-on-leaving-one-direction-i-thought-i-just-need-to-be-me-now>
The starkest version of this transformation is happening right now, as Zayn 
Malik <https://www.theguardian.com/music/zayn-malik>, formerly one-fifth of One 
Direction <https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction>, releases his debut 
solo album. Not long ago, images of Malik were being emblazoned on to pencil 
cases as he played out a part in a global tween fantasy. When he dramatically 
quit 1D last year, however, everything changed. At first it seemed as if things 
were heading towards a case of classic post-boyband stress disorder. Malik 
spent a few months posting embittered tweets (“Remember when you had a life?” 
he tweeted at former bandmate Louis Tomlinson), dumped his fiancee, Little 
Mix’s Perrie Edwards, and the tabloids started to run stories about his 
“meltdown”.

But Zayn’s life was not in meltdown. He was holed up in his London mansion to 
record a solo album (Mind Of Mine, which came out yesterday). As opposed to his 
previous life in 1D, where his every move was masterminded by big teams, Zayn 
wrote all the lyrics to every song himself (which is also presumably why they 
have titles such as rEaR vIeW and fLoWer) and recorded half the album with 
Malay, the architect of Frank Ocean’s edgy R&B sound.

The album’s only featured vocalist is Kehlani, a rising rap and R&B star from 
California, who herself found fame on America’s Got Talent before going it 
alone and self-releasing a mixtape (it ended up being Grammy nominated). “He’s 
a genius,” she says, which isn’t exactly the word you might have associated 
with a manufactured boybander. “He knows exactly what he wants and doesn’t 
want, and that’s incredibly admirable in an artist. His writing style is very 
necessary for our generation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc65c5fe1b00d3f594d217fb5686148374c2ba75e%2F0_80_3300_1981%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc65c5fe1b00d3f594d217fb5686148374c2ba75e%2F0_80_3300_1981%2F3300.jpg>
 Justin Bieber 
That “necessary” style is diffuse, a sound that reflects the current trend for 
pop music that cuts across genre but borrows fromDisclosure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/13/disclosure-guy-howard-lawrence-interview>
-style house, R&B and reggae. Its lyrics, meanwhile, incorporate adult themes, 
unshackled from coy pop insinuation: sex so “dirty and raw” it will “piss off 
the neighbours” and a love interest that “takes another line of blow from the 
table”.

That real talk seems to reflect the way that Zayn speaks about himself in 
interviews, too. In acover story for trendy youth culture magazine the Fader 
<http://www.thefader.com/2015/11/17/zayn-malik-fader-cover-story-interview-solo-album-one-direction>
, he spoke about being a working-class Muslim from Bradford struggling with his 
own existence. He smoked a spliff while he told the interviewer, “I love music 
and I get tattoos and I make mistakes.” It’s hardly the most rock’n’roll 
declaration to be made this year, but no parent paying close attention would 
have saved an issue for their 1D-adoring children. It was a clever, calculated 
move that certified Malik as a credible pop star in the making.

Justin Bieber: Purpose review – a grown-up sorry. Sort of
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/15/justin-bieber-purpose-review-a-grown-up-sorry-sort-of>
Malik was lucky, in that a blueprint for how to evolve deftly from tween idol 
to respected star had just been engraved on a gold tablet by Justin Bieber. 
Bieber’s transformation is probably best summed up bya meme doing the rounds on 
Instagram <https://pbs.twimg.com/media/CV4aPiEW4AAAUA0.jpg>. On one side is the 
caption “Beliebers 2014” and a photograph of screaming nine-year-old girls in 
neon pink jumpers, on the other side it says there are “Beliebers 2015” and 
there is a photo of hard-lookingroadmen 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Roadman> in puffa jackets and 
Stone Island on a sofa in a shed.

The gag behind it is that somehow this animated blonde twerp went from being a 
children’s entertainer to the coolest person in music. Now, the same production 
heads who love buzzy electronic producers like Hudson Mohawke or Joy Orbison 
have spent the last six months raving about Bieber’s record Purpose. Even Kanye 
West, not known for doling out superlatives to others, tweeted that What Do You 
Mean? was his favourite track of the year, andKim Kardashian posted a video on 
Snapchat of Kanye singing along to it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gWslr_uLZvA>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnntGTK2Fhb0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnntGTK2Fhb0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnntGTK2Fhb0&media=>
Purpose was so popular because Bieber did something on it that pop stars 
almost never do: he didn’t just have hip influences, he struck on a singular 
new sound. For the album, he worked with EDM producer Skrillex and Grimes 
collaborator BloodPop to create a digital-tropical lightness of touch, drawing 
on club culture (cool points!) and Jamaican dancehall’s syncopated rhythms 
(grinding points!) and with choruses that can bust the charts.

A new direction: Is Zayn Malik the next Justin Timberlake?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/30/zayn-malik-one-direction-the-next-justin-timberlake-one-direction>
Zane Lowe, who hosts the flagship show on Apple’s radio station Beats 1, is 
something of a global gatekeeper for what is and isn’t seen as proper music. He 
would never have played 1D, for example, but he’s been supportive of both 
Bieber and Malik, interviewing them and premiering their tracks. “You can dress 
up pop stardom in a hundred different ways,” he says, of how they’ve gained 
respect in the music world, “but if an artist wants something more meaningful 
and lasting, there has to be a willingness to try something different and break 
up the ‘if it ain’t broke’ philosophy. Justin and Zayn have done that and made 
smart decisions, working with collaborators who have brought out a different 
side. They’re evolving as artists.”

For Gabriel Szatan, editor-in-chief at underground music platform Boiler Room, 
though, their cross-generation popularity comes down to the strength of the 
songs rather than being recognised as progressive “artists”. It’s all about the 
nostalgia they conjure from the fans. “I could over-intellectualise about 
poptimism storming the gates of techno snobbery,” he says. “But really, 
bouncing around to [Jack Ü’s Bieber-featuring hit] Where Are Ü Now with your 
mates taps directly back into that dumb euphoria of doing the exact same to Rui 
Da Silva or Chicane as a kid. That’s why Bieber’s clout is growing fast.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff559ba85f4170fe9278f8b07b80d2e4a1d3df909%2F0_103_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff559ba85f4170fe9278f8b07b80d2e4a1d3df909%2F0_103_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Ariana Grande. Photograph: Scott Roth 
Whether these stars are innovators themselves or just benefiting from working 
with taste-making producers, brought in by labels to capture a particular sound 
or style zeitgeist, is a moot point. You can’t imagine Malik or Bieber would 
have got as far as they have if they’d been left to fend for themselves on 
GarageBand. But what’s interesting about these stars, over and above technical 
ability, is their emancipation. These teen idols were culturally castrated in 
adolescence, forced to smooth any edges to their personality, so it feels 
rewarding to hear them make a club banger instead of a faceless bedroom 
producer you’ve never heard of. Increasingly, their musical freedom is often 
coupled with a newfound social liberation: able to say what they want for the 
first time, former child stars are becoming more and more outspoken on social 
issues facing young people.

Ariana Grande review – arch wit from pop powerhouse in training
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/02/ariana-grande-review-london> 
Former Nickelodeon star Ariana Grande is one singer who is using social media 
to address sexism – as if taking her social media cues from smart stars like 
Lorde, she responded to the endless questions asked about who she’s dating with 
Gloria Steinem quotes. Then there’s Carly Rae Jepsen, the teen Canadian Idol 
finalist. Her 2015 album Emotion, produced by members of Vampire Weekend and 
Blood Orange, marked her shift from tween Bieber protege to pop/indie crossover 
artist – as did her answers in interviews, where shegot honest on issues such 
as feminism 
<https://broadly.vice.com/en_us/article/carly-rae-jepsen-shes-really-nice>.

The teen idol whose transformation embodies all of this best is Miley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/miley-cyrus>. She started out as a 
butter-wouldn’t-melt Disney kids’ star, even wearing a purity ring to signify 
her virginal status. Then she undid her image bit by bit with every album, 
until 2013’s Bangerz, a record supported by a series of sexually explicit 
performances and videos that outraged the US. At first her feminist credentials 
and cultural appropriation of hip-hop were mercilessly debated.

But the Bangerz tour that followed – a high-art exploration of music, erotica 
and psychology placed in the incongruous setting of a tween pop concert – 
silenced the critics and won her a legion of new appreciators. I remember 
watching this show, including a 50ft dog shooting lasers from its eyes, graphic 
animations featuring dildo limbs and bestiality, and a magic mushroom trip 
recreated with Jim Henson-style monsters, and wondering whether I was at The O2 
or MOMA.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225f8e946d8acf2873b27284a7950072d421b87f%2F152_231_2809_1685%2F2809.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225f8e946d8acf2873b27284a7950072d421b87f%2F152_231_2809_1685%2F2809.jpg>
 Miley Cyrus at the 2015 MTV Video Music Awards. Photograph: John Shearer/Getty 
Cyrus then spent the next couple of years supporting homeless LGBT youth in 
Los Angeles through her Happy Hippy Foundation and performing with some heroes 
of counterculture, including Joan Jett, 60s protest singer Melanie Safka and 
trans Against Me! frontwoman Laura Jane Grace. Further eschewing the 
traditional pop artist mould, her most recent project, Miley Cyrus & Her Dead 
Petz, was a collaboration with the Flaming Lips and featured vocals from indie 
weirdos such as Ariel Pink. Her record label deemed it so uncommercial they 
allowed her to release it for free online. Cyrus was no longer the woman 
swinging naked from a wrecking ball but an important cultural disrupter.

Miley Cyrus: Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz – a sweary, engaging self-release
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/06/miley-cyrus-dead-petz-kitty-empire-review-wayne-coyne>
Of course, artists maturing their sound as they get older is nothing new, but 
the traditional route for a pop star to gain respect from the cool crowd was 
for them to stop making pop music – that’s been true across the decades, from 
John Lennon to Charlie from Busted. Yet none of today’s versions, like Bieber 
and Malik, are disavowing their pop roots. Rather, they are becoming 
standard-bearers for the genre that made them, mixing up elements of R&B, 
electronic dance music and hip-hop to change the sound of pop altogether and 
helping to create a genre-less future.

Now, that cycle continues, as the child stars of today follow Cyrus, Malik and 
Biebs’s model. Take Rowan Blanchard, a 14-year-old Nickelodeon star: her life 
is not that different to how Cyrus’s was at the same age, except that Blanchard 
is currently on the cover of style mag Wonderland explaining why she identifies 
as queer. Her friend, 17-year-old Hunger Games actor Amandla Stenberg, is part 
of folk duo Honeywater: she’s been an active supporter of the Black Lives 
Matter campaign and posted a series of videos explaining intersectional 
feminism. Last month she was wason the cover of Teen Vogue 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/amandla-stenberg-interview-teen-vogue-february-2016>
 talking about American race relations with intelligence and subtlety, in a way 
few adult stars ever have.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F570cd3a6718639951d9f185b8cf6d6677253a64a%2F0_0_2586_3000%2F2586.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20just%20for%20kids%3A%20how%20Zayn%20Malik%20and%20Justin%20Bieber%20rebranded%20the%20teen%20pop%20idol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fzayn-malik-one-direction-justin-bieber-miley-cyrus-tween-idols-grow-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F570cd3a6718639951d9f185b8cf6d6677253a64a%2F0_0_2586_3000%2F2586.jpg>
 Amandla Stenberg. Photograph: Jon Kopaloff 
Completing this new teen set are Willow Smith and Jaden Smith, the children of 
Will and Jada, who have both talked about their ambitions to deconstruct gender 
and R&B. Willow’s self-released, self-produced album Ardipithecus last December 
was a stroll through various disconnected genres that underlines just how 
unpredictable pop music has become.


That’s the most exciting thing about the new teen stars: they’ve hurled the 
starting point for the next generation wildly leftfield. What happens now? The 
next big teen pop album could be produced by Oneohtrix Point Never. Grown 
adults could be pestering the DJ to play “that massive new Halsey tune”. Sophia 
Grace in concert might become the hottest ticket since Radiohead at the 
Roundhouse. The field of pop is wide open and everyone is game.

Zayn Malik’s album Mind Of Mine is out now on RCA 






 