
American Airlines flight 587, bound for Santo Domingo, crashes into Queens. 
"It is a test," Mayor Giuliani says. I believe him. I just wish I knew who was 
doing the testing: God or Osama bin Laden? Two months ago, millions of us 
around the world witnessed things that should never have left the realm of 
fantasy. But there is a quantum difference between watching an event on 
television and living through it. Perhaps that is why some journalists in the 
UK were able to write so cavalierly about America's "bloody nose". When you can 
smell death, when you see strangers weeping on trains and sidewalks, when you 
can feel the rumbling of armoured vehicles, you are changed.

Two months ago I would have thought it mawkish to mourn for people who have no 
connection to me. Not now. Quite the contrary. I feel that one of the ways I 
must combat the terrorists is in their attempts to deaden my emotions to 
disaster.

I find myself thinking about the Dominican passengers on flight 587. Their 
country, Dominican Republic, is among the poorest of the poor in the Caribbean. 
If yesterday's crash was the result of foul play, their government is not going 
to declare war on terrorism. No one is going to avenge them. And that, in 
itself, seems like an injustice to me. But more than that, I can't help 
believing that if I, and millions like me, accept the tragedy as our own, then 
somehow the individuality of all 255 people on board is acknowledged.

But while I care more about the fate of others, I no longer worry quite so 
much about my own. In a funny way, I think most New Yorkers are much more 
sanguine. For example, the phone has been silent most of the morning because, 
once again, the lines are jammed. However, two months ago, what telephone 
conversations we had were much more lengthy and hysterical. This time, I 
managed to receive one and make one shortly after the plane crash. And in both 
instances, it was the same message: "Turn on the television." To be honest, I 
can't say that I am all that familiar with Queens. I drive through it on my way 
to the airport. But with every New York borough the size of an average city, it 
is quite easy to leave certain parts of it to the imagination. Yet with the 
television comes instant familiarity, and a sense of belonging. Just as the 
outer boroughs embraced us after September 11, now I feel that Queens is my 
back yard. In fact, none of us here in Manhattan could see anything. The first 
pictures showed a thick plume of black smoke billowing from over the water. As 
is usual now, every channel showed the same pictures. From time to time, a 
talking head appeared to waffle on in a reassuring way, but mostly we saw a 
bright blue sky and helicopters circling the smoke. Emergency numbers flashed 
on the screen, and the federal aviation authority made the occasional - 
conflicting - announcement.

The broadcasters have learned that what viewers want during these moments is 
pictures. Any time somebody appeared to "interpret" events, I simply switched 
channels. Moreover, we know the drill now. Establish contact with those you 
love, and listen to the news. We also know what we can and can't do to help. 
They don't want volunteers, they want our money. They want us to stay off the 
roads and, above all, keep calm.

Actually, it is very easy to remain calm. I know that my husband and brother 
are both safe. My houseguest left from JFK yesterday, so, thank goodness, he 
was not involved in this. I even went to the gym this morning. The general mood 
there was not fear, but hunger for information. Walking back to my house, I 
could see that the look in people's faces was all the same; each of us had 
frowns, and that look of concentration that connotes furious internal dialogue. 
Everyone wants to react in the proper way, but that it is not possible without 
direction from the news. Last time, the events unfolded minute by minute. It 
was dramavision of the very worst kind. No wonder we watched television for 
days and days. First, there were the fires and the explosions, then there was 
the agonising wait for survivors. But today there is no overwhelming need to be 
a part of an unfolding tragedy. We know what has happened, we just don't know 
why.

As Giuliani says: "It is a test." But that doesn't resolve the issue of 
whether we should be concerned about poor aviation maintenance or more 
terrorism. I know I have changed since September 11 because I no longer know 
which of the two is worse. And, talking to people in my neighbourhood, everyone 
seems to agree. We hear that there was an explosion aboard. A TWA-kind of 
explosion, or a Lockerbie one?

It's not the sort of question I would have worried about before, but now it 
feels as though this is the crux of the matter. Random acts of God are 
frightening and make us look to the state of our souls. But deliberate acts of 
terrorism I know I can fight. If anything, with the latter in mind, my resolve 
to be vigilant and a good citizen is even greater now than it was yesterday.

Even if it turns out that AA flight 587 was doomed from the start, I still 
hate the terrorists all the more. I would like to kill the bastards myself. New 
York is breathing on one lung as it is. Our defenses are so weakened, our 
nerves so shaken by September 11 and the anthrax attacks, that this feels like 
another body blow. I worry that the city will gradually lose all its businesses 
and tourism. The infrastructure, never the best to begin with, will only 
disintegrate further. What will happen next? Who would have thought that the 
World Trade Centre attack could be just the beginning?

Â· Amanda Foreman is author of Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire, published by 
Flamingo.
 