
If you were looking for exciting contemporary theatre in the UK, where might 
you look? The obvious answer is that you would head to London and venues such as
Battersea Arts Centre <https://www.bac.org.uk/> (BAC) or the Royal Court 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/>. Or to the small studio theatres in cities 
and large towns across the country, fromDerby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/28/theatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company>
 and Exeter to Cambridge toEdinburgh <http://www.traverse.co.uk/>. But would 
you think to look in rural locations? In their village halls, small arts 
centres, pubs, libraries and pop-up venues? Maybe you should, particularly at a 
time when there has been an erosion of opportunities for small-scale touring 
theatre.

The Iranian Feast review – charming show about the soup of human kindness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/07/the-iranian-feast-review-farnham-maltings>
It was one of the questions raised at the latest A Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre> conversation, 
presented by the Guardian and BAC, which took place atFarnham Maltings 
<https://farnhammaltings.com/> last week. The title of the conversation was I 
Liked It But I Couldn’t Book It 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/41221/whats_on/whats_on/events_and_workshops/a_nations_theatre_conversation_i_liked_it_but_i_couldnt_book_it>
, which came from something I overheard a village-hall promoter say following a 
showcase of work presented at theNational Rural Touring Forum 
<http://www.ruraltouring.org/> (NRTF) last year.

That comment suggests that theatre programmed in rural settings is somehow 
always going to be cosier, less challenging and more old fashioned, in both 
form and content, than work that is programmed and toured elsewhere. The number 
of active local promoters has risen by more than 40% in the past 10 years. But 
there is a feeling that, while rural touring theatre boasts some terrific work, 
many promoters are playing it safe and choosing not to programme the most 
challenging contemporary work.

Or perhaps it’s that artists don’t think they can make such work for rural 
audiences. Perhaps they worry that the work might be damaged by if it has to be 
pared down for a rural tour. Perhaps they don’t always understand that a show’s 
function is different in a rural context? As the writerKevin Dyer 
<http://www.kevindyer.co.uk/> observed drily: “Not all plays written for rural 
touring have to have a tractor in them.”

Farnham Maltings: the craft-loving community that's a close-knit success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/11/farnham-maltings-tiny-closely-knit-arts-community-farnham-little-bulb>
But there is something substantially different about watching a show amid a 
crowd of strangers and watching it in the company of people whom you may well 
encounter everyday in the community.

A piece about neighbourliness and what home means will play very differently 
in the anonymity of a city theatre than in the heart of a community. As 
initiatives such as theCollaborative Touring Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/13/doorstep-arts-theatre-local-communities-torbay>
 or Fuel’sNew Theatre in Your Neighbourhood 
<http://www.fueltheatre.com/projects/new-theatre-in-your-neighbourhood> strand 
have found, as they seek to find local promoters with local knowledge, a 
production creates meaning not just through the choices it makes but also from 
the context in which it is delivered.

What does it mean for artists if their show is the reason the community has 
gathered, but is only one component of an evening of which, for some people, 
the main event will be the raffle or the interval buffet? And is that so very 
different for a lot of London theatre-going, where, for much of the audience, 
the interval glass of wine or the post-show dinner are as much a part of the 
evening as the show itself?

There is a misconception that audiences in rural settings are somehow less 
sophisticated or less engaged than metropolitan audiences. This is a mistake. 
Although only 2.5% ofnational portfolio organisation 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/our-investment/national-portfolio-organisations-map/>
 (NPO) investment goes to organisations in rural areas, 17.6% of the population 
live in rural areas. According tothe Arts Council’s Taking Part survey 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/research-and-data/arts-audiences/taking-part-survey/>
, these audiences have a higher level of arts engagement than those in urban 
areas. They don’t just like to consume art, they like to make it too.

So there is a great deal of potential for artists and companies who want to 
work in rural settings and are looking for different models to do so. Tom 
Spencer ofFine Chisel <http://finechisel.co.uk/> observed that, while the 
company are happy to do traditional village-hall tours, they are also keen to 
do pop-up gigs in almost any setting, or longer term residencies in which they 
become embedded within the community, getting to know them and delivering 
workshops and more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fa-nations-theatre-rural-touring-forum-farnham-maltings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81fc62fd6514845828ad19f56ff03f30bf35b1d4%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20cosy%2C%20not%20safe%2C%20no%20tractors%3A%20the%20plays%20redefining%20rural%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fa-nations-theatre-rural-touring-forum-farnham-maltings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20cosy%2C%20not%20safe%2C%20no%20tractors%3A%20the%20plays%20redefining%20rural%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fa-nations-theatre-rural-touring-forum-farnham-maltings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81fc62fd6514845828ad19f56ff03f30bf35b1d4%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Squally Showers, a dance-theatre show about 1980s politics, created and 
devised by Little Bulb theatre and produced by Farnham Maltings. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
The success of Creative Arts East 
<http://www.creativeartseast.co.uk/projects/new-places-extraordinary-spaces>’s 
project, in whichpoets <http://www.henryraby.com/> and theatre-makers 
<http://www.scarylittlegirls.co.uk/> have been resident in pubs and libraries, 
points a way forward for those wanting to work in rural areas; local authority 
wellbeing or pride of place initiatives also offer opportunities and funding. 
Sometimes artists are mistakenly a bit sniffy about such schemes, but one of 
the wonderful things about rural touring is that itallows artists to directly 
meet their audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/feb/05/theatre> in a way 
that often doesn’t happen in other contexts.

Checking out the Farnham Maltings website <https://farnhammaltings.com/> 
before my visit, it made me smile to see one comment from a user who liked the 
place because it was where he went both to see standup comedy and to give 
blood. Nobody would ever say that about the National Theatre – but maybe we 
should be able to. Otherwise, theatre becomes separated from the everyday lives 
of ordinary people and hidden away in cathedrals to art that have no connection 
to the real world. AsDavid Jubb argued in the Stage last week 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/david-jubb-lets-rethink-what-theatres-are-for/>
, as BAC takes stock on the first anniversary of the fire which destroyed its 
Grand Hall, we need to rethink what theatres are for.


Artists must think more about who their audiences might be
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/03/artists-must-think-more-about-who-their-audiences-might-be>
There was quite a lot of debate during the conversation in Farnham about the 
quality of work – something I wrote about following theNRTF showcase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/21/rural-theatre-touring>
 last year – and about whether rural touring should involve taking audiences on 
a journey. Natalie Jode of Creative Arts East talked about appetite-building: 
hearing what the audience says and using that as a way of developing cultural 
education.Gavin Stride <http://gavinstride.co.uk/>, of Farnham Maltings, said: 
“Every time I give the audience what they want, I disappoint them,” suggesting 
that rural audiences are as demanding as any other and deserve the best, and 
it’s just the way that you frame the offer that matters.

People may run a mile if they are offered a piece of challenging, form-busting 
new writing about why people become refugees. But if it is marketed as a piece 
that takes the form of party and involves the preparation of food, they won’t 
be so put off. Both descriptions cover the excellent showThe Iranian Feast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/07/the-iranian-feast-review-farnham-maltings>
, currently out on tour from the Maltings, a producing venue which over the 
years has built up a relationship of trust with artists, audiences and 
promoters on tour.

The issue of trust seems key. When trust is won, it means opportunities for 
artists to take contemporary theatre to new audiences in new settings, and for 
those audiences to see exciting theatre without the cost and transport issues 
of leaving their own location.

But the stakes are higher than they are for artistic directors and producers 
operating in cities. If a local promoter puts on a show in the village hall 
that the audience doesn’t like, he or she might have to face that audience in 
the village shop the very next day. That isn’t an issue forRufus Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/25/rufus-norris-first-national-theatre-season-interview>
 at the National. He may be grateful for it. But maybe there are opportunities 
and advantages to that kind of close connection. It’s a reminder that artists 
and audiences don’t live on different planets, and that both benefit from being 
in constant dialogue with each other.

 * A Nation’s Theatre debates are run in conjunction with Guardian Live. To 
find out aboutupcoming events <https://membership.theguardian.com/events>, sign 
up toGuardian Members <https://membership.theguardian.com/welcome>.  