Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2p7x2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2p7x2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2p7x2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Novak Djokovic produced some of the best tennis of his career in advancing to 
his third successiveAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final, destroying the 
fourth seed David Ferrer 6-2, 6-2, 6-1 in just 89 minutes.

The world No1 was in no mood to allow Ferrer the opportunity to come back from 
a two-set deficit as he did against Nicolas Almagro in the quarter-finals, and 
blasted him off court in short order.

"I was aware of David's qualities; I wanted to be aggressive on the court and 
this was definitely one of the best matches of my career," said the 25-year-old 
Serbian, who is seeking to become the first man in the professional era to win 
three successive Australian Open titles.

"He is one of the most respected guys on the tour. He is such a great 
competitor and has been around for years

"He is experiencing some of the best form of his career but tonight I just 
played incredible. You need to focus on every point and even though I was two 
sets up I didn't want to give him any points."

Ferrer will rise to fourth in the world after the tournament but said before 
the semi-final that this was due solely to a long-term injury to his compatriot 
Rafa Nadal and that he was still some way behind the "big four"of Djokovic, 
Roger Federer, Andy Murray and Nadal.

Djokovic underlined that statement in emphatic fashion with his performance, 
making it seem like he was playing the 400th-ranked player in the world rather 
than a man who won seven titles in 2012 and had reached four previous grand 
slam semi-finals.

He dominated when on serve, often rattling through games without losing a 
point, and put immense pressure on the Spaniard by stepping in, taking the ball 
early and keeping him on the back foot.

In the fourth game of the third set, he battered Ferrer's serve and broke to 
love, game point coming when he blasted a backhand cross court, pumping his 
fist in triumph.

Djokovic will meet the winner of Friday's semi-final between the second seed 
Federer and the third seed Murray in Sunday's final.

"I wouldn't give the role of favourite to either of them," Djokovic told ESPN. 
"Whoever I play I will be ready."
 