
10.17am GMT 

Djokovic wins 6-2, 6-2, 6-1

They've only been playing for just under an hour and a half but Ferrer looks 
absolutely shattered. Mentally shot. Djokovic again shows no mercy, opting for 
another drop shot. 30-15.Another drop shot, 30-all. From deuce, Ferrer double 
faults to hand the defending champion a first match point. Which Djokovic duly 
takes courtesy of an unforced error from a humiliated Ferrer. Djokovic is 
through to his third straightAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final, and on that form it 
will most likely be three straight titles. Ruthless, efficient, brutal, 
anti-climactic, disappointing, say what you will about the match. But it's some 
message to Murray and Federer ahead of their semi-final. "This is definitely 
one of the best performances I've ever had in my career. I was free in my mind 
tonight, hopefully I can maintain that level in the final," says Djokovic 
ominously. Ferrer has already shuffled off court. Thanks for reading, do join 
us for Murray v Federer tomorrow. Bye.

Updated at 10.23am GMT

10.10am GMT 

Third set: Djokovic 6-2, 6-2, 5-1 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

Djokovic's aim is so true. Forehand strike, 15-0. Backhand strike, 30-0. He 
then toys with poor Ferrer, dragging him into the net before dinking a lob just 
out of the 5'9" Spaniard's reach. 40-0. Game. Ferrer must hold serve to stay in 
this match. The way this has gone, there are absolutely no guarantees he will. 
Oh well, at least he has another grand slam semi-final defeat to go before he 
reaches Tim Henman proportions.

Updated at 10.52am GMT

10.07am GMT 

Third set: *Djokovic 6-2, 6-2, 4-1 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

Djokovic, with the luxury of a two-set and two-break advantage, is going 
all-out for the winners now. The showman. Sometimes they come off in this game, 
more often not. Ferrer holds to prevent the bagel. And a few more stats for 
you: Djokovic has hit 20 winners and 13 unforced errors, which pretty much 
tells you all you need to know about this.

10.04am GMT 

Third set: Djokovic 6-2, 6-2, 4-0 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

"I can play Djokovic closer than Ferrer does," says an exasperated Mats 
Wilander on Eurosport. 15-0. 30-0. 40-0. Ferrer then relaxes a little and 
unleashes. 40-15. A slight mis-hit from Djokovic as he steps into court to 
dispatch a forehand, and it's called out. Djokovic appeals to Hawk-Eye – not 
that he really needs any help from any external forces today – which shows the 
ball landed about 0.000001mm in. Back to you Mr Ferrrreerrrr ...

10.01am GMT 

Third set: *Djokovic 6-2, 6-2, 3-0 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

A second double fault of the day sees Ferrer slip 0-30 down. He then drops a 
ball on his foot before he serves. Nothing is in sync for the poor Spaniard. 
Two crunching Djokovic winners and two crunching Djokovic fist pumps later and 
it's 3-zip. At least we can safely predict that Andy Murray v Roger Federer 
tomorrow will be more competitive. This is as one-sided a grand slam semi-final 
as you're likely to see. "All I can think is please bring Rafa back," begs‏@
iscreamtobi <https://twitter.com/iscreamtobi>. 

Updated at 10.25am GMT

9.57am GMT 

Third set: Djokovic 6-2, 6-2, 2-0 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

Great foot speed from Ferrer, he charges to the net like a greyhound, before 
wrapping up the point with a smash. The crowd liked that. They cheer 
appreciatively. But that's as good as it gets for the Spaniard as Djokovic 
holds to 15. Djokovic has won 67 points to Ferrer's 33. "Can't someone just 
give ND the silver? It would save time," tweets@zappamappa.  
<https://twitter.com/zappamappa>Don't worry, I doubt we'll be here much longer.

Updated at 10.28am GMT

9.54am GMT 

Third set: *Djokovic 6-2, 6-2, 1-0 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

This match shows just how far Ferrer is from the Big Four. He'll become the 
world No4 next week, courtesy of Rafael Nadal's extended absence, but it's by 
default. He can't touch these guys. From 30-all, the longest rally of the match 
(32 shots, we expected a few more of those today), but Ferrer runs out of steam 
as a wayward and wild forehand goes well wide. 30-40. Break point. And another 
errant forehand gives Djokovic the break.

Updated at 10.47am GMT

9.49am GMT 

Djokovic wins the second set 6-2

Djokovic's over-confidence continues as he dinks another drop shot into the 
net. But no bother. From 15-all an unreturned serve, nerveless drive volley (he 
had Ferrer on a piece of string there, no, perhaps more like a noose, brutally 
pulling him from side to side before going for the kill) and a netted Ferrer 
return give him the second set. They've only been going an hour and six 
minutes. Forget what I said about snacks and drinks earlier, they're not 
needed. This is a shellacking.

Updated at 10.46am GMT

9.44am GMT 

Second set: *Djokovic 6-2, 5-2 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

A wonderful point at 15-all, Djokovic strikes with the backhand, forehand, 
eventually rounding things off with a delightful volley. 15-30. 30-all. 
Djokovic then perhaps gets a little too cocky, though who can blame him with 
the way things have been going so far? He opts for the drop shot, which doesn't 
come off, skidding into the net. Ferrer squeezes through, but Djokovic will 
still step up to serve for the second set.

9.39am GMT 

Second set: Djokovic 6-2, 5-1 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

An error from Djokovic! A collective gasp from the crowd. 15-all. Ferrer 
suddenly rouses himself as a ferocious forehand down the line has Djokovic 
spinning, sliding and scrambling. The Serb can only net. 15-30. But it's one 
step forward, two back for Ferrer as Djokovic rattles off the next three points 
to hold.

Updated at 9.39am GMT

9.35am GMT 

Second set: *Djokovic 6-2, 4-1 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

All too easy for the world No1. 0-15. 0-30. A thunderous winner brings up 
0-40, three more break points. He's already three from three. Ferrer hasn't 
even had a break point yet. And Ferrer gifts the break to Djokovic with a 
double fault. Djokovic looks supreme, Ferrer is all at sea. The Spaniard 
shuffles back to his chair with the look of a man who would like to be off 
court pretty quick sharpish.

9.32am GMT 

Second set: Djokovic 6-2, 3-1 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

There have been flashes from Ferrer, but that's it. All too fleeting. It's 
Djokovic who's flowing. 15-0. 30-0. 40-0. Game. When you think about the 
players who have troubled Djokovic during this tournament, the Wawrinkas, the 
Berdychs, they're players who come out firing. That's not Ferrer's game. It's 
hard to see how he can make any inroads here. Djokovic hasstill only conceded 
two points on serve.

9.29am GMT 

Second set: *Djokovic 6-2, 2-1 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

Poor Ferrer is a bit of a Tim Henman when you think about it. This is his 
fifth grand slam semi-final, and the way this is going, this will be his fifth 
semi-final defeat. Djokovic again keeps on chipping, pushing, probing on 
Ferrer's serve and gets to deuce. Advantage Ferrer. Deuce. Advantage Djokovic. 
The court opened up for Ferrer there, but he couldn't take advantage. And he 
then flunks a forehand into the net. Hmm. Stay with me.Please.

9.24am GMT 

Second set: Djokovic 6-2, 1-1 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

Wow. A brutal backhand strike from Djokovic and Ferrer has no answer. 40-0. A 
service bomb down the T. Again, Ferrer has no answer. Another love hold for 
Djokovic, who's only dropped two points on serve. Not that Sasu Laaksonen is 
impressed with this affair so far: "A lull, cakewalk, freewheeling, not 
once-in-a-life-time, bore, not fun, a let down. You get the picture. Ferrer 
should not be a semi-final player in slams."

Updated at 9.25am GMT

9.21am GMT 

Second set: *Djokovic 6-2, 0-1 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

Djokovic only made four errors in the opening eight games. But a few here 
allow Ferrer to stop the rot with a first game in six. A lucky net cord gets 
Ferrer to 30-15 – he'll take all the luck he can get right now. He then hoiks a 
backhand into the tramlines after a punishing point. 30-all. But then Djokovic 
slips and slides on the next two points and goes long as Ferrer holds.

Updated at 9.21am GMT

9.16am GMT 

Djokovic wins the first set 6-2

A delightful drop volley for Djokovic gets him to 15-0. He can relax in this 
game, that's the comfort a double break will afford you. 30-0. Ferrer goes for 
broke with a backhand down the line. He misses. Even his body language 
suggested he didn't think he'd make it. This is one-way traffic now. And a 
third ace from Djokovic seals the set in 29 minutes. The outcome we all 
expected, but not this quickly.

9.11am GMT 

First set: *Djokovic 5-2 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

A wonderful second point, Ferrer runs until his lungs burst, charging forward 
like a terrier, but it's Djokovic who emerges victorious. 15-all. 30-15. A 
metronomic fourth point, Djokovic sends Ferrer from corner to corner, but he 
then nets. And grunts in disgust. 40-15. Djokovic's slice then has Ferrer 
flummoxed as the Spaniard goes a foot or so long. 40-30. Deuce. Advantage 
Ferrer. Deuce. Advantage Djokovic. Break Djokovic. Ferrer has every chance to 
win that game, he'll be kicking himself. Djokovic will serve for the opening 
set with the new balls.

Updated at 9.11am GMT

9.04am GMT 

First set: Djokovic 4-2 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

A smooth service game for the Serb. Again, Djokovic is just able to pull the 
trigger more quickly and easily than Ferrer. Two love games in a row now. 
Ominous for Ferrer.

Updated at 9.11am GMT

9.02am GMT 

First set: *Djokovic 3-2 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

Ferrer finds himself in a little bit of a hole at 15-30. A brutal point 
follows, the pair drag each other back and forth and left and right (though 
they've still got some way to go before they get to Simon and Monfils levels 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWerzRmwy38>). Ferrer goes for the pass, 
Djokovic dispatches the volley. 15-40, two break points. Another long exchange 
ensues, but Ferrer gifts Djokovic the break as he prods a forehand well long 
under little pressure down the middle of the court. First blood to the Djoker.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWerzRmwy38&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWerzRmwy38>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWerzRmwy38&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWerzRmwy38&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWerzRmwy38>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWerzRmwy38&media=>
close 
Updated at 9.10am GMT

8.59am GMT 

First set: Djokovic 2-2 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

15-0, 30-0, 40-0, game. An update on Victoria Azarenka; she's just done her 
press conference and has backtracked a little on her comments on court. She's 
now saying a rib got stuck, and she was unable to breathe. Still, a 10-minute 
timeout when your opponent is serving to stay in the match is surely stretching 
the boundaries of sportsmanship?

Updated at 9.05am GMT

8.57am GMT 

First set: *Djokovic 1-2 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

Some lovely play from Ferrer at 30-0. He pins Djokovic deep into the corner, 
then as Djokovic scampers back to the centre the Serb is wrongfooted, as Ferrer 
goes back behind with his favourite shot, the inside-out forehand. Ferrer holds 
to 15. A good start from the Spaniard, better than from you lot. You're all 
very quiet, you know.

Updated at 10.33am GMT

8.52am GMT 

First set: Djokovic 1-1 Ferrer* (*denotes next server)

It will be interesting to see what Ferrer’s energy levels are like after his 
back-from-the-dead five-set win over Nicolas Almagro in the quarter-finals. Of 
course Djokovic was also taken to the brink by Stanislas Wawrinka, though that 
one was in the last 16, so he’s had longer to recover. And Djokovic didn't look 
to be suffering any after effects during his last-eight win over Tomas Berdych 
on Tuesday. But Djokovic is Djokovic. We all know he's superhuman. From 15-0, 
the pair go down the middle, down the middle, down the middle. Eventually they 
mix things up and Djokovic prevails. 30-0. 40-0. Some resistance from Ferrer to 
get to 40-30, but he then undoes his good work by pushing a forehand return 
into the net.

Updated at 8.53am GMT

8.47am GMT 

First set: *Djokovic 0-1 Ferrer (*denotes next server)

What's this? An attacking Ferrer? I like him. A strong first serve followed up 
by some dominant net play gets him to 15-0. But then comes the kind of point 
you'd expect from these two. A baseline duel eventually ends when Djokovic 
opens up on the forehand side and pings a winner down the line. And therein 
lies the problem for Ferrer. Djokovic is the one with more firepower. 15-all 
turns into 30-all which becomes 40-30 with a well-executed body serve, a good 
tactic against the Serb. The pair then trade cross-court backhands before 
Djokovic slaps into the net.

8.41am GMT 

Tik, tok, tikity, tok, they're warming up. Ferrer has won the toss and will 
serve first.

8.39am GMT 

And they're out. Djokovic receives a fantastic ovation as he steps out on to 
the Rod Laver Arena, which has become his backyard in recent years. He's won 
his past 19 matches at the Australian Open and is looking to become the first 
man in the Open era to take the title three years in a row. Hmm I'm not selling 
this as a contest am I? Well, you never know. Anything could happen. Itreally 
could. Just look at Sharapova.

Updated at 8.39am GMT

8.36am GMT 

The players are making the long walk from the dressing room. Ferrer is a few 
steps ahead of Djokovic, the Spaniard will be hoping it's a sign of things to 
come, but their head-to-head would suggest otherwise. Djokovic leads it 9-5. 
He's won five of their past six meetings and is 4-0 against Ferrer in grand 
slams, winning three of those matches in straight sets.

8.23am GMT 

Matters in the women's semi-finals have already been settled. Maria Sharapova, 
the runaway favourite for the title following Serena Williams's departure, has 
departed herself, losing 6-2, 6-2 to an inspired Li Na. Li, the 2011 runner-up, 
will play the world No1 and defending champion Victoria Azarenka in Saturday's 
final, who ended the run of Sloane Stephens in a 6-1, 6-4 win. But that only 
tells half the story. There's plenty of debate as to whether Azarenka's 
10-minute timeout after she missed five match points at 5-4 was legitimate or 
not. Azarenka seemed to admit afterwards she left the court because she bottled 
it. Though she was also suffering from chest pains, which considering the 44C 
heat surely had to be taken seriously. She returned to break Stephens straight 
away to seal her place in the final.

7.59am GMT 

Preamble

Yawn. These early mornings are starting to catch up with me. So hopefully you 
won't mind if I begin this preamble with some recycled wordsI wrote about 
Daveeeed Ferrrrerrrr last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jun/06/andy-murray-david-ferrer-live> …

It's the late 1990s, in a town on the Costa Blanca. A teenage prodigy is 
struggling for motivation in practice. His frustrated coach decides to teach 
him a lesson and locks him in a dark two-metre square cupboard used to store 
tennis balls. Despite his pleas for freedom, he's left there for several hours, 
with only some bread and water for company. When he's eventually set free, he 
decides to quit the sport and goes to work on a construction site, only to 
return to tennis a week later.

The incarcerated player in question is David Ferrer, and the story probably 
goes some way towards explaining why the once work-shy Spaniard has transformed 
himself into one of the fiercest competitors on tour (the coach in question, 
Javier Piles, is still employed by Ferrer today, and Ferrer regards his 
childhood tormentor as like a second father).

Known as "The Wall", "Le Grinder" and "Little Beast", Ferrer is a player who 
doesn't seem to know what a lost cause means. Scurrying across the baseline 
from corner to corner, he chases down every ball and wears opponents down with 
his unflinching refusal to give in. What the dogged, determined and diminutive 
world No5 lacks in height and power, he more than makes up for in heart, 
agility and a willingness to run. And run. And run.

Sounds a bit like his opponent today, eh? (well, apart from the cupboard and 
height issues). In many ways, Djokovic and Ferrer are cut from the same cloth. 
They’re supreme athletes. They’re indefatigable. They’re happy to defend, 
defend, defend. But the crucial difference is that Djokovic has more weapons in 
his armoury to turn his relentless defence into ruthless attacks. Expect plenty 
of punishing rallies, but the world No1 and defending champion should finish 
more of them off. I’m going for a Djokovic win in three or four (lengthy) sets.

The players will be on court at: 8.30am GMT.

At stake is: a place in the Australian Open final.

Grab your snacks and drinks: we could be here a while.

Updated at 8.03am GMT
 