
Eddie Campbell <http://eddiecampbell.blogspot.co.uk/> and I live on opposite 
sides of the Earth: Eddie's in Brisbane, Australia, I'm in Chicago, US. We met 
in London, in December 2012, and we've been conducting a long-distance 
courtship ever since. We travel to various places – Columbus, Ohio, for the
Billy Ireland Cartoon Library <http://cartoons.osu.edu/>; Nottingham Playhouse, 
to watch a play byMichael Eaton for which Eddie drew the scenery 
<http://www.nottinghamplayhouse.co.uk/news/peter-duncan-and-norman-pace-star-in-charlie-peace/>
; Poulton-le-Fylde, Lancashire, so I could meet his parents; Chicago, so he 
could meet mine – and we have managed to collect a lot of experiences into our 
few intermittent months of physical proximity. We have an enormous, lavish 
email correspondence, full of daft jokes and musings about our respective 
writing and art projects. But we had not considered collaborating until the 
Guardian Weekend asked us to make a comic, to celebrate theComics Unmasked 
exhibit at the British Library 
<http://www.bl.uk/whatson/exhibitions/comics-unmasked/>.

Since we are both writers and both artists, it wasn't quite obvious to us at 
first how we should divide the work. We ended up working with one of my 
unfinished short stories and brainstorming an ending together over the phone. 
I wrote it as a short story, not a comics script, since I have no clue how to 
write a proper comics script. Eddie adapted the story, which was far too long, 
into a five-page format. I was very interested to see his process (we were, as 
usual, in our separate hemispheres, and the collaboration was done over the 
internet). He re-formed the story, reimagined it into images, panels, pages. He 
had to condense it without losing the plot, and of course much of the written 
description would be turned into images.

Eddie always begins with the lettering, so there was an early stage of panels 
and lettering but no images, which I found intriguing. He letters by hand, and 
already the pages looked like a true Eddie Campbell comic.

Eddie drew Ellen and I drew Charles, Ike and Ed. He was drawing with a bird's 
feather he'd cut into a quill. I drew with a roller ball pen. Eddie showed me 
the rough layouts and described what sort of Ikes, Eds and Charleses he needed, 
then I drew lots and lots of them, so he could choose. We wanted the characters 
to look like they belonged in the same world, so Eddie modified the line 
quality of my drawings in Photoshop; even so, it's easy to see the difference 
between Eddie's loose, painterly style and my tight, blackline drawing. We both 
sketched on paper, then scanned our drawings. Eddie then did all the rest of 
the drawing and colouring in Photoshop. I am not a Photoshop adept, so I 
learned a lot while watching him shape and layer all the elements that became 
the comic.

My favourite example of this is the monster. A few weeks after we finished 
working on the comic and turned it in, I visited Eddie in Brisbane. He showed 
me all the layers of the monster drawing, how it begins with a vague digital 
squiggle and adds up to a very solid, slightly melancholy monster. It's rather 
magical to be able to reveal process this way, something we cannot do with an 
actual painting.

My own comics passions are for Raw 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raw_%28magazine%29> and post-Raw independent 
comics and early comics such asLittle Nemo In Slumberland  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Nemo>and Krazy Kat 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krazy_Kat>. Eddie has done a lot of research and 
thinking about early American sports cartooning, and also about the 1950s 
romance comics, which he's blogged about extensively. It occurred to me as we 
were finishing this project that this story is a modern romance comic. It is a 
story with an impetuous heroine driven by her curiosity and an introverted hero 
driven by his need to have a couple of hours to himself every Thursday night to 
read a good book. Modern domestic life often seems to veer between the need for 
solitude and the need for intimacy; in our story, this impasse remains 
unresolved but love triumphs with a little help from mischief. Ellen and 
Charles are secure in their bliss through a happy misunderstanding.

So we managed to amuse ourselves while making this comic, we didn't have too 
many disagreements, and the end result was different from what either of us 
would make alone. We hope to try it again some time, but before that happens we 
are working on our own projects: Eddie is writing a book about the San 
Francisco sports cartoonists, and I am writing a sequel to my first novel. And 
email. We are writing lots of email.

• Audrey Niffenegger <http://audreyniffenegger.com/> is an artist and 
the author of the international bestsellerThe Time Traveler's Wife 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099464464>
 (MacAdam/Cage)
 