
There are famous book openings, and then, there are famous book openings:

"Aujourd'hui, maman est morte. Ou peut-être hier, je ne sais pas. J'ai reçu un 
télégramme de l'asile : <<Mere décédée. Enterement demain. Sentiments 
distingué.>> Cela ne veut rien dire. C'était peut-être hier."

(Or, if like me, you find the Penguin translation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241950050/the-outsider>
 a little easier: "My mother died today. Or maybe yesterday, I don't know. I 
received a telegram from the old people's home: 'Mother deceased. Funeral 
tomrrow. Very sincerely yours.' That doesn't mean anything. It might have been 
yesterday.")

This narrator's confusion about his mother's death (or, arguably, his lack of 
concern) set in train a new force in European literature, and a new way of 
examining the human conscience. It could even be argued that these few words 
changed the face of literary and popular culture. At the very least, they 
alerted the world to a new talent, Albert Camus:fag in mouth 
<http://libcom.org/files/images/library/the-famous-pose-of-albert-camus1.jpg>, 
slick of hair,surprisingly good in goal 
<http://25.media.tumblr.com/74U0uwqKZo814pkvefjCd7gGo1_500.jpg>, and still such 
an important part of the modern age that it's unsettling to realise that on 7 
November it will be 100 years since he was born.

We'll be focusing on the great Frenchman for the rest of this month in the 
Reading group and most particularly his classic first novel, L'Etranger, usually
but not always 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Stranger-Vintage-International-Albert-Camus/dp/0881032476/ref=sr_1_3?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1383733809&sr=1-3&keywords=the+stranger+albert+camus>
 translated into English as The Outsider. I almost wrote "classic 
existentialist" novel then – but, of course, that was a tag the author himself 
never accepted. We'll be able to discuss such questions, not to mention whether 
to see Camus as primarily a novelist or philosopher, or if that even matters, 
later in the month.

But for now, the thing is to get going through those wonderful words. I'll be 
reading through the new Penguin translation and I'm pleased to say that the 
translator Sandra Smith has agreed to answer a few questions from us later on 
in the month. I'm also pleased to say that we have 10 copies to give away to 
the first 10 UK people to post "I want a copy please", alongside a nice comment 
relevant to the book. And if you're lucky enough to get in early, don't forget 
to email Ginny.Hooker@guardian.co.uk as we can't track you down ourselves. Be 
nice to her too.
 