
Last Monday, as the prime minister rehearsed his Manchester conference speech, 
a story appeared in this newspaper that showed you who really runs this country 
– and how. It revealed that one of Britain’s largest companies,AstraZeneca, 
paid absolutely no corporation tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/04/how-astrazeneca-avoids-paying-uk-corporation-tax>
 here in both 2013 and 2014, despite racking up global profits in those years 
of £2.9bn.

Revealed: how AstraZeneca avoids paying UK corporation tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/04/how-astrazeneca-avoids-paying-uk-corporation-tax>
At first glance this sounded like an everyday tale of Mega-Business Making a 
Mockery of Our Tax Laws, to be filed alongside Google, Starbucks – or this 
weekend’s disclosure thatFacebook paid less to the exchequer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/22/facebook-uk-corporation-tax> 
last year than you probably did. But this story is bigger. It’s less about 
accountancy than where power lies in 21st-century Britain.

Astra’s tax maestro is called Ian Brimicombe, and he is more than well-known 
at the Treasury: he is a trusted adviser. Shortly after George Osborne took 
over as chancellor in 2010, his team began rewriting the rules on how big 
businesses are taxed. To help, the government appointed senior executives from 
some of Britain’s giant companies to a “liaison committee 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20140422132009/http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130129110402/http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/corporate_tax_reform.htm>
”, comprising Astra’s Brimicombe, representatives from Tesco, Santander, BP and 
others.

Although the group was not widely reported, there was no disguising its 
purpose. In the Treasury’s own blunt words, the businesspeople were providing 
“strategic oversight of the development of corporate tax policy”.

Corporation tax alone is one of the biggest earners for the government, worth 
over £50bn a year – and now companies with millions, even billions of pounds at 
stake were to be given direct say on how they should be taxed.

The Treasury set up working groups specifically to advise on taxing 
multinational business – fitted out with directors from 40 multinationals, all 
with extensive networks of offshore subsidiaries. In his bookThe Great Tax 
Robbery 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/chris-hill/great-tax-robbery-reviewed>
, the former tax inspector Richard Brooks records that a Vodafone 
representative was put on the group “deciding how to tax offshore financing of 
exactly the sort his company was running through Luxembourg and Switzerland for 
hundreds of millions of pounds in tax saving every year”.

The new regime for multinationals began in 2013. Within five months, 
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> had set up an 
unusual and intricate Dutch tax avoidance structure that would enable it to 
take full advantage of the new loopholes it had so helpfully advised on. To 
call this a conflict of interests is to miss the point – it’s far too brazen 
for that. Osborne’s Treasury blithely invited in some of the country’s biggest 
businesses and asked them to help design their own tax regimes. It’s like 
trawlermen asking fish to design their nets, or the Highways Agency allowing 
Jeremy Clarkson to set his own speed limit.

Ordinary taxpayers are having to tighten their belts – even while 
multinationals are being lavished with public cash

It might even be funny – if all these giveaways didn’t cost hundreds of 
millions amid a decade of belt-tightening. In their original assessment, 
Treasury officials calculated that the relaxation of the controlled foreign 
company ruleswould cost the public around £840m by this tax year 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0CCoQFjACahUKEwjT3c732bvIAhUKWhQKHVDrDhk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.uk%2Fgovernment%2Fuploads%2Fsystem%2Fuploads%2Fattachment_data%2Ffile%2F81304%2Fconsult_cfc_detailed_proposals.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFkauujHanjdly_X0DKBiYINv3m1Q&sig2=H9nhQzcWY5rhUOZLm_iE6g>
. That’s getting on for the equivalent of three brand-new, fully staffed 
hospitals. The year 2013 also marked the start of the most severe cuts to 
social security, including the introduction of thebedroom tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/bedroom-tax>. That particular cut has 
inflicted panic and upheaval on some of the poorest households in Britain, yet 
going by academic researchit raises less half the amount given away to 
multinationals 
<https://www.york.ac.uk/media/chp/documents/2013/Testing%20DWP%20Assessment%20of%20Impact%20of%20SRS%20Size%20Criterion%20on%20HB%20Costs%20University%20of%20York.pdf>
 by the new controlled foreign company rules.

I write this – but we’re not even allowed to know how much money we’re giving 
away to Astra,Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> and the rest. 
The Treasury’s initial assessment of the new rules came with a vital 
postscript: “The government would welcome evidence from business to help it 
refine the estimates of the elements of cost of the CFC reform.” Or, translated 
from the mandarin: this is guesswork.

When the tax-justice campaigner George Turner submitted a freedom of 
information request last month to find out how much the new system was costing 
taxpayers, Osborne’s department told him it would take too much time to find 
out. Turner persisted: what about the newpatent box tax break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/17/osborne-patent-box-tax-break-g20>
, originally set to cost the public £900m? No luck there either. So ordinary 
taxpayers may have kissed goodbye to £1.8bn in school places and Sure Start 
schemes – or they may have lost a lot more. We won’t be told what’s happened to 
our own money.

These tax breaks aren’t in aid of struggling small businesses or innovative 
new tech firms: they are going into the coffers of the biggest companies in 
Britain, with their platoons of lobbyists and tax advisers and their web of 
connections into Whitehall.

The year before the government brought in these new tax breaks, AstraZeneca 
was granted £5m to encourage it to expand its research site at Alderley Park in 
Cheshire –money that the local MP (one G Osborne of Tatton) played a key role 
in securing 
<http://www.alderleyedge.com/news/article/7269/astrazeneca-secures-5m-grant-for-potential-bioscience-park>
. Just five months later, thedrugs giant announced it was closing the centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/18/astrazeneca-cut-jobs-george-osborne-constituency>
, with the immediate loss of 550 jobs. From 2007-14, calculates York 
University’s Kevin Farnsworth, AstraZeneca took £91.3m in joint public funding 
from the government’sInnovate UK 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/innovate-uk> research group.

Britain is in the middle of a cold, austere decade. Ordinary taxpayers are 
having to tighten their belts – even while multinationals are being lavished 
with public cash. Osborne and Cameron tell tax-avoiding companies to “wake up 
and smell the coffee”, yet undercut the rest of Europe on taxes so as to lure 
Starbucks to put their offices in the UK. Tax avoidance is normally painted as 
big businesses finding and exploiting loopholes; but theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> are now allowing those 
same outfits to design their own loopholes.

“Upwards redistribution” is how the Berkeley academic Gabriel Zucman describes 
it: taking from ordinary taxpayers and giving to the very richest. Zucman is a 
sometime co-author with Thomas Piketty and his new bookThe Hidden Wealth of 
Nations <http://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/H/bo20159822.html>
 is set to do for tax havens what his colleague’s did for wealth inequality: 
define and popularise the problem.

“Britain is now engaged in the most extreme form of tax competition anywhere 
in Europe,” he told me this weekend. “It’s trying to become a tax haven.” This 
is what economic competence now looks like in the UK: an officially driven 
attempt to turn a developed country into a competitor to the Cayman Islands, 
with lavish handouts for those who can afford it, and cuts for those who can’t.
 