
White boys from poor families in deprived areas face the double disadvantage 
of poverty and geography that means they abandon education earlier than their 
peers in better-off areas, according to new research by Oxford University.

The findings, commissioned by the Sutton Trust <http://www.suttontrust.com/>, 
reveal the powerful and long-lasting influence of background in shaping 
educational outcomes and suggest that income is only partly responsible for the 
variations in levels of education by different groups.

The research found that just 29% of white working class boys from deprived 
neighbourhoods in England go on to take A-levels orAS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> in sixth form, compared with 
46% of white boys who came from the same economic background but lived in more 
affluent areas.

A similar pattern was seen among white girls from working class backgrounds, 
although the gap was not as wide, and confirmed the success of pupils from 
Indian and Bangladeshi ethnic backgrounds. Half of all ethnic Indian pupils 
took three or moreA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, as 
did 33% of those from Bangladeshi backgrounds.

Sir Peter Lampl, founder and chair of the Sutton Trust, said the figures 
showed the government’s spending review later this month needed to address 
underachievement within England’s poorest communities.

“It is shocking that so few white working class boys go on to take AS or 
A-levels. We must redouble our efforts to address these attainment gaps, and 
ensure that every pupil, regardless of family income, gender or ethnicity, has 
the chance to succeed,” he said.

Bright children from disadvantaged backgrounds fall by the wayside at GCSE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/03/bright-children-disadvantaged-backgrounds-missing-talent-fail-achieve-gcse>
Pam Sammons, professor of education at Oxford 
<http://www.education.ox.ac.uk/about-us/directory/professor-pam-sammons/> and 
one of the report’s authors, said: “Disadvantaged students, especially white UK 
boys, have poorer outcomes, and living in a poor neighbourhood compounds this.

“Unfortunately, although the pupil premium helps schools by providing extra 
resources for poor students, local authorities serving the poorest communities 
have been hardest hit by budget cuts during the last five years.”

The study followed 3,000 pupils as part of the Effective Pre-School, Primary 
and Secondary Education longitudinal project 
<http://www.ioe.ac.uk/research/153.html> running since the 1990s, and found 
that gender, ethnicity, location and economic status were likely to determine 
which groups continued on in education.

It found that white students were less likely to progress on to taking AS or 
A-levels than students from other ethnic groups, while pupils living in poor or 
deprived areas were also less likely to do the same. And while boys were less 
likely than girls to go on to take A-levels, white boys from deprived 
backgrounds showed some of the lowest levels of progression overall.

“Taken together, these results again point to the powerful influence of 
different aspects of student background in shaping educational outcomes, 
particularly for 17 and 18-year-olds at A-level,” the report noted.

“The findings show that a range of factors remained important. They confirm 
that there is no ‘level playing field’ and that differences that emerged early 
in children’s lives continue to affect outcomes and life chances into 
adolescence.”

The lower proportion of poor white boys taking qualifications such as A-levels 
means they are less likely to go on to higher education, restricting their 
access to professional or graduate-level employment.

Recent research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8042> showed the proportion of white boys 
admitted to university was lower than almost all other ethnic groups in England.

Schools need to avoid 'selection by estate agent', says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/18/schools-need-to-avoid-selection-by-estate-agent-says-report>
“The differences in higher education participation between pupils from 
different ethnic groups are staggering,” said Claire Crawford, an academic at 
Warwick University and an author of the IFS research.

“We were particularly surprised to find that ethnic minority groups which have 
relatively low school attainment, such as those of black Caribbean, Pakistani 
or Bangladeshi ethnic origin, are, on average, more likely to continue into 
higher education than white British pupils.”

The Oxford research noted that while two-thirds of all girls took AS, A-levels 
or another qualifications, only 55% of all boys did the same.

“Working class underachievement is a scandal. Recent attention has been 
focused on the achievement of working class boys; this report highlights this 
is an issue for girls too,” said Becky Francis, professor of education at 
King’s College London.

A spokesman for the Department for Education said: “Too many young people 
still aren’t being given a fair shot to succeed because of where they live, 
which is why our education reforms are focused on delivering educational 
excellence everywhere.

“We are ensuring schools are fairly funded and have already maintained per 
pupil funding and provided an extra £390m to the least fairly funded areas. 
Over the coming months we will be looking at what can be done to ensure that 
all local areas are funded justly.”
 