
The NUS president, Aaron Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, has been accused of 
misrepresenting a new policy adopted by his own union in support of 
Palestinians after he warned it could lead to a backlash against Jewish 
students.

The policy passed by the NUS national executive council 
<http://www.nus.org.uk/en/about-nus/Who-We-Are/Structure/> demands "freedom for 
Palestine" and an end to the siege of Gaza, but Porter said it could have 
repercussions for Jewish students at UK universities.

"NUS has always taken a measured and balanced approach to the complex issues 
surrounding the Middle East and I believe changing that is damaging to all 
involved," Porter said.

"NUS has worked closely with the Union of Jewish Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> to tackle hate speech on 
campus and I am proud of that work.

"Jewish students must feel able to participate freely in our movement and I 
will do all I can to persuade the NUS NEC to drop a policy which is seen as 
anti-Israel and to further co-operation on campuses."

The policy means the NUS will send a delegation on future convoys to the Gaza 
strip, possibly on next month's freedom flotilla, and build links with students 
at the Islamic University ofGaza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> and 
other educational institutions.

Kanja Sesay, the NUS black students' officer, voted for the motion and said 
the NUS president's criticism was misguided. "Supporting the right to education 
for Palestinians is not hate speech," he said.

"Universities, colleges and schools were destroyed by Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> during the war on Gaza and the 
ongoing siege has meant the damage cannot be repaired because of a lack of 
building materials in Gaza ... NUS is right to commit to positive action to 
support Palestinian human rights, which are continually violated."

Fiona Edwards, student officer for the Palestine Solidarity Campaign, which 
helped to draft the motion, said it contained "nothing ... which advocates any 
oppression or discrimination against any group of people".

Dan Sheldon of the Union of Jewish Students (UJS) said his group supported 
legitimate debate on Israel-Palestine but Jewish students had been "spat at, 
intimidated and called Nazis".

"We welcome Aaron's statement and hope, for the sake of our students, that NUS 
will listen to its own students and eschew this outdated brand of gesture 
politics," he said.

The UJS described the Islamic University of Gaza, which was bombed during the 
2009 Israeli invasion of Gaza, as a "Hamas stronghold" 
<http://www.ujs.org.uk/news/664/nus-slammed-for-divisive-undemocratic-anti-israel-policy/>
. The Israeli army has claimed it has been used for the development and storage 
of weapons but theUN fact-finding mission on the Gaza conflict found no 
evidence it was being used for military purposes 
<http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/specialsession/9/FactFindingMission.htm>
.

â€¢ This article was amended on 28 May 2011 to clarify the description of the 
Islamic University of Gaza in the final paragraph
 