
“The Armenian genocide is not an allegation, a personal opinion or a point of 
view, but rather a widely documented fact supported by an overwhelming body of 
historical evidence,”said a US senator named Barack Obama in 2008 
<http://www.anca.org/press_releases/press_releases.php?prid=1365>, before he 
sought to be elected to the highest office in the land.

He was right then. He is so very wrong now.

On 24 April 1915, near the end of the Ottoman empire, more than 200 Armenian 
intellectuals in Istanbul, most of whom were in government custody, were 
killed. More than a million of their kin were killed in the following year as 
part of a national program designed to quite literally decimate the Armenian 
populace of the crumbling empire.

In 2008, Obama was unequivocal about his plans to acknowledge that history: 
“As presidentI will recognize 
<https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/04/21/despite-campaign-pledge-obama-wont-call-1915-armenian-killings-genocide/>
 the Armenian genocide.” In the ensuing 7 years,he has yet to do so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/22/barack-obama-will-not-label-1915-massacre-of-armenians-a-genocide>
. What irks isn’t just that he broke a campaign promise – politicians do that 
all the time – but that he would refuse to acknowledge historical facts he’s 
already admitted to knowing.

The reason for his studied ignorance is entirely too obvious: Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> is a valuable NATO ally, and has 
been (sometimes) helpful in the fight against the Islamic State (Isis). Given 
Turkey’s attacks on the Pope and the European Union for recognizing the 
genocide, Obama is seeking to avoid a tiff with another ally.

The Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/22/barack-obama-will-not-label-1915-massacre-of-armenians-a-genocide>
 that the fight against Isis and even the “safety of US diplomats and troops in 
Turkey,” entered into the administration’s decision to continue the policy of 
not saying “the g-word”.

The Turkish government, however, is in the wrong – and the US government need 
not and should not remain complicit in denying the truth of the Armenians’ 
history.

The 1949 United Nations Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocidedefines genocide as 
<http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/pdf/osapg_analysis_framework.pdf>:

any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in 
part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such: killing members 
of the group; causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group; 
deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring 
about its physical destruction in whole or in part; imposing measures intended 
to prevent births within the group; [and] forcibly transferring children of the 
group to another group.

That what happened to Armenians in Turkey fits this description is impossible 
to deny – and yet the Turkish government does so unabashedly,lashing out 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/turkeys-erdogan-condemns-eu-pope-francis-over-armenian-genocide-label-1429101392>
 at anyone who defies their ahistoricism to acknowledge what scholars and 
people of conscience alike – not to mention Armenians themselves – rightfully 
call the Armenian genocide. The Turkish overreaction serves a purpose: to 
intimidate those who would dare to do nothing more than speak a historical 
truth.

Speaking to Foreign Policy 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/04/21/despite-campaign-pledge-obama-wont-call-1915-armenian-killings-genocide/>
, for instance, one Congressional aide nicely encapsulated the Obama 
administration’s hesitance to call what happened in Armenia “genocide” with a 
rhetorical question: “Is this the time to kick Turkey in the balls given 
everything that’s going on in the region?”

But there will never be a right time to enrage Turkey and it’s not worth it to 
continue to placate their denialism: the fight against terrorism will go on 
despite Turkey’s wounded pride. Turkey – unlike Libya, where post-revolutionary 
chaos led to a deadly attack on American diplomats – has sophisticated and 
heavy-handed security forces, so any failure to help protect US diplomats and 
troops there would be an abdication of its position as an ally.

There’s also a precedent for taking the risk that Turkey might withdraw its 
cooperation in the region in a fit of diplomatic pique: Iran. Iranian leaders’ 
ugly history of Holocaust denial reared its head in 2014 amid the tense and 
difficult nuclear negotiations: Islamic Republic’s Supreme Leader chose that 
moment totweet <https://twitter.com/khamenei_ir/status/446928689943420928>, 
“#Holocaust is an event whose reality is uncertain and if it has happened, it’s 
uncertain how it has happened.”

The Obama administration responded forcefully: a State Department spokesperson 
called the statements “inflammatory 
<http://www.jta.org/2014/03/27/news-opinion/united-states/obama-administration-condemns-khamenei-holocaust-denial>
”, and adding, “They’re, quite frankly, abhorrent. And it’s insulting to the 
millions of people who died in the Holocaust” – in keeping with Obama’scomments 
in 2012 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/01/27/statement-president-international-holocaust-remembrance-day>
 that “we pledge to speak truth to those who deny the Holocaust.”

Yet the nuclear talks continued apace.

What’s so troubling about Obama’s failure to acknowledge the Armenian genocide 
is that the pattern of denialism seen with the Holocaust is the same: some deny 
it outright; some question the specifics, such as the death toll; and other 
simply say more research is needed (though the Turks have blocked access to the 
full Ottoman archives). But there has been historical research aplenty – and
there are first person accounts from Americans in the region at the time 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/2015/04/22/what-these-four-americans-saw-happening-to-armenians-100-years-ago-sounds-like-genocide/>
 – so failing to acknowledge the facts is to acquiesce to the deniers’ position.

“State-sponsored denial is not a void, a simple absence of truth; it is a 
wounding instrument,” Raffi Khatchadourianwrote this year in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/01/05/century-silence>, recalling his 
own family’s ordeal amid the genocide. Obama, and with him the United States, 
now wields that instrument, and our own hands are working in concert with the 
denialists of the Turkish government.
In his cowardice, Obama has become complicit in a sort of wounding far more 
grave than Turkish pride: that of the Armenians whose lore includes watching 
their forebears forcibly deported and summarily executed, their bodies deposed 
in mass graves or floated down rivers into oblivion.

Just as failing to forcefully rebut Holocaust denial is to disrespect the 
memories of those Jews and others who perished, so is failing to rebut the 
Armenian genocide denial an affront to the memories of the Armenians who died 
at Ottoman hands. The President should speak truth toArmenian genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide> deniers just as he does 
Holocaust deniers – whomever they may be.

 * The first paragraph of this article was corrected on 24 April 2015 to 
reflect that Senator Barack Obama condemned the Armenian genocide in those 
words in 2008.
 