
The US’s longest war will wind down even more slowly than promised after 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> confirmed 
another delay in the withdrawal timetable for troops in Afghanistan.


“We are moving the drawdown pace over to the right,” he said in a press 
conference with the Afghan president,Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, who had flown to Washington 
to request additional support in dealing with continued insurgent attacks in 
the country.

The White House had previously pledged to reduce the remaining 9,800 troops in 
the country to 5,500-by the end of 2015 – a force it insists is no longer 
involved in a “combat role”.

After the widely expected announcement on Tuesday, it will now maintain this 
higher level for rest of this year and also is re-evaluating how fast it will 
bring this down to a residual 1,000-strong “embassy protection” force envisaged 
when Obama leaves the White House.

Though down from a peak of 100,000 four years ago, the decision to keep double 
the number of anticipated troops in the country this year is a far cry froma 
2010 assurance by Vice-President Joe Biden 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/video/meet-the-press/40739445#40739445> that the US 
would be gone by 2014 “come hell or high water”.

But it is consistent with a pattern of slipping targets as security has 
remained elusive and the White House fears a repeat of its experience in Iraq, 
where it has been forced to redeploy troops despite the promised full 
withdrawal which helped first get Obama elected.

Earlier on Tuesday in Afghanistan, gunmen killed 13 passengers travelling on a 
bus heading toward Kandahar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/24/gunmen-kill-13-bus-passengers-in-afghanistan>
, once a stronghold of the Taliban.

Ghani – who, unlike his predecessor Hamid Karzai, arrived at the White House 
in a suit and repeatedly thanked his hosts for their “support” – argued that 
the US continued to have a strong interest in maintaining security.

“Tragedy brought us together, but interests now unite us,” he said, arguing 
that theAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> was on the 
“frontline” of protecting the US.

“Fortresses cannot be built around countries and continents; we live in a 
connected world and our security rests together,” added Ghani, who began the 
press conference by thanking American taxpayers.

Afghan president launches charm offensive to win over Washington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/afghan-president-ahraf-ghani-launches-charm-offensive-washington>
Obama stressed the lower casualty rate since US troops moved toward supporting 
Afghan forces rather than engaging directly in combat.

“It has been over 90 days since two Americans were killed in Afghanistan,” he 
said. “As we have drawn down, they have stood up and they are fighting.”

Ghani, who was once mistakenly referred to as Karzai by Obama during the 
hourlong press conference, also insisted that an “Afghan-led and Afghan-owned 
peace process” would eventually bring peace with the Taliban.

“We have the capacity to speak truth to terror,” he said. “They don’t speak 
for Islam; we do.”
 