
You want to know why Aretha is the indisputable Queen of Soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/soul>? Watch this. You want to know why 
hacks like me send her fan mail by the week pleading for an interview, knowing 
there is sod-all hope, but not resenting her one smidge? Watch this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5RIgeu-6Jcs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5RIgeu-6Jcs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5RIgeu-6Jcs&media=>
Aretha is performing at the 38th Annual Kennedy Center Honors 
<http://www.kennedy-center.org/programs/specialevents/honors/>, held on 6 
December in Washington and broadcast on CBS on Tuesday night. It wasn’t even 
Aretha’s night. Oh no. This ceremony was to award, among others,Rita Moreno 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001549/reference>, George Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> and Carole King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/06/natural-woman-carole-king-review>
. Then up steps Aretha to sing the King/Goffin/Wexler 1967 classic (You Make Me 
Feel Like) A Natural Woman.

Look at King, open-mouthed in shock and awe (the right kind of shock and awe) 
– and this is before Aretha’s even opened hers. Everything about Aretha is 
astonishing – the range, depth, control in her voice, the phrasing, the 
passion, the playing, the floor-length fur, the sparkling clutch purse. The 
more Aretha sings, the harder it is to believe that King is not going to die 
and go to heaven. President Obama is wiping away tears before Aretha’s even 
done with the first verse. Aretha is 73, looks wonderful, and might just be 
singing better than ever.
 President Obama wipes away a tear as Aretha Franklin sings. Photograph: CBS 
To top everything, she throws the mink to the ground with supreme elan. Nobody 
chucks a fur like Aretha. This is not the performance of the year, it’s the 
performance of the millennium. Long live the Queen.
 