
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> today 
attempted to heal a rift between the technology community and the government, 
saying the two sides must engage constructively to build technologies that 
balance individual privacy with the government’s obligation to keep people safe.

Addressing a small and enthusiastic audience at the SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> festival, Obama told the 2,400 
festival-goers, technologists, local politicians and media that the American 
constitution and bill of rights are a system designed to protect the public 
from government overreach.

He said he could not directly comment on the battle between Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> and the FBI.

“I am way on the civil liberties side of this thing. I anguish a lot over the 
decisions we make to keep this country safe and do not want to overthrow the 
values that made our country safe simply for expediency,” Obama said. “But if 
everybody goes to their respective corners and says ‘it’s either perfect 
encryption or a big Orwellian world’, then after something bad happens politics 
will swing into action and it will become sloppy and rushed through Congress in 
ways that are not thought through.”

Obama said the government had engaged the tech community “aggressively” over 
the issue and concluded: “Fetishising our phones above every other value ... 
this notion that our data is different and can be walled off I think is 
incorrect.”

He also claimed that Edward Snowden’s revelations had “vastly overstated” the 
dangers of spying, insisting that US intelligence agencies are “scrupulous” and 
that some of the excesses of agencies highlighted by Snowden have been fixed.

“We are in a moment in history when technology, globalization and our economy 
are changing so fast, and this gathering, SXSW, brings together people who are 
at the cutting edge.

“Those changes offer us enormous opportunities but are also very disruptive 
and unsettling – they empower individuals to do things they could never dream 
before, but they also allow folks who are very dangerous to spread dangerous 
messages.”

Obama talked more broadly about the role of technology in government, speaking 
at length about community engagement including affordable internet access and 
online voting systems. “It is easier to order a pizza … than it is to exercise 
the single most important task in a democracy – to select who is to represent 
you in government.” The tech industry has a role to play in stepping up to 
solve that challenge, he said.

Government has to tackle harder problems than the private sector, Obama said, 
whether education, terrorism or homelessness. “You’re never going to get 100% 
perfect satisfaction the way you get the perfect latte. When a government does 
great things we take it for granted. … I could find the fiercest libertarian in 
the room but he’d be checking the weather on his phone thanks to some 
government satellite. But that’s not reported as ‘government’.

“If there are those who despise government oftentimes it’s because the absence 
of government allows them to pollute, or keep as much money as they can, or not 
answer consumers who are complaining about their practices.”

That the website of his administration’s Affordable Care Act didn’t work was 
“a little embarrassing for me”, Obama conceded. “I was the cool early adapter 
president, I ran my entire campaign on having cool technology and social 
media.” He said he called in a “Swat team” from Silicon Valley andAustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> to fix it but blamed a government 
procurement system designed for buying pencils, boots and furniture that 
doesn’t work so well for software.

Obama launched the Educate to Innovate 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/education/k-12/educate-innovate> project in 
2009, which combined government initiatives with private sector projects and 
NGOs to improve science, maths and engineering education, especially among 
minority children. “If we join forces with the private sector there’s no 
problem that isn’t solveable. It’s not enough to focus on the next big thing. 
It’s how do we harness the next big thing to make sure that everybody in the 
country has an opportunity.”

One of the world’s most influential arts festivals, SXSW has become one of the 
defining events for Austin, the state capital of Texas. Sometimes derided as 
San Francisco South, the city has built a reputation as a liberal bastion and 
centre for counter-culture in what is otherwise a staunchly conservative state.

Texas led 26 other Republican-dominated states in opposing Obama’s November 
2015 executive order on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/20/obama-plan-shield-five-million-undocumented-migrants-deportation-speech>
, which would enable 5 million undocumented migrants to work legally.

Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and other Silicon Valley leaders recently 
supported Obama’s efforts on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/08/mark-zuckerberg-joins-tech-bosses-in-supporting-obama-on-immigration>
, which resonated with an industry reliant on recruiting and often importing 
the world’s best engineering talent.

But most recently, the technology world has been focused on a battle between 
Apple and theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>, which is using a 
federal court to try to force the company to help it access the iPhone of one 
of the San Bernardino shooters.

The technology industry has almost unanimously backed Apple, even as the two 
sides have become increasingly acrimonious.

Obama’s appearance at the SXSW festival in Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> is a presidential first. More than 
15,000 SXSW ticket-holders applied to a lottery to see the president, with 
2,000 picked at random including Wesley Faulkner from the startup Namecheap, 
who turned up dressed as Waldo of Where’s Waldo.

“He’s the last cool president,” he said. “Look at who’s running for president 
on the Democrat and Republican side – I don’t think I’d want to hang out with 
any of them. Obama’s relatable. He’s on the same level.”
 