
Obama is on a roll. He arrived in east Africa on the back of a ruling 
upholding his healthcare plan, endorsement of his Pacific trade agreement, a
nuclear deal with Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/23/obama-team-attempts-to-persuade-us-lawmakers-to-endorse-iran-nuclear-deal>
, the reopening of diplomatic relations with Cuba, andstirring eulogy in 
Charleston <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RK7tYOVd0Hs>. He disembarked Air 
Force One in Nairobi with a spring in his step and proceeded to confidently 
skewer homophobia, misogyny, corruption and dictatorship.

Obama's message of hope rings true in call for Africa to flourish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/barack-obama-message-hope-kenya-africa-speech>
Yet few of the usual reactionary voices were raised to accuse him of being a 
“western neocolonial” meddling in traditions and cultures he didn’t understand. 
Presumably his African heritage was an important deflector shield. But it’s all 
downhill from here: the continent can be forgiven for mustering less enthusiasm 
for president Hillary Clinton, Jeb Bush or... Donald Trump.

An open-top bus tour was never going to happen

Major roads in Nairobi were closed and deserted 
<http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/lifestyle/article/2000170297/photo-the-deserted-nairobi-streets-ahead-of-obama-s-arrival>
, which spoiled the atmosphere a bit, while there was even less interaction 
with the public in Ethiopia.The Washington Post reported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/on-his-trip-to-east-africa-obama-confronts-new-gains-old-stalemates/2015/07/28/7c6b98fd-a631-4e99-a144-bd0f1ecef743_story.html?postshare=9861438171017112>
: “The spectre of terrorism had made preparing for this trip particularly 
complicated for the White House. A law enforcement official familiar with 
Secret Service security and logistics planning said the visit had been the most 
challenging since George W Bush went to Islamabad in 2006, based on the level 
of terrorist activity and lack of infrastructure in the region.”

‘Africa rising’ is now conventional wisdom

Obama noted that “Africa is on the move” more than once. Politicians and 
entrepreneurs love to point out thatthe old stereotypes of war, famine and 
hopelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa-blog/2012/oct/01/africa-complex-continent-blog>
 have been replaced by some of the fastest growing economies in the world, as 
if they are the first to discover it. In fact so many people have said this so 
often, is there anyone left who still doubts it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438252824414%2Fd769cab1-bba0-4eb1-b46b-a4d25813da06-2060x1290.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20in%20Africa%3A%2012%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20historic%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20in%20Africa%3A%2012%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20historic%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438252824414%2Fd769cab1-bba0-4eb1-b46b-a4d25813da06-2060x1290.jpeg>
 Motorbikers celebrate Obama’s visit in Kisumu. Photograph: STR/AP 
Obama is a master of analogy

The president compared homophobia in Africa with racism in America, and his 
own respect for presidential term limits withAfrican leaders who won’t let go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/28/barack-obama-africas-presidents-for-life-are-a-risk-to-its-democratic-progress>
 (the football fans’ chant would be “Are you watching, Paul Kagame?”).

A less successful use of this rhetorical device was his drawing of a parallel 
between corruption in Kenya and corruption in the Chicago of Al Capone, since 
it implied that countries move in a linear progression andKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> trails America by nearly a century.


‘Don’t mention the gays’ is a bad tactic

Before Obama’s visit, a leading activist said he hoped there would be no 
mention of homophobia, since it would cause a firestorm engulfing all other 
subjects. But when a journalist raised the issue at a press conference,Obama 
gave an “unequivocal” answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/barack-obama-african-states-abandon-anti-gay-discrimination>
 as Kenya’s Uhuru Kenyatta, no fan of gay rights, was forced to take the 
medicine – a fine piece of political theatre. Such is Obama’s popularity in 
Kenya that there was relatively little media backlash against him, suggesting 
that by making gay rights a talking point, and perhaps changing a few minds, 
his directness did more good than harm.

Fine line between shaking hands, and staying away

Obama's plan to visit Ethiopia criticised as 'gift' for repressive government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/24/obama-ethiopia-online-outcry-twitter>
Analysts such as Jeffrey Smith 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/07/08/obama-should-stay-away-from-ethiopia/> 
warned that by setting foot in Ethiopia, Obamawould confer legitimacy on an 
authoritarian regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/24/obama-ethiopia-online-outcry-twitter>
 that won 100% of seats at the last election. The president made things worse 
with his with only significant gaffe of the trip,twice describing the 
government as “democratically elected” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/obama-urges-ethiopia-end-crackdown-political-press-freedom>
.

Yet some here welcomed the chance to see prime minister Hailemariam Desalegn 
put on the spot. For its part, the White House defended the principle of 
engagement, pointing out that no one questions visits to China or Russia, 
despite their dubious records. Meanwhile Obama shook hands with Kenyan deputy 
presidentWilliam Ruto, who still faces trial at the international criminal court
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/politics/the-case-against-kenyas-powerful-vicepresident-william-ruto-that-the-icc-must-win-to-vindicate-itself-10046724.html>
, yet refused to invite Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe to the African Union despite 
him being its current chairman. It’s complicated.


China is an American rival in Africa

While White House officials gave the standard line – “We welcome China in 
Africa” – Nils Tcheyan, director of government relations for General Electric 
in Africa,told the same press briefing 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/07/26/press-briefing-press-secretary-josh-earnest-and-deputy-national-security>
: “I mean, we can talk about China as a competitor, and there’s no doubt about 
it, they are a competitor.”

Steve Case, chief executive of investment firm Revolution, offered this take: 
“I think the first wave of investment inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> was around infrastructure. I think 
the next wave, which is now just breaking, is around innovation. And that where 
I think the United States is particularly advantaged.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438246676219%2Fe7b46a43-bbdd-4920-8a8c-0655caf092c7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20in%20Africa%3A%2012%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20historic%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20in%20Africa%3A%2012%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20historic%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438246676219%2Fe7b46a43-bbdd-4920-8a8c-0655caf092c7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A mural of President Barack Obama by the Kenyan graffiti artist Bankslave at 
the GoDown Arts Centre in Nairobi, Kenya. Photograph: Ben Curtis/AP 
Some in Africa remain disappointed

One former African president described the trip as “too little too late”, 
suggesting that Obama has more stylebut less substance on the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/obama-kenya-africa-policy-symbolic>
 than his white predecessor. The president was visibly stung by doubters of his 
signaturePower Africa <http://www.usaid.gov/powerafrica> initiative, a 
public-private partnership that aims to add 30,000 megawatts to serve 60m 
households and businesses.

Obama parried: “This isn’t a beauty contest between presidents; this is the US 
government and whatever the policies that need to be put in place in order for 
us to help our partner countries. I think president George W Bush’sPepfar 
<http://www.pepfar.gov/> initiative [to combat HIV/Aids] was as significant an 
achievement internationally as anything that we’ve done over the last several 
decades. It saved millions of lives.”

The African Union’s golden opportunity

The continental body has been described as Muammar Gaddafi’s plaything and a 
pointless talking shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jan/06/african-union-missing-action-conflicts-mali-south-sudan>
 that makes even the European Union look dynamic. Obama was the first US 
president to address it, seemingly untroubled that its headquarters are a $200m 
gift from China, and giving it unprecedented prestige and exposure. The African 
Union will never have a better chance to assert itself, starting (hopefully) 
with a prompter-than-usual response to the next major crisis or conflict.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438246763528%2F229b2390-d7e2-4b3d-9fbb-bf57e2d51f1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20in%20Africa%3A%2012%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20historic%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20in%20Africa%3A%2012%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20historic%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fobama-in-africa-12-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438246763528%2F229b2390-d7e2-4b3d-9fbb-bf57e2d51f1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 President Barack Obama touches a fossilised vertebra of Lucy, an early human, 
before a State Dinner in Obama’s honour at the National Palace in Addis Ababa. 
Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
He touched Lucy

Obama was not only allowed up close to view Lucy – the 3.2 million-year-old 
skeleton of the “grandmother of humanity” –but to touch it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/obama-ethiopia-lucy-fossil>. 
Journalists present noticed that the fossil was kept in an old box with 
captions that looked like they’d been typed out in the 1970s – “This would 
never happen at the Smithsonian”.


Families are complicated for everyone

Western media references to Obama’s “half-sister” Auma and “step-grandmother” 
Sarah prompted debate on Twitter, with some arguing that in Africa there are no 
such terms, only “sister” and “grandmother”. In Nairobi, Obamahad dinner with 
three dozen relatives 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/07/barack-obama-family-dinner-trip-nairobi-kenya-120591.html>
, some of whom he had never met before: “In these extended families, there are 
cousins and uncles and aunties that show up that you didn’t know existed but 
you’re always happy to meet,” he said. He also said he spent part of the meal 
“begging for forgiveness” that his schedule does not allow him to spend more 
time with them.


Obama really doesn’t need to worry about getting elected again

Fox News and the so-called “birther” movement would have had a field day if 
Obama had visited Kenya before the 2012 presidential election, gaining a whole 
new round of ammunition to question his “Americanness”. A giant billboard in 
downtown Nairobi proclaimed, “Welcome Home President Obama”, he began each 
speech with a local phrase andtold one adoring crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/26/barack-obama-condemns-tradition-women-second-class-citizens-nairobi>
: “I’m the first Kenyan-American to be president of the United States.”

White House staff reckon this was his last visit to the continent as 
president, but the melody lingers on. “I’ll be back,” he said, not deliberately 
referencing The Terminator. “The next time I’m back I may not be wearing a 
suit.”
 