
The OECD's latest findings 
<http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/education/oecd-skills-outlook-2013_9789264204256-en#page27>
 on adult skills – which place the UK near the bottom of a global league table 
of young adult education – have been challenged on methodological grounds. But 
how many people know what that polysyllabic mouthful means, let alone can 
assess the sampling techniques used in comparing literacy and numeracy across 
different countries?

The think tank says it looked at "key information processing competencies". An 
audience of policymakers knows what that means. But would low-skill adults have 
made more sense of it had theOECD <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> 
talked about "knowing how to read, write and handle IT"?

Language matters, but it's often seen as a problem of those who don't speak 
it. Deficiency in the skills needed to get and keep jobs, fill in forms and 
generally deal with the world can be dealt with as a question of supply.

In other countries schools do a better job of equipping 18-year-olds with 
know-how, so they can use computers, understand texts and so on. Other 
countries make more of an effort to train employees and provide opportunities 
for older people to refresh their competences. That's all important, and the 
OECD report will stimulate debate about performance in England and Northern 
Ireland (it did not cover Wales and Scotland) – including debate about our 
weird administrative division between "education" and "skills". A few more 
conversations between education secretary Michael Gove and business secretary 
Vince Cable, and their respective shadows, could be in order.

Yet adult skills and competence are also a matter of demand. It's how you 
speak as well as your capacity to understand what's said. How intelligible are 
public services when they speak to the public – or to their staff, some of whom 
(the OECD figures imply) will possess only low levels of literacy and numeracy?

Francis Maude and many others inside and outside of government call for a 
"transformation" in how public services are delivered, based on IT; the digital 
revolution is a cliché. All that does not just assume people have decent access 
to the web but that they understand the online instructions and texts with 
which they are presented. At least 10% of adults in England and Northern 
Ireland don't have that basic comprehension and the ability of a further 30% to 
handle common online instructions and commands is far from assured.

Public managers ought to draw two conclusions. One is that in providing 
universal services they must never assume a single platform will reach the 
intended population. That means "double running" of communications and 
maintaining alternatives to the web, and that costs money.

The second is about content. All public bodies ought constantly to interrogate 
their paperwork and their websites for intelligibility by a public that may 
only have basic levels of literacy and numeracy, and their "style guides" ought 
to encompass much more than debates about split infinitives such as the one at 
the start of this sentence. The Guardian's use-of-language guruDavid Marsh 
urges us to lighten up on formal rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/sep/30/10-grammar-rules-you-can-forget>
. The object is getting a message over inside a context and any set of 
prescriptions must bend in that direction.

The government itself is having a go, producing a guide to written content 
<https://www.gov.uk/designprinciples/styleguide> on the gov.uk website and 
sensibly dividing communications between the system (where acronyms and 
shortcuts play to common knowledge within a community) and "mainstream" 
messages to citizens, taxpayers, companies and the public. Much of it is good 
sense – be brisk, specific and employ language people use. Connoisseurs of 
public sector speak will warm to its proscription of "deliver" (that's what you 
do with pizzas not priorities), facilitate, impact and progress used as verbs.

The guide only takes you so far, however. Some government is complicated – 
think of tax credits or rural payments. Some rests on esoteric knowledge: what 
doctors and software designers do, for example. Communicating difficult 
concepts and technical procedures is itself hard, time-consuming and may be 
expensive.

But government really has no choice. It must conduct a permanent exercise in 
combing through its language, visual signals, websites and messages. The 
alternative is misunderstanding and, as the OECD material shows, further 
exclusion of people already being pushed to the margins of the jobs market and 
into civic non-participation.

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

To get our articles on policy and leadership direct to your inbox, sign up to 
the Guardian Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> now. 

Looking for your next role? See our Guardian jobs site 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/> for senior executive jobs in government and 
politics 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>. 

• For the latest on public services leadership, follow us: @Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 