
There's a tiny corner in Chiswick, west London, where the soil has been turned 
for hundreds if not thousands of years. I have been growing food there for a 
mere half-decade, and until reading Caroline Foley's history of allotments, the 
questions that preoccupied me were rather basic. Why do I only have three 
carrots when I sowed enough seed to relieve the siege of Leningrad? Why does 
comfrey smell like halitosis when you soak it in water? Do all the other plot 
holders think it'stheir robin? How many smokes could you get out of a clay pipe?

For the most part, I don't ask myself questions at all. For me, working the 
allotment is to be abstracted from the usual laws of daily life, fenced off 
from its (OK, my) neurotic demands and intricate delusions, suspended in a 
benevolent miasma of non-thought. The spade goes in and the robin, hearing the 
call to worms, appears soundlessly and waits for the catch of the day to be 
brought to the surface. A rackety bee wobbles over a flower that is also 
wobbling in the breeze, and by some complex agreement the two wobbles cancel 
each other out and the bee is able to land. These tiny events repeat themselves 
until time seems gently to dissolve into whatYogi Berra 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yogi_Berra> called "deja vu all over again".

The allotment abuts a cemetery (we make compost before we become it), and 
sometimes, when my fork turns up a button or knot of rotting twine, I wonder 
about the people who have preceded me in nursing these few rods of earth. To 
dig an allotment is to address yourself, in a very literal way, to vertical 
history, and I'm astonished to discover from local records that this small 
parcel of land near a bend in the Thames has been cultivated without 
interruption since Roman times. No permanent building has ever sat on this soil 
(today's garden sheds, most of them tilting into the abyss, don't count). Its 
yields have included wheat, oats, "exceptionally fine barley", vegetables and 
fruit, perhaps even pineapples (I'm romanticising, but they were certainly 
being grown in a nearby nursery by 1740).

In the 11th century these few hectares were part of a large demesne held by 
the dean and chapter of St Paul's Cathedral, whose serfs and tenants –villeins 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Villein_%28feudal%29>, bordars 
<http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/bordar> and cotters – ploughed, sowed, harrowed, 
mowed, weeded, sheared and carted so that they could surrender the 
larger portion of the fruit of their labours in taxes or rates to the canons. 
The land continued to be worked, with successive transfers of ownership, for 
almost a thousand years, until in 1923 it was purchased from the  Duke 
of Devonshire by the council and designated as an allotment, subsequently 
gaining statutory protection under the Allotments Act of 1925.

As Foley's thorough, if less than enthralling, study of the allotment movement 
shows, the availability to commoners of a portion of land has been a highly 
contested theme of social history since the completion of William the 
Conqueror's "Great Survey" of England and Wales in 1086. TheDomesday Book 
<http://www.domesdaybook.co.uk/> – so-called because it was a "strict and 
terrible last account" that brooked no alteration or appeal – was aggressively 
comprehensive. As theAnglo-Saxon Chronicle 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anglo-Saxon_Chronicle> records, "there was not 
one single hide, nor a yard of land, nay, moreover (it is shameful to tell, 
though he thought it no shame to do it), not even an ox, nor a cow, nor a swine 
was there left, that was not set down in his writ".

The point of this unprecedented audit was to furnish William with an exact map 
of his universal tax base, and to organise the transfer of estates from the 
"traitor thegns" of the old regime to his friends among the Norman aristocracy. 
This ushered in the feudal era ofmanorialism 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manorialism> – nulle terre sans seigneur (no land 
without its lord) – that persisted for centuries. Its requirements were simple: 
the peasants, 85% of the population, bent their backs in return for the lord's 
protection. They were yoked to an endless round of rents, dues, tithes, even a 
mortuary tax (when a peasant died, the lord was entitled to his first beast and 
the Church took the second), and most of them depended for their survival on 
the small subsistence they drew from access to common land.

The commons, a leftover from the Anglo-Saxon tradition of shared usage of the 
land, were eaten away by centuries of enclosures (a euphemism for theft), a 
process that no amount of peasants' revolts or angry levelling of hedges could 
reverse. The idea of giving over a portion, or "allotment" of land to the 
labouring poor for the provision of growing food did not take root until the 
Enlightenment, and even then the allotment movement was infused with a kind of 
paternalism: better to have the lower classes growing their own turnips than 
wallowing in the ale houses or indulging other morally destitute habits. By the 
end of the 19th century, after a rampant period of enclosures, the ruling 
classes began to take more seriously the disastrous impact of their policies on 
a burgeoning population that was struggling to feed itself.

Shortly after the end of the first world war, the principle of providing 
allotments to returning soldiers was extended to all. A succession of 
smallholding and allotment acts placed a duty on local authorities to provide 
land according to demand, enabling the allotment movement to mature into 
something resembling its present status. But with many waiting lists now 
closed, and an estimated demand for 90,000 more plots (in addition to the 
330,000 currently available), we are still far behind our Anglo-Saxon forebears 
in the distribution of land as common property.

Foley's book reminds us that the right to share the earth has always been an 
asymmetric struggle. Set against the manically inflationist private-property 
capitalism in a city such as London, putting your spade to soil that is 
collectively owned acquires a new significance. It is, in the ancient meaning 
of the word, a radical act.

• To order Of Cabbages and Kings for £15 go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/of-cabbages-and-kings-the-history-of-allotments.html>
 or call 0330 333 6846.
 