
A Neanderthal woman who lived and died in a Siberian cave 50,000 years ago has 
led researchers to the oldest known case of sex between modern humans and their 
beefy, thick-browed cousins.

Tests revealed that the female, whose remains were recovered from the Altai 
mountains on the Russia-Mongolia border, carried traces of DNA fromHomo sapiens 
who appear to have mated with her ancestors 100,000 years ago.


The discovery pushes back - by tens of millennia - the date of the first known 
couplings between the two groups, and shows that both Neanderthals and modern 
humans inherited DNA from the prehistoric trysts.


Researchers have known since 2010 that people alive today carry as much as 4% 
Neanderthal DNA. The genetic legacy, which may affecthuman immune systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/07/human-neanderthal-relationships-may-be-at-root-of-modern-allergies>
, and the risk ofdepression and even nicotine addiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/neanderthal-dna-may-account-for-nicotine-addiction-and-depression>
, is a smoking gun for interbreeding that took place after modern humans left 
Africa 60,000 years ago and met up with the Neanderthals.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Foldest-known-case-of-neanderthal-human-sex-revealed-by-dna-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4205e9a31a3ff0e798c39e68e124caa68cd7f30%2F0_0_876_478%2F876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oldest%20known%20case%20of%20Neanderthal-human%20sex%20revealed%20by%20DNA%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Foldest-known-case-of-neanderthal-human-sex-revealed-by-dna-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oldest%20known%20case%20of%20Neanderthal-human%20sex%20revealed%20by%20DNA%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Foldest-known-case-of-neanderthal-human-sex-revealed-by-dna-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4205e9a31a3ff0e798c39e68e124caa68cd7f30%2F0_0_876_478%2F876.jpg>
 Dorsal view of the Neanderthal woman’s toe bone. Photograph: Bence Viola 
The latest study is the first to ask whether the archaic genes flowed in both 
directions. It finds that while European Neanderthals bore no traces of modern 
human DNA, the Altai Neanderthal did. The scientists narrowed the suspects down 
to early human pioneers who left Africa about 40,000 years before the great 
migration that saw humans colonise the world. Their adventure was not entirely 
successful: like the Neanderthals, they appear eventually to have died out.


“An early modern human population left Africa much earlier than had been shown 
before and met with Neanderthals, possibly those moving from Europe towards the 
East, some time around 100,000 years ago,” said Sergi Castellano, who led the 
study at the Max Planck Institute for EvolutionaryAnthropology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/anthropology> in Leipzig, Germany.


Fifth of Neanderthals' genetic code lives on in modern humans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jan/29/fifth-neanderthals-genetic-code-lives-on-humans>
Writing in the journal, Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature16544>, the researchers describe 
how they compared complete and partial Neanderthal genomes with those from 
modern Africans who do not carry Neanderthal DNA. They found no trace of modern 
human DNA in Neanderthals from Spain or Croatia, but the Altai Neanderthal had 
strands of DNA that closely matched those of the modern Africans. One strand of 
modern human DNA found in the Altai Neanderthal involved a gene called FOXP2 
which has been linked to language development, but Castellano said it was too 
early to say whether Neanderthals benefited from the DNA.


Modern humans evolved in Africa about 200,000 years ago. When they left the 
continent for the north, they encountered Neanderthals who had already settled 
in Europe and Asia and adapted to the cooler temperatures, lack of sunlight, 
and different diseases. The interbreeding swapped genes among the two groups.


Scientists have other evidence that Homo sapiens left Africa early but failed 
to establish themselves beyond the continent. They have recovered 
100,000-year-old modern human skeletons from the Skhul and Qafzeh caves in 
Israel. Meanwhile, a set of 47 modern human teeth found in a cave in southern 
China was recently dated to at least 80,000 years old.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Foldest-known-case-of-neanderthal-human-sex-revealed-by-dna-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd405d478ea15c83df3200d97d478c8be1642100f%2F0_114_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oldest%20known%20case%20of%20Neanderthal-human%20sex%20revealed%20by%20DNA%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Foldest-known-case-of-neanderthal-human-sex-revealed-by-dna-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oldest%20known%20case%20of%20Neanderthal-human%20sex%20revealed%20by%20DNA%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Foldest-known-case-of-neanderthal-human-sex-revealed-by-dna-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd405d478ea15c83df3200d97d478c8be1642100f%2F0_114_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
 The excavation of the female Neanderthal’s remains, in the Denisova cave in 
the Altai Mountains. Photograph: Bence Viola 
“Not only is this the first evidence of modern human DNA entering Neanderthal 
populations, rather than the reverse process, but this is also a separate and 
much earlier interbreeding than the one placed at 60,000 years onwards,” said 
Chris Stringer, head of human origins at the Natural History Museum in London. 
He said that the interbreeding could have occurred anywhere in southern Asia.

“Does this change the view that the pre-60,000 year old modern human 
dispersals failed? If both the early modern human groups and the early 
intermixed Neanderthals went completely extinct, then this was still ultimately 
a failed expansion,” he added.


Why did the Neanderthals die out?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jun/02/why-did-neanderthals-die-out> 
Stringer said scientists cannot say whether the sex took place in peaceful 
relationships, or whether the groups stole each other’s women, or whether 
abandoned or orphaned babies from one group were adopted by the other.


Adam Siepel, a senior author on the study at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in 
New York, said: “Because children typically stay with their mother, it may 
suggest that this was a case where a human man mated with a Neanderthal woman, 
and then she raised the child in her Neanderthal community, into which it was 
successfully integrated enough to mate itself.

“An alternative, and perhaps slightly less likely, scenario would have a 
Neanderthal man and a human woman mating and integrating as a family into a 
Neanderthal community — perhaps by coercion or perhaps not,” he said.

 