
A vow that Amy Williams made as a teenager after watching the Salt Lake City 
Games eight years ago was fulfilled last night when she became Britain's first 
soloWinter Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> gold 
medallist for 30Â years.

Williams, 27, a keen artist nicknamed "Curly Wurly" because of her frizzy 
hair, said she was "absolutely speechless" after her victory in the women's 
skeleton on board the trusty sled she has named Arthur. "Arthur was great, we 
bonded, we did well together, he behaved himself. He was a bit cheeky on my 
first run today, by nearly tipping me off. I've got on really well in my 
sliding, Arthur and Amy did very well today," she said.

Her performance in Vancouver was all the more remarkable as Britain does not 
have a full skeleton track for her to train on, apart from a dry starting 
section near Bath. She is Britain's first individual gold medallist at the 
Winter Olympics since figure skater Robin Cousins triumphed at Lake Placid in 
1980.

Williams said fear of failure after being a reserve in Turin four years ago 
had spurred her to victory. She had been a stand-in for Shelley Rudman, 
Britain's only skeleton competitor in Italy, who won silver in 2006 but was a 
disappointing sixth in Vancouver.

Williams's parents were in Whistler to see her triumph. Her mother, Jan, a 
former midwife, peered from behind her white mittens as her daughter sped along 
the track at up to 93mph but led the cheers when she claimed gold. "I am 
extremely proud of what she has achieved and all the hard work she has put in 
has paid off today, it's just amazing to be here and share it with her," she 
said. "I just want to give her a hug."

Her father, Ian, a chemistry professor at Bath University, said: "After the 
third run it was her race to lose, but I didn't think she was going to do that 
this time. It was just brilliant."

Family and friends were yesterday celebrating her success back at home. 
Williams's twin sister, Ruth, and brother Simon were among a crowd watching the 
action at 1.30am at her local pub, the Pulteney Arms in Bath. "I was jumping up 
and down with Simon like a lunatic," Ruth said. "There were loads of family. It 
still really has not sunk in. I am having to pinch myself. We have had very 
little sleep over the past 48 hours. I cannot quite believe that my twin sister 
is an Olympic champion."

Landlord Martin Cooper said about 60 people turned up for champagne and hot 
dogs. "They were going to watch at home and then decided to group together and 
that home wasn't big enough," he said. "It's absolutely amazing for her. To go 
to the Olympics is amazing, but to win is incredible for her and her family. 
She is a lovely person."

Williams, who is studying sports performance at Bath, said she had made great 
sacrificesover the last four years. "I've just worked really hard. I've done 
everything possible in my physical training, mental training, everything with 
my coaches, runners, every single possible thing, my health, my diet," she 
said. "Every decision I made was: 'Is this going to help me go to the Olympics 
or not?' I've probably been a bit of a bore for the past few years and probably 
haven't given my friends enough attention, but it has all paid off."

Skeleton sliding was reintroduced to the Winter Olympics at the 2002 Salt Lake 
City Games, where Britain's Alex Coomber won bronze. Williams, originally a 
400m runner, decided to switch disciplines after watching Coomber. Until seeing 
it on TV, she had no idea what skeleton was. She reputedly complained of "not 
really liking it" after her first go, but persevered at an army ice camp in 
Lillehammer, Norway, not wanting to "appear like a wimp in front of the army 
guys". Last year Williams won a silver medal in the world championships at Lake 
Placid and another silver in the world cup race in Whistler, establishing a 
fierce sporting rivalry with Rudman.

Now a 20-1 shot to win the BBC's sports personality of the year trophy, 
Williams admitted she had been "a bit nervous" in the changing room prior to 
the fourth and final run in the Olympics, but thought she had nothing to lose. 
"I didn't think I'd be standing here now. It was all a blur."
 