
Edinburgh, like London, has the distinction of being both a noun and an 
adjective. The noun is a place, a city of fragile beauty perched on a cold 
northern latitude; the adjective is a set of attitudes, a world view. If 
something is described as very Edinburgh, most people in Scotland know exactly 
what is meant. Which is? Well, thinkJean Brodie 
<http://www.list.co.uk/article/2800-muriel-spark-the-prime-of-miss-jean-brodie-1961/>
, thinkDavid Hume <http://www.davidhume.org/>, think … Eric Liddell 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/scotland/sportscotland/asportingnation/article/0019/>.

Eric Liddell? Chariots of Fire <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082158/> … of 
course – the 1981 Hugh Hudson film.

Liddell was the remarkable Scot who won the 400m in the 1924 Olympics in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/04/50-stunning-olympic-moments-eric-liddell>
 and who – footballers aside – could lay claim to being Scotland's most famous 
sportsman.

Although Liddell was born in China, to missionary parents, Edinburgh was the 
family home in which he spent part of his childhood and to which he returned 
for his university years. Today he is honoured there in theEric Liddell Centre 
<http://www.ericliddell.org/>, a remarkable place that expresses Scottish 
communitarian instincts through its support for local volunteer organisations.

Liddell's Edinburgh was in important respects a very different place from 
Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> today, even if there are 
features that have survived and that still give this city its special character.

In the 1920s, Edinburgh was definitely a provincial city, a description that 
if used today can be calculated to raise the hackles. I can hear them. 
Provincial? We are certainly NOT provincial: we are a capital city. Yes, yes, 
but the fact of the matter was that Edinburgh, and the rest ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, had been an enthusiastic participant 
in the project of the British empire and had been gutted by the union of any 
significant political influence.

The decisions that really counted were made in London, even if vestiges of 
statehood – legal and educational systems and a national church – had been left 
in place.

Edinburgh, at the time of the 1924 Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>, was smug and compliant. Here 
and there were traces of political and intellectual radicalism but, for the 
most part, the city was a pretty, rather quiet place, an ideal base for an 
unassuming, modest man such as Liddell, who understood his role in life in 
evangelical terms.

How different it is today. There is a parliament, there is the world's 
greatest arts festival, there are ambitious banks (one of them perhaps, in the 
past, rather too ambitious), there is internationally distinguished scientific 
and cultural activity. If Edinburgh used to look inward and congratulate itself 
on the achievements of the Scottish enlightenment, today it looks outward and 
asks itself what its proper place is.

The answers proposed range from Tam Dalyell's iconoclastic suggestion that the 
Scottish parliament be abolished 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/05/14/holyrood-abolition-tam-dalyell-_n_1513945.html>
, to the vision of the current Scottish government that Edinburgh should once 
again be the capital of an independent Scotland.

Most of the city's citizens fall somewhere in the doubting middle of that 
spectrum. Most of them, according to opinion polls, would like Edinburgh to 
continue to be what it is today: the capital of a country within the United 
Kingdom. Mr Salmond does not want that. He wants a new team to be in the 2016 
Olympics.

Edinburgh watches it all with interest – a slightly superior smile on its 
face. After all, it is that sort of place.

Alexander McCall Smith is the author of the No1 Ladies' Detective Agency 
series of novels and lives in Edinburgh. His latest book, The World According 
to Bertie (Abacus, £7.99 pbk) is available now. Find out more about the city 
with the free app, Alexander McCall Smith's Edinburgh.

• Help us tell the story of the UK Olympic torch route as it passes near your 
home by contributing to our daily coverage.You can volunteer to represent your 
community on the Guardian relay, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/15/olympic-games-guardian-torch-relay-uk#form>
 share reports and observations of the day with us via n0tice or h 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/15/olympic-games-guardian-torch-relay-uk#n0tice>
elp us create a snapshot of Britain via Flickr at www.guardian. 
co.uk/olympics-2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/15/olympic-games-guardian-torch-relay-uk#flickr>
 