
Great Britain's teenaged sprinter Adam Gemili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> will race over 200m at the 
Aviva Birmingham Grand Prix on 26 August, UK Athletics has confirmed.

The 18-year-old, who reached the semi-final of the 100m at the Olympics, will 
compete over the longer distance in his first Diamond League appearance on home 
soil at the Alexander Stadium.

The former footballer, who has only been training full-time since January, ran 
10.06sec to finish third in his semi-final behind the silver medallist Yohan 
Blake and Tyson Gay at London 2012, just missing out on a final spot.

The world junior champion said: "The Olympics was an amazing experience for 
me. I never thought in my wildest dreams that in eight months I would go from 
playing non-league football to representing my country in the biggest sporting 
event in the world.

"To compete in front of a capacity home crowd against the best athletes in the 
world gave me a real taste of what's to come in the next few years. To walk out 
to the roars of 80,000 people cheering you on is something I'll never forget."

Gemili, who was also in the relay team which was disqualified at London 2012 
for a baton handover error, will be up against the Olympic finalists Ryan 
Bailey, Churandy Martina and Wallace Spearmon.

"The Aviva Birmingham Grand Prix will give me another opportunity to race 
against some of the guys that I went up against in theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>, and this is something I am 
relishing," said Gemili, who has a best 200m time of 20.61sec.

"There are going to be some 200m specialists out on the track, but I am keen 
to show that I can make that transition from the 100m and compete against the 
best.

"Make no mistake, it will be a fiercely contested race, but I'm more than 
capable of rising to the occasion and showing a glimpse of what is to come from 
me in the next few years."
 