 The ArcelorMittal Orbit. Photograph: Dave Hill 
Here's how the "something extra" that Boris Johnson and Tessa Jowell required 
for the Olympic Park looked when I pointed my camera at it yesterday afternoon. 
No, those yellow cranes aren't part of it. Yes, those weird clouds are real. 
The Olympic stadium stands to the left of theArcelorMittal Orbit 
<http://www.arcelormittal.com/index.php?lang=en&page=17> observation tower from 
this angle, just out of shot. Also just out of shot were two groups of mostly 
grey-haired Olympic Park tourists. Out-of-towners, I'd say, judging by their 
accents and attire. They too were taking photos, and being regaled with key 
facts and choice anecdotes. Did I really hear a guide say, "They actually found 
a fox's den, 14 floors up!" while pointing south to the former location of 
whatever building it was that no longer exists. There was a small chorus of 
astonished exhalations.

This sort of scene is now routine on the Greenway public path, even on a 
mundane Monday afternoon. The gathering sense of a coming spectacle being 
marketed, consumed and, even now, mythologised (those foxes!) is everywhere. So 
is evidence of hi-vis security-consciousness: a pair of security guards, one a 
small ex-Ghurka, the other a tall African, questioned me obscurely about my 
bicycle, which I'd leaned against a fence. When I left, heading back to the 
River Lea navigation canal towpath, we exchanged smiles and waves. I had, I 
think, played my part in the necessary enactment of a non-stop vigilance 
performance. I was glad to have been of help.

The view from the Greenway has long crystalised the spectrum of Olympic 
possibilities. Standing there fills me simultaneously with wonder at the scale 
of the regeneration idealism at work and with foreboding at the potential for 
the whole thing to become one vast, historic symbol of the folly ofgrand projets
. The Orbit, as it embeds itself, still sprouting, in the Games landscape, 
distills these hopes and fears, well, monumentally. Its purpose is to provide 
epic views and to intrigue - two ways in which to draw a crowd to the East End 
"in legacy." It's also a symbol of the whims and egos of the powerful, should 
you wish to look at it that way.

First drafts of its history tell of a chance meeting of less than a minute 
betweenBoris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and Lakshmi 
Mittal, Britain's wealthiest man, at the world economic forum in Davos in early 
2009. Mittal said he'd supply the metalwork. Boris said thanks very much. His 
foes might decry this as typical of the way the Tory Mayor operates, never 
missing the chance to grab public glory for himself and schmoozing filthy 
private wealth - Barclays sponsoring "Boris bikes" would be cited as a further 
example.

His admirers would see only spontaneous brilliance in the cause of grand 
philanthropy (ArcelorMittal gave £16 million). They might also point out that 
the Anish Kapoor creation has had public funding too (£3.1 million from the 
London Development Agency) and was only commissioned following acompetition 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/media/press_releases_mayoral/anish-kapoor-design-iconic-visitor-attraction-olympic-park>
, judged by eminent art experts including one of Boris's unpaid "fund-raising 
champions"Anita Zabludowicz 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/media/press_releases_mayoral/anish-kapoor-design-iconic-visitor-attraction-olympic-park>
.

To this, Boris-bashers might respond that the prize money was reportedly 
boosted to the tune of £80,000 by property man Pierre Rolin, the then partner 
of another of those champions, the art consultantHelen Macintyre 
<http://www.artadvisory.co.uk/people.html>. Judging by a subsequent interview 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/lifestyle/article-23919818-the-cuckold-the-mayor-the-girlfriend-and-a-love-child.do>
, Rolin might be forgiven for taking a somewhat rueful hindsight view of his 
own generosity.

Quite a talking point, that Orbit thing, and it's still got about a hundred 
feet to go. People's mission accomplished, or grand vanity confirmed?
 