
There was a more tranquil start to day four of the Olympic flame's circuitous 
tour of the UK as torchbearers, including the bob skeleton gold medallistAmy 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams>, plodded through 
Somerset in glorious sunshine.

Following Monday's drama, when the flame briefly went out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/21/olympic-torch-relay-flame-goes-out>
 and bearers came in for criticism for auctioning off their torches, the London 
2012 organising committee must have been pleased at the respite.

Williams said carrying the torch – through Yeovil – was an "amazing feeling" 
and had made her "very proud to be British". She received huge cheers from the 
crowd as she walked past, waving and smiling broadly.

The athlete announced her retirement from her sporting discipline earlier this 
month, bringing an end to a career that culminated in a gold medal at the 
VancouverWinter Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> in 
2010. She was Great Britain's first individual female gold medallist at a 
winter games for 58 years.

Hundreds of people from Taunton, Glastonbury, Bath, Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> and across Wiltshire turned out to 
watch dozens of less celebrated individuals have their moment in the spotlight.

Ninety-one-year-old Doris Whiting, who was to carry the flame through Shepton 
Mallet, was one of the oldest of the 8,000 people taking part in the relay. She 
was nominated for her 30 years of community work.

Carrying the torch in Frome was Sergeant Gavin Harvey, 31, a soldier who lost 
both legs while serving in Afghanistan in 2009.

Richard Harrison, who became a marathon runner after losing 14 stone in 18 
months, was taking his turn in Bath. "I've completely turned my life around. 
I'm healthy, active and happy. I'm so excited about the future," he said.

The organising committee will hope there is no repeat of the burner 
"malfunction" when the flame went out in Devon on day three. It was quickly 
relit from the "mother flame" that is carried around as part of the relay 
convoy.

But the issue of bearers selling off their torches via eBay rumbled on as it 
emerged that a £150,000 bid for Sarah Milner Simonds's torch could be a hoax.

Milner Simonds, who was planning to give the proceeds to charity, said the 
winning bidder had not yet been in touch and she feared it could have been a 
cruel joke. "The buyer seems to have disappeared," she said.
 