
Not only is today Ada Lovelace Day <http://findingada.com/>, which celebrates 
the contributions of women in science and technology, but 2016 marks a century 
of women being admitted as fellows of the Royal Astronomical Society. What 
better day to write aboutAgnes Mary Clerke 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agnes_Mary_Clerke>? Born in 1842, she 
contributed much to astronomy and the RAS, although she died too soon, in 1907, 
to have had more than honorary fellowship.

It is also apt that I should write about Clerke here on the H Word blog, as 
she was to be best known forher work in the history of astronomy 
<http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu/full/2004AntAs...1....3B>. She also happens 
to share my birthday.

Born in Cork, Clerke was the middle of three children, between older sister, 
Ellen Mary, and younger brother Aubrey St John. All were clearly quite 
brilliant, although it was only the boy who could go on to excel in mathematics 
and natural science at Trinity College Dublin. All, however, benefitted from an 
education at home, including classics and practical scientific lessons from 
their banker father.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb2852a6ef7955c2e52cdf5d6235168773b60ab5%2F0_0_3652_5556%2F3652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%2C%20let's%20also%20celebrate%2019th-century%20renaissance%20woman%20Agnes%20Clerke%20%7C%20Rebekah%20Higgitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%2C%20let%27s%20also%20celebrate%2019th-century%20renaissance%20woman%20Agnes%20Clerke%20%7C%20Rebekah%20Higgitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb2852a6ef7955c2e52cdf5d6235168773b60ab5%2F0_0_3652_5556%2F3652.jpg>
 Plaque to the Clerke Sisters in Skibbereen, County Cork, Ireland. Photograph: 
Jackie Ellis/Alamy 
Family ties sustained Clerke throughout her life and career. Leaving Ireland, 
they lived and learned in Italy for a decade before moving to London in 1877, 
continuing their scholarly, musical, scientific and literary endeavours. After 
their parents’ deaths in the 1890s, the two sisters continued to live together 
and support each other. Ellen was a also a writer and translator of articles, 
both literary and scientific, poetry and a novel. To quote the author of 
Ellen’s ODNB entry, they had “a formidable breadth and depth of learning”.

Agnes Clerke wrote enormous amounts of prose over her lifetime. There were 
more than 50 articles for the Edinburgh Review, mostly on scientific topics; 
pieces in every annual issue ofThe Observatory 
<http://www.ulo.ucl.ac.uk/obsmag/> over two decades; 150 entries for the 
Dictionary of National Biography and more for the 9th and 11th editions of 
Encyclopaedia Britannica. On top of this were several books, her first being 
the 1885A Popular History of Astronomy During the Nineteenth Century 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YszlkJr5ussC&dq>.

Several more books followed – The System of the Stars 
<https://archive.org/details/systemstars01clergoog> (1890), The Herschels and 
Modern Astronomy <https://archive.org/details/cu31924012300681> (1895), 
Astronomy <https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=yuBKwp_xIlIC> (1898), Problems 
in Astrophysics <https://archive.org/details/problemsinastrop00cler> (1903), 
Modern Cosmogonies <https://archive.org/details/moderncosmogonie00clerrich> 
(1905), and, to confound any thoughts of two cultures,Familiar Studies in Homer 
<https://archive.org/details/familiarstudies01clergoog> in 1892. Her works 
showed both her good historical sense and her knowledge of the fast-changing 
world of astronomy and astrophysics in the last quarter of the 19th century. 
H.P. Hollis FRAS, an Assistant at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, wrote that 
her Popular History had become a standard, “especially valuable for its wealth 
of references”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ddb84f048ed2d8961de6643fb8be04314d93cd%2F0_0_1190_903%2F1190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%2C%20let's%20also%20celebrate%2019th-century%20renaissance%20woman%20Agnes%20Clerke%20%7C%20Rebekah%20Higgitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%2C%20let%27s%20also%20celebrate%2019th-century%20renaissance%20woman%20Agnes%20Clerke%20%7C%20Rebekah%20Higgitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ddb84f048ed2d8961de6643fb8be04314d93cd%2F0_0_1190_903%2F1190.jpg>
 Title page of Agnes Clerke’s Popular History of Astronomy (first published in 
1885, this is the third edition) Photograph: University of California Libraries 
Clerke’s practical knowledge of astronomy, including the new applications of 
spectroscopy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astronomical_spectroscopy>, 
increased when she spent two months at theRoyal Observatory at the Cape of Good 
Hope <https://www.saao.ac.za/about/history/>. She developed a friendship with 
the Astronomer Royal there,David Gill 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Gill_(astronomer)>, and his wife Isobel. 
She was also close to the London astronomical circles, particularly through the
British Astronomical Association 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Astronomical_Association> and – when 
allowed access – the Royal Astronomical Society.

Clerke had, in 1889, been invited to join the staff at the Royal Observatory, 
Greenwich, as a computer. This was part ofan experimental scheme 
<http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu//full/1995QJRAS..36...83B/0000085.000.html> 
by the Astronomer Royal, William Christie, to increase his staff with the small 
funds he had at his disposal. Clerke was vastly over-qualified for work 
traditionally carried out by young school leavers, but there were very few 
opportunities for women to take up paid work in astronomy. Clerke deliberated 
over the offer but turned it down – she was not guaranteed observing work and 
could probably make more money as a writer.

Three university-educated women did take the opportunity in 1890, although 
none were impressed at the £4 a month they were offered and few stayed long. 
They wereAlice Everett 
<http://www.rmg.co.uk/discover/behind-the-scenes/blog/women-rog-alice-everett>, 
Edith Mary Rix (a niece of Charles Dodgson, aka Lewis Caroll) and Harriet Maud 
Furniss.Annie Scott Russell 
<http://astrogeo.oxfordjournals.org/content/57/5/5.21.full> replaced Furniss in 
1891. She and Everett, at least, were allowed to do some observing, although 
much of the work involved computation or measuring features on photographic 
plates.

Russell was forced to resign in 1895 when she married Edward Walter Maunder 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Walter_Maunder>, her boss in the 
Photographic and Spectroscopic Department of the Observatory. This allowed her 
to keep working, unpaid, in partnership with her husband. She, like Clerke was 
also active within the astronomical spheres they could more easily access: 
joining the BAA, writing and editing.

In February 1892 Maunder and Everett were among a group of women who submitted 
election certificates <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02m866q/p02m83w6> to 
the RAS. Edward Maunder and William Huggins were among those who signed 
support, but they were rejected. As a sop, they were offered “cards of 
admission” that allowed them to attend some meetings. The Clerke sisters took 
advantage and, in 1903, Clerke and Margaret Huggins were given honorary 
fellowship of the Society, the first sinceCaroline Herschel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-h-word/2016/mar/16/caroline-herschel-riding-to-greenwich-astronomy>
, Mary Somerville (both 1835) andAnne Sheepshanks 
<http://astrogeo.oxfordjournals.org/content/57/3/3.11.full> (1862).

It seems clear that, as far as possible, these women astronomers and some of 
the men around them helped create a mutually supportive atmosphere. One of this 
circle, Margaret Huggins wrote in her obituary of Clerke that “No purer, 
loftier and yet sweetly unselfish and human soul has lived”.

The RAS is today taking their anniversary, history and the contribution of 
women seriously. They have publishedan open access journal issue 
<https://www.oxfordjournals.org/our_journals/astrogeo/100_years_of_women_in_ras_virtual_issue.html>
 that explores the lives of women who were early or honorary fellows. Having 
noted that they often made their contributions as writers, the Society has 
decided to underline the now recognised importance of this work by foundingtwo 
new prize medals <http://astrogeo.oxfordjournals.org/content/57/4/4.10.full>. 
They are the Annie Maunder Medal for an outstanding contribution to outreach 
and public engagement and the Agnes Clerke Medal for “outstanding personal 
research into the history of astronomy or geophysics”. Nicely done.
 