
Author Attica Locke’s debut novel, Black Water Rising, was shortlisted for the 
Orange prize in 2010, as well as receiving a string of award nominations in the 
US. As a screenwriter, she has written for various companies including 
Paramount, HBO and Dreamworks, and is a writer and producer on the Fox drama
Empire. She is a member of the academy for the Folio prize in the UK and of the 
Writers Guild of America. Her second novel,The Cutting Season, came out in 2012 
and her third,Pleasantville, is published by Serpent’s Tail on 16 April.

Music: Fantastic Negrito <https://www.facebook.com/fantasticnegrito>

Fantastic Negrito makes black roots music, like a thread from Lead Belly to 
Sly Stone all the way to Alabama Shakes. Also, his life story is fascinating. 
He had a million-dollar deal when he was younger, and the album that came out 
was an absolute failure. It kind of broke him and he went away from music. Then 
he had a terrible car accident, where he was in a coma for a month, and when he 
came out of all of that he threw out all the rules. Years ago I heard a quote 
that all artists start out in life full of verve and promise and excitement, 
and then something happens in life where they get their ass kicked, and what’s 
left is who they really are. To me he represents all of that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427893529335%2Fd022c4d8-3308-4201-89d8-fa1d62accb86-2060x1621.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427893529335%2Fd022c4d8-3308-4201-89d8-fa1d62accb86-2060x1621.jpeg>
Book: Summer House With Swimming Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/27/summer-house-with-swimming-poll-herman-koch-review>
 – Herman Koch

This is my favourite book of 2014. It’s a Danish book about two families who 
share a summer house in the countryside, and all kinds of lines and intimacies 
get crossed, with devastating results for both families. There’s a huge twist 
at the end. It’s told by a character who’s maybe one of the most despicable 
people I’ve ever read, and yet not only was I mesmerised as a reader, I almost 
had a kind of grudging respect for the narrator, because he’s so astute about 
human nature.

Restaurant: Horse Thief BBQ <http://www.horsethiefbbq.com/>, Los Angeles

I was born and grew up in Texas, and for the 20 years I’ve lived in LA I’ve 
been looking for BBQ – and for 20 years I’ve been miserable and let down. I 
cannot tell you how many times I’ve driven across the city to try some new 
thing somebody told me about, only to get two bites in and be sad. So colour me 
surprised that in downtown LA there is a tiny shop that is doing honest-to-god 
real Texas BBQ. It’s delightful: ribs, links, smoked chicken, all of it. They 
only smoke their meat once a day, so if you get there late and there’s no more, 
there’s just no more. It’s almost holy, the level of commitment they have to 
the smoking. So get there early.

Documentary: Alex Gibney’s Going Clear 
<http://www.hbo.com/documentaries/going-clear#>, HBO

I haven’t yet watched this, but my anticipation is high. You cannot have lived 
in LA this long without being mildly obsessed withScientology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/scientology>, because it’s always on the 
periphery of your life. You live alongside them, and your children go to school 
with people who are of this religion. Everyone knows somebody who’s connected 
and yet it’s so profoundly secretive. There are rumours that have been floating 
around LA for years – that John Travolta cannot get out, that there have been 
incidents of physical torture of the congregants, if you can even call them 
that. I’m fascinated by how Katie Holmes somehow escaped. The story is that 
it’s like a spiritual prison. I simply cannot wait.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427818855112%2Ffcdc9bef-2abc-46fd-b75f-16d25078cd55-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427818855112%2Ffcdc9bef-2abc-46fd-b75f-16d25078cd55-1020x612.jpeg>
Gallery: Project Row Houses <http://projectrowhouses.org/>

This is an art gallery in Houston, where I’m from. They have gone deep into 
what was once a ghetto called Third Ward, where there is a type of home called 
a “shotgun shack”, because they’re tiny, and the idea was that you could stand 
at the door with a shotgun and one bullet would take everybody out. This 
project has taken a row of these, so the gallery is not one building, but six 
little white clapboard houses on one street, and each house has a different 
artist’s exhibition in it, mostly showing modern art and folk art. It’s taking 
the raw materials of a neighbourhood and remaking them. There are all these 
stereotypes about Texans being just cowboys or whatever, but Houston has a 
really thriving art scene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427818961972%2Fff4063b1-64fa-4546-abfa-721b81297c18-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427818961972%2Fff4063b1-64fa-4546-abfa-721b81297c18-1020x612.jpeg>
DVD: A Soldier’s Story <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088146/>

As a crime writer, this is a film I always come back to. The story is set 
during the second world war on a segregated army base in America. One of the 
black decorated army men is murdered and it stirs up a lot of racial tension, 
but the solving of the mystery is highly unexpected, and it’s a perfect blend 
of the genre and deep philosophy around race. In a lot of ways this is what I 
aspire to do with every book I write. I probably re-watch that movie once a 
year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427819515213%2Ff61226ee-5974-41ac-ac3a-490468d0ef78-2060x1482.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Attica%20Locke%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fattica-locke-pleasantville-fantastic-negrito-herman-koch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427819515213%2Ff61226ee-5974-41ac-ac3a-490468d0ef78-2060x1482.jpeg>
Website: The Kitchen Widow

This is run by my sister, who is a very young widow – her husband died in 
2012. He was an Italian chef, and the term “kitchen widow” is very common for 
the wives of chefs because apparently they’re always home alone every night. 
She hascreated this website <http://thekitchenwidow.com/> in order to offer 
support to people who are struggling with care-giving, or people who are 
struggling with grief. She has these little “webisodes” where she interviews, 
say, teachers about how to handle children in school who are grieving. She also 
has a lot of content on there about how, if you are the friend of a care-giver, 
you can support them.
 