
Take it from me: writing about the new Bridget Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/07/bridget-jones-mad-about-the-boy-review>
 novel is –gaah! – an awful lot less fun than it ought to be. For one thing, by 
the time you read this, the hype will have done its exhausting, deadening work, 
and even those who began by knowing more about the histories ofEdward Gibbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/30/fall-roman-empire-rise-islam> 
than they did about Miss Jones will doubtless be au fait with what happens in
Mad About the Boy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224098090>
. For another, so many women continue to love Bridget so passionately – if 
Twitter is anything to go by, some of them fully expect to bump into her in 
Waitrose one day quite soon – that to criticise her at all feels unsisterly; I 
might as well have a go atMiranda Hart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/miranda-hart>. As for the idea of 
coming over all Feminist Set Text about the book, which I fear I'm about to do, 
well ...Gaah! again. When Julie Burchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/julieburchill> and others had the temerity 
to bemoan Bridget's utter daffiness last time around,Helen Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/helenfielding>, her creator, responded by 
saying: "Nobody worries about what Bertie Wooster's saying about masculinity." 
Who wants to be thought a killjoy? Not me. I'm a hoot, honest.

But still, it has to be said: Mad About the Boy is an unexpectedly miserable 
book, and not only becauseMark Darcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/29/bridget-jones-diary-helen-fielding-kills-mr-darcy>
 (our heroine's hairy-chested-sex-god-human-rights-lawyer husband and the 
father of her two small children, Mabel and Billy) has been killed on 
assignment in Darfur (the armoured vehicle in which he was travelling struck a 
landmine – a fact that is revealed in flashback, since the novel begins some 
years after his death). Open it, and you soon realise something is amiss with 
Bridget, too. You grew up with this woman, but who on earth is she now? 
Materially, she is not like you or anyone you know. Mark has left her 
exceptionally well provided for. She does not need to work; she has a nanny, a 
cleaner and an Aga in a house in an area of London where all the children have 
names like Thelonious and Eros. Emotionally, you recognise her generalised 
sense of guilt and, perhaps, the anxiety about her weight (though unlike her, 
you're probably not about to check into an obesity clinic). But everything else 
– the drunken texting, the obsessive tweeting, the inability to concentrate on 
anything other than what Roxster, her toyboy lover, might be thinking or doing 
– seems to belong to a woman at least 10 years younger than you. If you met her 
in a pub, you might find yourself worrying about how she was going to get home, 
but you'd have nothing at all to say to her.

Two things kept us on Bridget's side in the earlier books, even when she was 
at her most annoyingly vapid and self-obsessed. The first was the element of 
satire, the way Fielding took aim and fired at glossy magazines, self-help 
books and, most ghastly of all, Smug Marrieds. The second – and this was by far 
the more important – was our strong feeling that whatever happened, Bridget 
would eventually emerge triumphant from the chaos of her life; that the craven 
muddle in which she continually found herself was just a stage. After all, 
wasn't this what we hoped for when it came to our own lives? That we would sort 
everything out? No wonder, then, that it is such a shock to find her so much 
unchanged, even at the age of 51 and a widow to boot. Most of us wouldn't want 
to return to our 30s for all the chardonnay in theMajestic Wine Warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine>, even if our skin was 
a little peachier then. We're glad to have put all that shyness and confusion 
and misery behind us, and we have stuff to do: some of us, amazingly, even have 
careers. Yet here Bridget is, still writing out tragic lists of Dating Rules 
(ALERT! ALERT! DO NOT EVEN OPEN WINE WITHOUT WRAPPING PHONE UP IN NOTE SAYING 
'NO TEXTING' AND PUTTING ON A HIGH SHELF) and believing herself to be in love 
with a man with whom she's had only one date (Leatherman, a father of two she 
meets in a Hoxton pop-up speakeasy shortly before she cops off with Roxster). 
Her "work" is a screenplay she's just about half-written: an update of "Hedda 
Gabbler [sic] byAnton Chekhov <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chekhov>", 
which she has relocated to Queen's Park. Though she can't be bothered to spend 
too much time on it, not even before Important Meetings with Top People who 
might be interested in developing the thing. She's far too busy wondering 
who's leaving messages on her mobile for that.

At first, I took solace in the fact that Bridget was at least a singleton 
again, albeit one with two adorable small children whose necks she can snuffle. 
Of course she had to get together with grumpy, disapproving Mark Darcy in the 
end – they were reunited at the close of the second novel – but it was still, 
for some of us, disappointing that a character who had always been defined by 
her status as a single woman could only be truly happy when attached to a man. 
However – and I hereby issue the necessary spoiler alert – by the time Mad 
About the Boy draws to a close, Bridget is no longer single. She is living in a 
big house in Hampstead with another grumpy, disapproving male (I came to think 
of him as Mark Darcy 2.0). "He was so masterful, he was such a MAN!" she 
thinks, as they kiss for the first time, at which point, having struggled 
loyally through 300-odd pages, I knew it was over for Bridget and me. It's not 
that I want her to be lonely. But couldn't she be less of a throwback?

Later on, I found myself thinking about a passage earlier in the novel – 
I'd tried desperately hard to ignore it at the time – when Bridget describes 
her (married) friend, Woney, whose short, grey hair "only serves to emphasise 
the disappearance of her jawline" and who has allowed "the fat-positioning of 
middle age freely to position itself all over her back and beneath her bra". 
Jeez. It was like reading the Daily Mail onMary Beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mary-beard>. Oh, the disgust that was there! 
What it comes down to, I think, is this:Mad About the Boy, rather oddly for a 
novel that purports to be comic, is shot through with a horrible, paralysing 
fear. What's the only thing more hopeless and terrifying than a woman who 
hasn't got a man? Answer: a woman who's too lazy, complacent or, God forbid, 
serious-minded to put time and effort into hanging on to the man she's already 
got.
 Prunella Scales as Jane Austen’s Miss Bates, who is living proof that being a 
‘spare’ is a fate worse than death. Photograph: REX/ITV 
Fielding based the first two Bridget Jones books, however loosely, on 
the plots ofPride and Prejudice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/interactive/2013/jan/26/pride-and-prejudice-jane-austen-interactive>
 andPersuasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/nov/23/janeausten.classics> 
respectively. Her new novel, intentionally or not, takes this homage one step 
further, its thrumming engine – the fear I've just noted – being a strange new 
version of the spinster/widow-dread that permeates allJane Austen's mature work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/18/ten-questions-jane-austen>. In 
Austen's world, such anxiety is well founded: the woman who has no fortune 
literally cannot hope to survive if she does not bag a husband, and it's for 
this reason that we should remember to find some sympathy for a character such 
asMrs Bennet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2011/apr/03/ten-best-fictional-mums-in-pictures>
, for all that she is loud and vulgar (her preoccupation with marrying off her 
daughters has its foundations in the certain knowledge that the family 
will lose its home on the death of Mr Bennet, and in this sense at least she 
is a good deal more sensible than her droll, bookish husband). InMad About the 
Boy, though, such dread can have nothing at all to do with money: Bridget has 
her own home and a private income, and all her friends are either wildly 
successful, like Jude, who is "running the City", or have men who will 
doubtless leave them a packet, whether via a legacy or a divorce settlement. So 
where does it come from? I'm not sure. Some dark, self-hating place I'd rather 
not think about, probably. But I do wish Fielding had tried harder, on the 
page, to face it down.
 Margaret Leighton as Miss Havisham in Great Expectations. Photograph: REX/ITV 
When it comes to fiction, the history of the single woman, be she spinster or 
widow, has rarely been a happy one. Inevitably, one thinks first of Austen's 
twittering Miss Bates inEmma. On the receiving end of so much pity, poor Miss 
Bates is living proof – to the novel's other female characters, if not to us – 
that being a "spare" is pretty much a fate worse than death. It's the same 
story in many if not most Victorian novels – we all know aboutDickens's Miss 
Havisham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/16/adapting-great-expectations-david-nicholls>
 and Gaskell's Miss Matty and a dozen others besides – though inDorothea Brooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/04/fiction.asbyatt>, George Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot> gives us a widow who not only 
finds love, and on a reduced budget, but whose seriousness is never in doubt. 
As we move into the 20th century, hope briefly flares: in 1909,HG Wells 
publishedAnn Veronica 
<http://www.penguinclassics.co.uk/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9780141441092,00.html>
, whose heroine is a suffragette who leaves home to live independently 
and study at a laboratory, and the reader starts to think that, here at 
last, is a single woman who will be allowed to find fulfilment beyond the 
sacrament of marriage. But no. After spending time in prison for the cause, Ann 
Veronica, seemingly half delirious with the idea of submission, finally gives 
herself to her lover, Capes. It's true that the couple don't marry, something 
that caused a sensation in the novel's day. Nevertheless, in its final chapter, 
Capes is a successful playwright while Ann Veronica is happily pregnant. Wells, 
one gathers, simply couldn't bear for his heroine – she was inspired by his 
lover, Amber Reeves – not to be "normal" in the end.

Perhaps you're thinking that I should look to Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf> for an antidote to this? For 
we all know about naughty HG, a conservative rather badly disguised as a 
radical. Alas, the future author ofA Room of One's Own is not much better, 
really. Her first novel,The Voyage Out, came out in 1915. Its puppyish but 
inquiring young heroine, Rachel Vinrace, is in possession of not one but two 
prattling spinster aunts, and when she rejects the idea of marriage, she 
succumbs to a fever and dies. After this, Woolf's most important characters – 
Clarissa Dalloway, Mrs Ramsay – are married.

During the first world war, three-quarters of a million men were killed, and 
a generation of "Surplus Women" was born. Could this, necessity being the 
mother of invention, be the single woman's literary moment? Well, a lot of 
novels about single life were certainly written in this period. But they are 
sad, stoical little books in the main, their female characters leading only 
half-lives. One thinks ofFM Mayor's The Rector's Daughter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/features/open-book/neglected-classics/susan-hill/> 
(1924), whose heroine, Mary Jocelyn, quietly resigns herself to a spinster life 
of matinees and meetings. Joan, the heroine ofIrene Rathbone's We That Were 
Young <http://www.feministpress.org/books/irene-rathbone> (1932), leads a 
mildly bohemian existence replete with parties and people. All the same, "if 
she had been told, by someone who knew, that tomorrow she would have to leave 
all this and die, she would simply have said: 'Oh!' At the roots of her being 
there lay a vast indifference."
 'Brodie is powerful and compelling. She seems to have a sex life, too. She is 
also sinister and, ultimately, betrayed' … Robert Stephens and Maggie Smith in 
The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
We move on. EF Benson's Mapp and Lucia 
<http://mappandluciaglossary.blogspot.co.uk> series? (One widow, one spinster.) 
Hilarious, but not at all the kind of thing we're looking for. In the 40s and 
50s, books, you can't help noticing, start being a little kinder to single 
women, perhaps because the stays are loosening; a woman might be unmarried, but 
this doesn't preclude the possibility that she can have a physical love affair. 
Also, working is no longer so unusual. It's true thatBarbara Pym 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
, whose first novelSome Tame Gazelle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/99/07/18/nnp/pym-gzelle.html> was published in 
1950, deals almost exclusively with spinsters of quite an old-fashioned kind: 
they are village-living, curate-loving types, in the main, but they have a 
spirit that was lacking up to this point. The fiftysomethings Harriet and 
Belinda Bede both receive marriage proposals, and both turn them down, 
unwilling to swap the deep pleasures of the present for a future that may or 
may not be happy. Elsewhere though, the problem of happiness, and of power, is 
unresolved. The most famous literary spinster of the 60s is – don't all shout 
at once! –Muriel Spark's Miss Jean Brodie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/apr/22/murielspark>, though of course 
her prime was in the 30s, when the book is set. She is powerful, Brodie, and 
compelling: "an Edinburgh festival all on her own". She seems to have a sex 
life, too, albeit rather a peculiar and mysterious one. Nevertheless, she is 
also sinister and, ultimately, betrayed; the favourite among her elite 
students, it turns out, is also her Judas, for which reason she is unable to 
take much consolation in her life's work as she lies dying.

I could go on and on. In the 70s and 80s, the single woman appears rather less 
often in fiction, those who might otherwise have invested time in making her 
flesh now preferring to tackle such matters as marital and extra-marital sex. 
But on the rare occasions she does rear her head, she is as hopeless and as sad 
as ever. The fact thatAnita Brookner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>'s spinster heroines are so 
beautifully drawn doesn't make you any less despairing of their plight; I've 
read very few novels so bleak as Brookner's.Kitty Maule, the heroine of 
Providence (1983) 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/book/18906/providence-by-anita-brookner>, is an 
academic, an expert in Romantic literature. Outwardly, she is all 
accomplishment; she is soignee and a good cook, as well as clever. Inwardly, 
she longs to be quite another person: the kind of creature who achieves what 
most women really want. The novel's climax – even at 16, I found it distressing 
– comes when she gives a public lecture. It brings her kudos and a permanent 
teaching post at the university, but she is not allowed to enjoy her feeling 
"of well-being and almost of worth" for long. The day afterwards – it falls on 
her like a punishment – she loses Maurice Bishop, the man she loves, to her 
student and intellectual inferior, Miss Fairchild. "She had the impression," 
writes Brookner, "of having been sent right back to the beginning of a game she 
thought she had been playing according to the rules." The novel ends just 11 
sentences later, Kitty's hands trembling as she brings a soup spoon to her 
mouth.

Even now, in a new century, things aren't much better. It's probably dumb of 
me to expect much from Bridget Jones, but so-called literary novelists can't 
resist the stereotypes either. "Good" women find love in the end. "Bad" women 
don't. Spinsters – though this isn't a word anyone uses these days – are mostly 
lonely, or creepy, or just plain mad. (The narrator ofHarriet Lane's recent 
Alys, Always 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/16/alys-always-harriet-lane-review> 
being a rare exception: a nasty spinster type who does bag a husband.) I liked
Claire Messud'sThe Woman Upstairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/17/the-woman-upstairs-messud-review>
, which was published earlier this year, very much; it is an absorbing, 
beautifully written book, and like its author, I don't see why women characters 
shouldn't be dislikable. Women reserve the right to be dislikable. All the 
same, a tiny part of me shrank from the book's angry, passive-aggressive 
narrator, Nora, a teacher who becomes fixated with the family of a new boy in 
her class. Why must the character who is a single woman also be the one who is 
failed and obsessive and increasingly odd? (See alsoZoë Heller's Notes on a 
Scandal <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/fiction1>.) It is not as 
if the single woman is a statistical oddity; the census reveals that the number 
of single-person households is on the rise. Are the women in these flats and 
houses all desiccated, or loopy, or permanently furious, or desperately sad? 
Does the thought ever occur that some of them might be happy and fulfilled, 
with jobs that they love and an understanding of the term "family" that may 
extend beyond the word "husband" or "baby"? Apparently, it does not.
 George Gissing's The Odd Women 
How is it to be done, the writing of the single life? A few books stand out, 
like beacons. In 1893,George Gissing published The Odd Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview26>
, his variant on the voguish New Woman novel. At the time, there were vastly 
more women than men in England, and the book is, among other things, a fierce 
rebuttal of the idea that the lives of these spares would inevitably be 
"useless, lost, futile". I have two things to say about it here. The first is 
that you should read it this moment. It's wonderful. The second is that for all 
its sadnesses – some of its women characters are pushed to the limits of 
existence by poverty, and to the edge of sanity by society's cruelty – you 
will cherish Gissing's bluestocking heroine, Rhoda Nunn, with her ideas about 
work (yes), marriage (no) and holidays (shewill stride across the mountains by 
Wastwater). Here is a "good" girl who does not marry, and does not die either; 
even better, a desirable man, the rakish Everard Barfoot, falls in love with 
her because of her independence of mind rather than in spite of it. The reader 
– well, this reader – feels about Rhoda much as her friend, Mary Barfoot, does: 
"I don't flatter you, dear. I tell you bluntly of your faults and 
extravagances. But I am proud of your magnificent independence, proud of your 
pride, and of your stainless heart. Thank heaven we are women!"
 Lolly Willowes 
Another beacon, albeit rather more satirical in style: Lolly Willowes by 
Sylvia Townsend Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/02/sylvia-townsend-warner> (1926). 
What a book! When it begins, Laura "Lolly" Willowes is just 28, and yet already 
she is a maiden aunt, living with her brother and his wife and children 
following the death of her beloved father. Lolly spends her time doing 
needlework and generally being rather unobtrusive, for which reason it is all 
the more startling when she deters her only suitor with the declaration that he 
may be a werewolf. But this is just the start. Two decades on, and by now 
somewhat eccentric, at least in the eyes of her relatives, she moves out, 
taking a cottage in a remote part of the Chilterns, where she drinks a lot of 
dandelion wine and ...becomes a witch. Liberation! As a member of the Great Mop 
coven, she is neither patronised nor pitied. She is, in other words, free to be 
who she is: "One doesn't become a witch to run round being harmful, or to run 
round being helpful either, a district visitor on a broomstick. It's to escape 
all that – to have a life of one's own, not an existence doled out to you by 
others."
 Elaine Dundy's The Dud Avocado 
Winifred Holtby's novel The Crowded Street 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/658421/not-the-marrying-type/> (1924) is a 
moving depiction of how a woman might come to live a dignified single life in 
a provincial town where all anyone cares about is marriage. Holtby, of course, 
knew whereof she spoke: when things did not work out with her lover, Harry 
Pearson, she simply refused to languish unproductively on the sidelines of life.
Vita Sackville-West'sAll Passion Spent 
<http://dovegreyreader.typepad.com/dovegreyreader_scribbles/2013/09/all-passion-spent-vita-sackville-west.html>
 (1931) tells the marvellously cheering story of how, in widowhood, a 
conventional woman is finally able to defy her family (to their horror, Lady 
Slane rents a small house in Hampstead, where she revels in leading the kind 
of life she forfeited 70 years earlier when she married). Whizzing on, we find 
in the 50s – I'm keen on this little patch of domestic history, having 
just written a book about it –Elaine Dundy's The Dud Avocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/26/dud-avocado-elaine-dundy-rereading>
(1958), in which the witty and tenacious Sally Jay Gorce merrily sleeps her way 
around Paris and (this is the important bit) comes to no harm at all; and, in 
similar vein toLolly Willowes, Barbara Comyns' strikingly odd novel The 
Vet's Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/28/spoons-vets-daughter-barbara-comyns-review>
 (1959), in which Alice is liberated by her ability to levitate. (Did Comyns 
knowThe Rector's Daughter? Surely she did.)

After this, though, the trail goes cold. A lot of the rowdy, sexy books one 
thinks of as celebrating the single life are in fact quite the opposite. Pulling
Mary McCarthy'sThe Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/29/the-group-mary-mccarthy> (1963) 
from the shelf reminds me that, however crazily enjoyable, it is more of a book 
about friendship and the compromises brought by marriage than about striking 
out; dittothe early Margaret Drabble novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/02/jerusalem-golden-margaret-drabble>
 I used to read surreptitiously in the school library, looking for naughty 
bits. For a moment I stare at my bookcases, considering the writers whose 
novels I've most enjoyed reading in recent years:Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>, Meg Wolitzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/10/meg-wolitzer-interview>, 
Curtis Sittenfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/books/curtis-sittenfeld>, Jane 
Gardam <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jane-gardam>, Kate Atkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kate-atkinson>, Tessa Hadley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/28/tessa-hadley-life-writing-fiction>
. Not too many fabulous spinsters or widows there – or not that I can remember. 
Wolitzer is, in my view, the author of a bona fide feminist classic, but it is 
no good for my purposes, being calledThe Wife 
<http://www.thefolioprize.com/2013/07/rachel-cooke-on-the-wife-by-meg-wolitzer-2003/>
. Gardam's greatest creation is Sir Edward Feathers inOld Filth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/nov/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>
, a widower. Am I being too reductive? Too stubborn? Too determinedly feminist? 
Too sour? Isn't the simple truth that we are all of us after love, beyond 
everything else? Perhaps. But still, it seems woeful to me, and wrong, that in 
2013 so many writers remain convinced that their female characters must partner 
up or, metaphorically speaking, die. "Gaah!" as Bridget would have it. Though I 
can more easily see her joining a convent than I can reading the novels of
Winifred Holtby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/19/south-riding-winifred-holtby-rereading>
.

• Her Brilliant Career: Ten Extraordinary Women of the Fifties by Rachel Cooke 
is published this month by Virago. To order it for £14.99 with free UK p&p call 
Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846 or go toguardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844087402>
.
 