
Arrested Development remains one of the few shows where even the slightest 
rustle of a rumour can provoke a fan frenzy. It’s no surprise then that the 
revelation from executive producer Brian Grazer,in an interview with 
Grantland’s Bill Simmons <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOy6WYr9jxQ>, that 
the show is to return for a 17-episode season at some point in the near future 
was greeted with whoops of joy andchicken dance gifs  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1TphEh0Qgv0> on social media.

Never mind that Grazer’s announcement was about as vague as they come. “We’re 
going to do another 17 episodes. So stay tuned for Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>,” was all he 
had to say on the matter, before the conversation moved on to how great Tom 
Cruise and Jennifer Lawrence are. Conspicuously missing was a release date or 
even a confirmed network, with Netflix refusing to comment on the news. 
Meanwhile, Grazer’s Arrested Development collaborators – the cast, executive 
producer Ron Howard and showrunner Mitchell Hurwitz (who initially said that 
the show might return as a movie) – have all remained conspicuously silent.

Yet, for all the scantness of information, Grazer’s disclosure is at least a 
step in the right direction, with that very specific episode order suggesting 
that things have moved on from the nebulous assurances given byWill Arnett 
<http://uproxx.com/tv/2014/08/will-arnett-confirms-arrested-development-season-5/>
 and Netflix head Ted Sarandos last year. And, despite Netflix’s coyness on the 
matter, the safe money is on the new season ending up there: the show’s fourth 
seasonbrought a substantial number of eyeballs 
<http://variety.com/2013/digital/news/arrested-development-draws-big-early-netflix-audience-1200488489/>
 to the streaming service when it launched in 2013, and Hurwitz has since 
signed amulti-year creative deal with Netflix 
<http://deadline.com/2014/04/mitch-hurwitz-to-create-new-series-for-netflix-under-multi-year-deal-718382/>
 (though it remains unclear whether a commitment to new Arrested Development 
makes up part of that deal).

When we will actually get to see this season is a knottier question to unpick. 
Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> has one of the 
most in-demand casts around, and rounding them up for the show’s fourth season 
was reportedly a task akin to herding cats, with the show’s creators only able 
to film a few scenes with all leads present. If anything they’re even busier 
now: Jeffrey Tambor has a regular gig on the excellent Transparent, Portia de 
Rossi has a recurring role on Scandal, while the rest of the cast are involved 
in a dizzying number of film and TV projects.

There’s also the difficult question of whether we actually want or need any 
more Arrested Development. Season four wasn’t terribly well-received, its 
individual character-focused episodes and jigsaw puzzle plot lines (both 
decisions partly made out of necessity due to cast commitments) confused rather 
than amused some critics.

Hurwitz’s forthcoming “chronological recut 
<http://uproxx.com/tv/2014/10/mitch-hurwitz-is-working-on-a-major-edit-to-arrested-development-season-4/>
” of season four suggests that he may have taken some of those negative 
reactions on board, and, in truth it wasn’t quite as bad as the naysayers made 
out: the Tobias and Gob episodes contained several of my most favourite 
Arrested Development moments (including anear-perfect Entourage parody 
<http://arresteddevelopment.wikia.com/wiki/And_Jeremy_Piven>). What’s more, 
there’s a great whacking cliffhanger that needs resolving, with Buster arrested 
for the murder of Lucille Austero (Liza Minnelli), and Michael and George 
Michael’s father-son relationship on the rocks. As fans of Deadwood can attest, 
there’snothing worse than a lack of closure 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadwood_%28TV_series%29#Cancellation>, so 
hopefully we’ll be finding out what happenson the next Arrested Development 
<http://arresteddevelopment.wikia.com/wiki/On_the_next..._Arrested_Development> 
sooner rather than later.
 