
The Count of Monte Cristo

The Count of Monte Cristo is a wonderful tale of one man's revenge against 
three friends who falsely accused him of helping Napoleon topple Louis XVIII. 
Having spent 14 years rotting away in prison as a result of their lies, he 
escapes with the complicity of a rich abbot and reinvents himself as a 
powerful, dangerous and seductive count for whom revenge is all that matters.

The novel possesses all the elements of the best epic adventures: a chilling 
intrigue, a tragic love story, and numerous power struggles. Above all, the 
poetic ending is the best conclusion to a book you'll ever read.
 Unswerving loyalty â€¦ The Three Musketeers 
The Three Musketeers

Given the countless Hollywood adaptations of the adventures of D'Artagnan, 
Athos, Portos and Aramis, you probably know the plot of the Musketeers already. 
Set in 17th century France, D'Artagnan dreams of joining the prestigious 
company of the Musketeers to serve his king. But before that can happen he must 
defeat the evil plots of the Cardinal of Richelieu and the wicked temptress 
Milady de Winter.

Naturally Dumas provides great adventure sequences, full of intrigue and 
suspense, but the plot is not just about jumping from roofs and rescuing 
damsels in distress: its real strength lies in its description of the undying 
friendship of four men and their unswerving loyalty to each other.

La Reine Margot

Dumas turns to the murky world of the wars of religion in which Catholics 
fought to prevent a Protestant, Henri de Navarre, from claiming the throne of 
France. As ever, Dumas provides plenty of entertainment, this time in the form 
of assassination attempts, incestuous relationships and religious massacres.

Dumas's knack of bringing alive a historical period is particularly well 
developed in La Reine Margot. One feels the ever present threat of danger 
surrounding the future Henri IV and the sense that violence could break out at 
any moment.

Dumas's character descriptions are also brought to the fore. The title 
character is especially fascinating; a cunning and beautiful sister to the then 
King of France, can she save her skin as a Catholic queen destined to a 
Protestant king?

Twenty Years After

It's all very well to cry 'one for all and all for one' when young and full of 
energy, but even heroes grow old, tired and broke. In Twenty Years After, 
D'Artagnan is disillusioned with his job, Athos is sick with concern about his 
son, Porthos seeks an artistocratic title, and Aramis is plotting away in the 
religious orders.

Disillusionment, nostalgia and growing old: not the usual ingredients of 
swashbuckling novels. But Dumas manages to ally the excitement of new 
adventures with reflections about what age does to friendships and the 
realisation that youthful dreams are but illusions waiting to be shattered. In 
many ways, Twenty Years After is to The Three Musketeers what The Godfather II 
was to The Godfather: a fantastic sequel that makes you wonder if the original 
is always superior.

The Vicomte of Bragelonne

This doesn't mean that the final sequel to the Musketeers trilogy is a 
Godfather III-style disappointment. The sometimes unappreciated final chapter 
succeeds as a wonderful conclusion to the adventures of our brave musketeers.

D'Artagnan once again needs to rescue the throne of France from evil 
conspirators, and prevent Louis XIV from being replaced by his secret twin 
brother. Can he still count on his friends or are they on the side of the 
enemy? Dumas's assertion that the mysterious man in the iron mask was Louis 
XIV's twin brother has kept generations of readers in suspense.

Also of interest in The Vicomte of Bragelonne is the fact that three of the 
main characters die. Morbid? Perhaps, but rarely have the deaths of characters 
to whom one has developed such an attachment been so heart-breaking to read. 
Dumas said of one of the deaths that he was crying his heart out as he was 
writing it, and could not believe he'd actually taken the decision to do it.
 