
The newlyweds are a year out.


More than a million LGBT Americans have exchanged vows since this day a year 
ago, when the US supreme court ruled that same-sex marriage is a legal right in 
a decision thatthrew open the doors of courthouses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/26/supreme-court-same-sex-marriage-history-activism>
 across the country.

Fighting gay marriage law is 'rude': polite Alabama drag queen is voice for 
equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/22/alabama-gay-marriage-same-sex-ambrosia-starling-roy-moore>
“That means tens of millions affected,” said Evan Wolfson, who founded Freedom 
to Marry, a leading campaign for marriage equality. “Family members, friends, 
loved ones. That’s a lot of happiness.”

The supreme court’s ruling in Obergefell v Hodges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/26/gay-marriage-legal-supreme-court>
 came after several months of decisions at local levels, then reversals, then 
reversals of reversals, creating nationwide disorder. In some places, people 
were married in their home state, but not while they traveled for vacation. Or 
in other places, marriage licenses were granted for a while then withheld 
again, so that some couples could marry but their friends couldn’t.


One of the last places to hold out in the back-and-forth was Mobile, Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>. The first gay couple to wed 
there, last year, was Robert Povilat and Milton Persinger.

“We’re still going strong,” Povilat said recently. “We made the vow as a 
lifetime commitment, and we are holding to that.”

Their story is probably common among people who live far from cities where 
same-sex marriage had been accepted well before the supreme court’s ruling.

“Very rural,” Povilat said. 

He lived in Fort Payne, Alabama, and Persinger lived about a half hour away in 
Gadsden. In 2012 they met online, and chatted for weeks before meeting.

Too straight, white and corporate: why some queer people are skipping SF Pride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/25/san-francisco-gay-pride-corporate-orlando-shooting>
Both had lost partners: Povilat to liver disease, Persinger to a heart attack. 
Povilat was 58, Persinger 44. Both wanted something stable. “More than just a 
one-night stand,” Povilat said.

Six months later they knew they wanted to marry, but couldn’t. Alabama 
wouldn’t allow it. So when the window opened at the Mobile courthouse and 
offered marriage licenses to gay couples for the first time, Povilat and 
Persinger were the first in line.

After years of denial, the world seemed to drape itself in a rainbow flag. 

“It was on the front page of the newspaper,” Povilat said. “We came home, and 
the people in our neighborhood had put a copy of the newspaper and flowers and 
a bottle of champagne on our front porch.”

Facebook profiles went rainbow-hued. International brands tripped over 
themselves to congratulate the LGBT community. The White House itself was lit 
with rainbow lights. It was a honeymoon.

And largely, Povilat said, the goodwill has held out, even in one of the last 
states to legally acknowledge their relationship. “I’ve not had a single 
negative comment, actually,” he said.

Not that life has been easy. Persinger has suffered health problems, and the 
couple has struggled through financial straits. “It’s not perfect. But we’re 
holding on.”

Meet the two women who were finally able to marry after 72 years together
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/09/alice-dubes-vivian-boyack-iowa-72-years-marriage>
The same is true of the state of equality across the nation. Over the past 
year a raft of anti-LGBT legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/mississippi-anti-lgbt-law-derrick-errick-simmons-greenville>
 has come up in numerous states. Some have come in the form of religious 
freedom bills, designed to allow government clerks and other officials to deny 
services to gay people. Others have come asbathroom-related legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/14/north-carolina-bathroom-bill-hb2-transgender-rights>
, aimed at regulating which bathrooms transgender people may use.

Wolfson, the founder of Freedom to Marry, said those sorts of reactions are in 
a way a sign of key advancements.

“They’re designed to undermine,” he said. “And they have to undermine, because 
they can’t directly attack the law. Marriage equality is law. We’ve won.”

Wolfson, now a law professor at Georgetown University, said the legality of 
same-sex marriage may now be unassailable, but that there is still work for 
activists to do.

On Friday, for instance, Aaron Sarver of the Campaign for Southern Equality 
said: “We were in federal court all day for our legal challenge to HB 1523 in 
Mississippi.”

The bill is called the Religious Liberty Accommodations Act and is vast in its 
scope. Among many other things, it would give business owners the right to deny 
services to LGBT people; additionally, it would allow court clerks to deny 
marriage licenses to same-sex couples, or social workers to deny adoptions by 
couples they believe may be engaging in premarital sex.

But beyond that, Wolfson said, there is the question of international LGBT 
rights.

Throughout the first year of gay marriage in the US, he said, people in other 
countries have called for advice on starting their own equality campaigns.

“The opportunities are many,” he said. “All over the world.”

 