
The passing of the 12th minute of the 12th hour of the 12th day in the 12th 
month of 2012 prompted a discussion on the books desk about the significance of 
the number 12 - and being a bookish bunch, the conversation inevitably turned 
to what we reading at that age.

I was reading The Time Traveler's Wife 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/romance/9780099464464/the-time-travelers-wife>
, which shocked some of those working around me, who read it in their 30s. I'm 
going to take this reaction to mean that I have represented myself in a mature 
and sophisticated manner with the air of someone who doesn't still reread Harry 
Potter for fun.

The passage of years alters the course of memory lane. For myself, it's short 
and I can recall with relative ease what I was reading, for others it's a 
struggle but they get there in the end, and some can't remember at all.Gone 
With The Wind 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/romance/9780330323499/gone-with-the-wind>
was mentioned by not one, but two people, and another has fond memories of 
devouring Diana Wynne Jones'sFire and Hemlock 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780006755197/fire-and-hemlock>
.

We all represent different generations of reading, but we all also have 
something in common â€“ the same steely determination to read a proper, "grown 
up", book. I never thought I was the kind of child who couldn't wait to be 
older but when it came to books, I grew up very quickly.

I've reread The Time Traveller's Wife since, with such different eyes from 
those of my 12-year-old self. I didn't understand half of the sexual 
references, or if I did, I hastily turned the pages at the naked bits. I'm not 
sure if I really understood the intricacies of the plot but I still enjoyed 
reading it because it was something different, and all the more fun for being 
illicit - like sneaking into a certificate 12 film at the cinema at the age of 
11 or being in school at night time.

Which books did you read when you were 12? Let us know below, or tweet us 
@guardianbooks.
 