
Why is it that you can put down some perfectly enjoyable books without so much 
as a backward glance, while others refuse to let you go? This thought was 
prompted in Lukethedrifter after an encounter with Angela Carter's Nights at 
the Circus. His attempts to follow it with William Boyd's A Good Man in Africa 
having come to nothing, he concluded that he wasin the throes of a literary 
hangover <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/23942185>. R042 
is also besotted. <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/23940561>
 Perhaps, as he says, it's because this particular novel is out of the ordinary:


To be quite blunt, it was one of those books that stands out as something very 
special. Its scope - in terms of its social commentary, feminist themes and so 
on - was immense and it presented its arguments in a way which didn't hammer 
them upon you but instead made you feel that everything it said - about how 
unfair the world could be - was the most reasonable way of thinking.

But is there a special kind of special that keeps you hooked? To what extent 
is the compulsion the product of a particular writer's voice, and how much is 
it due to the magic of a single book?ClatteryClarence tentatively suggested 
Carter's gothic story collection 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/23948643>The Bloody 
Chamber might serve as the literary equivalent ofa bloody Mary 
<http://www.tasty-trials.com/2012/02/spicy-bloody-mary-ultimate-hangover.html> 
- but would it do the job?

Another Nights at the Circus devotee Laura Oliver  
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/23981357>was left 
plaintively bleating for a cure: "I devoured [Nights at the Circus] and have 
recommended it to friends, family, passing strangers... As such, do you have 
any suggestions of other reads or authors that have given you the same 
satisfaction? I'd love to hear."

Let us know which books have left you with that morning-after feeling â€“ and 
what cures you have discovered to counteract them.
 