
There's a moment in the second episode of Orange Is the New Black, Netflix's 
latest foray into original programming, where our heroine Piper Chapman (Taylor 
Schilling) tells her fiancee Larry (Jason Biggs) not to watch the latest season 
of Mad Men so that they can "binge watch it together in bed with takeout from 
Biridies". This is the first time, to my knowledge, that a TV show has 
acknowledged this phenomenon. The funny thing is, it's doing it to scores of 
people basking in the glow of their laptops or other devices while engaged in 
just that very activity.

Anyone who has logged into their account on the video streaming site and seen 
one of the countless banner ads for the show would know that all 13 episodes of 
the prison dramedy (an awful term for a wonderful phenomenon) are now available 
to watch. While not everyone is going to consume it the way Piper and Larry do 
with Don Draper's existential dramas, it's perfectly formulated to be consumed 
in one big bite rather than a series of pleasure-delaying nibbles.

This great show with an unfortunate title follows Piper, a 30-something 
upstanding bourgeois lady (she makes "artisinal beauty products" for criminey's 
sake), as she turns herself into prison for transporting drug money one time in 
her 20s. But it's not the Oz-like ecosystem of prison life that is so 
compelling.Orange is the New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black> cribs a page 
from Lost's book and gives us flashbacks to Piper's life before the clink and 
how and why her fellow inmates wound up terrorizing her in the pokey.

Unlike Lost, the reason why you want to click from one episode to the next 
isn't to solve some mystery about a magical island (spoiler alert: you never 
get the answers you were hoping for) but to find out just who these women are 
and how they've been changed by their circumstances. You'll be waiting to solve 
the mystery of Piper's former junkie bunkmate (back-from-the-dead Natasha 
Lyonne), her devious ex-girlfriend (That 70s Show survivor Laura Prepon), and 
just why the heck fellow newbie Diaz (Dascha Polanco) is at war with her 
mother, a fellow jail bird. These are mysteries on a personal level, as 
relatable as a cook who hates her food being insulted and a crazy as her being 
locked up for bursting a mean woman's breast implant.

Netflix has reportedly been using data generated from its 36 million 
subscribers' 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/25/business/media/for-house-of-cards-using-big-data-to-guarantee-its-popularity.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 viewing habits to figure out how to generate hits and so far it's been 
working. House of Cards was compulsively watchable because the endless 
political machinations of the main character begged viewers to find out what 
happened next. Its revival of Arrested Development was formatted with 
interlocking storylines that rewarded those who watched all at once with 
in-jokes and callbacks more casual viewers may have missed. And now Orange Is 
the New Black will be making people cancel their weekend plans so they can find 
out what happens to these fascinating and desperate women. Apparently all their 
number crunching told them what great novelists have known for centuries: it's 
about the people, stupid.

Netflix is so keen on these ladies that they've already ordered season two 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/06/netfilx-renews-orange-is-the-new-black-for-second-season/>
. Created by Weeds mastermind Jenji Kohan, the show is well-written, slyly 
funny (if sometimes bordering a big too close to wacky), and strangely 
emotional, delivering a gut-punch of drama even as you're still working through 
the laughs. But your cable package is lousy with quality programming. What make 
this different is that watching it is just like what Piper is going through, 
immersing herself in a strange and scary world that is as surreal as it is 
compelling. You'll want to lock the door and throw away the key. And that's 
what binge watching is all about.

â€¢ This article was amended on Monday 15 July. Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> now has 36 million subscribers, not 
27 million.
 