
Campaigners for an inquiry into the “Battle of Orgreave” have declared that 
the gloves are off as they step up calls for a judge-led investigation into 
brutal clashes between police and mineworkers during the 1984 miners’ strike.

In a defiant press conference at the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) hall 
in Barnsley, campaigners said they were considering mounting a crowdfunded bid 
for a judicial review ofAmber Rudd’s decision not to hold any kind of inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
 into the episode.

Orgreave was part of the class war that ended with 96 dead at Hillsborough | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
Barbara Jackson, secretary of the Orgreave Truth and Justice Campaign, was 
close to tears as she described feeling “shocked and devastated” by the home 
secretary’s decision.

Addressing the crowd of former pitworkers, their relatives, supporters and 
union activists in the South Yorkshire town, Jackson said: “As you can all tell 
this is very difficult and very disappointing but there are options for the 
future, some of them we will be discussing with the legal people about the 
possibility of a judicial review.

“We have focused on police violence because we thought that was the best way 
to get our inquiry – now we’re going to focus as well as that on the political 
side of the strike and the involvement of Margaret Thatcher’s government of the 
time … We regard the gloves as off on our side.”

Jackson told the gathering that she had struggled to contain her emotion when 
she received the “very calculated and very cold” phone call from Rudd informing 
her of the government’s decision on Monday afternoon.

“When she rang she was completely matter of fact, she said, ‘Listen to me say 
what I’ve got to say, then you can ask any questions.’ It was all very 
calculated and very cold. She read me – I didn’t know at the time – but she 
read me what was her ministerial statement she was going to read to parliament. 
I was shocked and devastated to find out we were not going to be offered 
anything.”

The Guardian view on Orgreave: refusing an inquiry is a denial of justice | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/the-guardian-view-on-orgreave-refusing-an-inquiry-is-a-denial-of-justice>
Jackson said the campaign had received a flood of support and donations since 
the announcement, as she revealed that its lawyers were considering a 
crowdfunded bid for a judicial review.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Forgreave-inquiry-campaigners-say-gloves-are-off-amber-rudd-miners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96320bec4bf6fa0a61534984fc0b84ca305c73af%2F0_206_4952_2971%2F4952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orgreave%20inquiry%20campaigners%20say%20the%20gloves%20are%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Forgreave-inquiry-campaigners-say-gloves-are-off-amber-rudd-miners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orgreave%20inquiry%20campaigners%20say%20the%20gloves%20are%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Forgreave-inquiry-campaigners-say-gloves-are-off-amber-rudd-miners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96320bec4bf6fa0a61534984fc0b84ca305c73af%2F0_206_4952_2971%2F4952.jpg>
 Police disperse miners at Orgreave. Photograph: Photofusion/REX/Shutterstock 
She said Jeremy Corbyn had promised an Orgreave inquiry if Labour were elected 
at the next general election, and that the campaign was also looking at a 
possible “peoples’ inquiry”.

The South Yorkshire police and crime commissioner, Dr Alan Billings, is also 
exploring ways of opening up the South Yorkshire police archives from the 
episode.

“There’s still lots of mileage to cover but we need you with us, like we’ve 
always needed you with us, because we can’t do this on our own. The campaign 
will keep going,” Jackson added.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Forgreave-inquiry-burnham-accuses-rudd-of-nakedly-political-act-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orgreave%20inquiry%3A%20Burnham%20accuses%20Rudd%20of%20%E2%80%98nakedly%20political%20act%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Forgreave-inquiry-burnham-accuses-rudd-of-nakedly-political-act-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orgreave%20inquiry%3A%20Burnham%20accuses%20Rudd%20of%20%E2%80%98nakedly%20political%20act%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Forgreave-inquiry-burnham-accuses-rudd-of-nakedly-political-act-video&media=>
Orgreave inquiry: Burnham accuses Rudd of ‘nakedly political act’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/31/orgreave-inquiry-burnham-accuses-rudd-of-nakedly-political-act-video>
Andy Burnham, the former shadow home secretary who campaigned for an inquiry 
into both Orgreave and the Hillsborough disaster, raised an urgent question in 
the House of Commons on Tuesday afternoon. He described Rudd’s decision as an 
“establishment stitch-up” and “a purely political act”.

Explaining her decision on Monday, Rudd said very few lessons for policing 
could be learned from a review of the events 30 years ago. She said there had 
been no deaths and no miscarriages of justice to investigate – claims that 
prompted jeers of “shame” when mentioned at the NUM rally on Tuesday.

Chris Hockney, deputy chair of the Orgreave Truth and Justice campaign, said 
an inquiry would have helped heal the wounds of the 1984 clashes, which he said 
continued to affect the region today. “There’s a lot of mistrust and bitterness 
about what they did in 1984 and an inquiry would help get to the bottom of 
that,” he said. “There’s certainly none or very little trust in a lot of the 
police, but it’s not against the day-to-day officers – it’s the hierarchy.”
 