
The annual Orwell Prize is being launched next month with a panel debate about 
the refugee crisis.

Among the speakers will be Tory MP Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, who was secretary of 
state for international development from 2010 to 2012 and, briefly, government 
chief whip.

Lord (Ken) Macdonald QC, chair of the council of the Orwell Prize, will launch 
the 2016 prize before introducing the debate, entitled “‘Something must be 
done’: the challenges of aid and the humanitarian and refugee crisis”.

Aside from Mitchell, the other two speakers will be Suzanne Franks, professor 
of journalism at City University London, who has studied the relationship 
between media and aid; and journalist Ian Birrell who has reported extensively 
from Africa and is the co-founder ofAfrica Express 
<http://www.africaexpress.co.uk/>.

It will be chaired by David Loyn, the former BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> international development correspondent.

The event at the Frontline Club in London 
<http://www.frontlineclub.com/club/members/?gclid=COqTqPeFiMgCFUbmwgod5XgOcA>, 
will take place on Wednesday 28 October. It begins with drinks at 6pm. Tickets 
are free, but places are limited andyou will need to reserved one here 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-orwell-prize-2016-launch-debate-tickets-18650404863>
.

A string of unmissable media events...

On 28 September, the Media Society hosts an interview with James Purnell, the 
BBC’s director of strategy and digital,The BBC today: future uncertain 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/28th-september-2015-bbc-today-crisis/>.

The interviewer will be Clive Jones, former chief executive of ITV news and 
regions. And the event, at London’s Bloomsbury Hotel, will be introduced by 
Professor Lis Howell of City University London. It will run from 6-9pm.Tickets 
available here 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-society-the-bbc-today-future-uncertain-tickets-16640729871>
.

On 7 October, the Media Society and London Press Club will host “a 
conversation” between the Independent’s editor,Amol Rajan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amol-rajan>, and Phil Harding, the former 
editor of Radio 4’s Today programme.

The interview will take place at the vertical Fleet Street 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/7th-october-2015-meet-editor-independent-vertical-fleet-street/>
, meaning Northcliffe House.Tickets available here 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-societymeet-the-editor-of-the-indie-in-the-vertical-fleet-street-tickets-17791357429>
.

On 18 October, former Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger will deliver 
the annual Society of Editors lecture. It will take place at 7-8.15pm at 
London’s Stationers’ Hall.More details here <http://www.societyofeditors.co.uk/>
. And the conference programmecan be found here 
<http://www.societyofeditors.co.uk/page-view.php?pagename=Programme-2015>.

On 19 October, the Media Society in association with the Information Law and 
Policy Centre <http://ials.sas.ac.uk/research/infolawcentre/infolawcentre.htm> 
will stage a panel debate,Whose investigatory power is it anyway? Security, 
source protection and surveillance 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/whose-investigatory-power-anyway-security-source-protection-surveillance/>
.


Speakers include former attorney general Dominic Grieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve> QC; the Guardian’s defence 
and intelligence correspondent, Ewen MacAskill; Rachel Logan of Amnesty 
International; and barrister Jessica Simor QC. Judith Townend will chair.

It takes place at Reed Smith in London’s Broadgate Tower, 6.30-8.30pm. Tickets 
available here 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-society-whose-investigatory-power-is-it-anyway-security-source-protection-and-surveillance-tickets-17412533356>
.

On 4 November, the Media Society and City University London host a panel 
debate,Data journalism/infomatics is the way of the future 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/4th-november-2015-data-journalism-mapping-future/>
.

Speakers will include Nick Phipps, general election editor at Sky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> and, by Skype from Oregon, 
Professor Damian Radcliffe. Others to be announced. In the chair: Ray Snoddy.

It will take place at City University, 6.30-9.30pm. Tickets available here 
<http://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-society-data-journalism-mapping-the-future-tickets-18201000683?aff=es2>
.


On 10 November, the London Press Club - in company with Media Diversified 
<http://mediadiversified.org/> and the Society of Editors 
<http://www.societyofeditors.co.uk/> - will host a discussion entitled How well 
does the world of sports journalism represent modern Britain? 
<http://londonpressclub.co.uk/getting-into-sports-journalism-a-level-playing-field-for-all/>

Taking part will be London Evening Standard digital sports editor Amar Singh; 
BBC Sport reporter Jessica Creighton; writer and broadcaster Gabriele Marcotti; 
Sun sports writer andWomen in Football <http://www.womeninfootball.co.uk/> 
board member Vikki Orvice; and Sky Sports news reporter Dharmesh Sheth.

It will take place at London’s Stationers’ Hall, 6.45pm-8.15pm. To book 
places, emailinfo@londonpressclub.co.uk <mailto:info@londonpressclub.co.uk>.

 