
The joke at the heart of A Most Violent Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-most-violent-year> – if a film this subtle 
and sober can even admit the idea of a joke – is that its hero barely raises 
his voice, let alone his fists. The New York City of 1981 had more crime than 
at any other year in its history but JC Chandor’s drama centres on a most 
un-violent man. Oscar Isaac plays Abel Morales, the owner of a rapidly 
expanding heating oil business. His name clues you in to the film’s concern 
before he even speaks the lines that serve as his credo: “I have always taken 
the path that is most right. The result is never a question for me, just what 
path do you take to get there.”

It’s not too much of a spoiler, though, to say that at some point in this 
movie a gun is drawn and fired, that its bullets puncture both a man’s skull 
and the barrel of an oil drum, and that those gunshots deliver the film’s most 
arresting image – an extravagant blood spray and, beside it, a dark sticky oil 
dribble. I can’t shake the little flicker of irritation that passes over 
Isaac’s face and the delicacy with which he withdraws a pristine white 
handkerchief to carefully plug that leak, ignoring the blood and preserving his 
oil. The cumulative power of his performance delivers this realisation: that 
cold pragmatism can be far, far more unsettling than violence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fa-most-violent-year-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422017236360%2Fcrop_KP_75751_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fa-most-violent-year-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fa-most-violent-year-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422017236360%2Fcrop_KP_75751_640x360.jpeg>
Today, though, the 35-year-old is a cheerful, vigorous presence, springing up 
from a sofa in a suite at the Waldorf Astoria to shake my hand. His energy and 
good humour are all the more commendable considering he’s spent most of the day 
talking about himself. I ask whether he finds anything useful about that 
process.

“Not really!” he says with a broad grin. “Sometimes better not to know how you 
do what you do. It becomes self-aware, and that’s no good. Ultimately it’s 
about trying to bottle the subconscious, so if it becomes too conscious it 
defeats the purpose. All you can hope for is at least a couple of moments when 
it happens. I think when things really work, when people really feel like 
they’re seeing something special, it’s usually because they feel like they’re 
seeing something that they’re not meant to.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fa-most-violent-year-exclusive-clip&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418923160305%2Fcrop_KP-57008_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20watch%20Oscar%20Isaac%20and%20Jessica%20Chastain%20in%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20JC%20Chandor's%20Oscar%20contender%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fa-most-violent-year-exclusive-clip>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20watch%20Oscar%20Isaac%20and%20Jessica%20Chastain%20in%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20JC%20Chandor%27s%20Oscar%20contender%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fa-most-violent-year-exclusive-clip&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418923160305%2Fcrop_KP-57008_640.jpeg>
I think of that perfect, minimal flicker of annoyance at the oil leak again. 
Isaac commands the film as unshakeably as he did last year’s Coen brothers 
movie,Inside Llewyn Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-llewyn-davis>
, in which he played a world-weary young man, stumbling through his own 
assholery, losing that damn cat over and over again, and singing folk songs 
with the sort of purity and beauty that evades all other parts of his life.

A Most Violent Year has him once again in a brutally cold winter of a past New 
York. But unlike Davis in his threadbare corduroy, Abel Morales never shivers: 
he’s judicious, respectful, strategic, and dressed in the armour of an 
impeccably tailored camel coat. Isaac began his research by reading books about 
sociopaths “and corporate America and business and how a lot of these guys lack 
empathy. Or, they project sincerity but it’s just part of strategy and 
calculation, and they see everything, including human beings, as commodities. 
And that, actually, is where all his choices come from. They come from 
strategy, they don’t come from morality. You think you’re watching a gangster 
pic but it ends up being about a guy who chooses not to do that. I think what’s 
interesting is that that’s just his pragmatism; sometimes the smartest strategy 
is actually the righteous choice.”

Like his cinematic forebears (the film evokes Al Pacino’s Serpico and all of 
Sidney Lumet’s other lone-wolfin’ heroes battling worlds of corruption), 
Morales exudes cool. There’s a deliberacy to his every word and action, and he 
deploys and maintains his own charisma scrupulously. “What’s funny,” smiles 
Isaac, “is that I think he’s a total square! Llewyn Davis was way cooler! You 
know? They would not get along. Llewyn Davis does not get along with too many 
people already but these guys would definitely not get along. But that was the 
challenge, because I hate cool. You know, ‘cool’ is detached and emotionally 
cool. My instinct is to battle anything that seems overly cool.”

So what was the coolest thing about Llewyn Davis?

“That the Coen brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/coenbrothers> 
created him! I mean,” he shrugs happily, “ifthey created him, that’s about it; 
it’s going to be cool.”

Isaac is a self-professed fanboy; he had a poster of Miller’s Crossing on his 
bedroom wall throughout high school. He’s also a musician and so, I imagine, 
would have done anything for the role.

“I would yeah, anything; I would do very uncool things for that part!” (As it 
happened, all he had to do was grow a beard and audition twice.)
 Star Wars: Episode VII - The Force Awakens Photograph: PR 
Isaac was born Oscar Isaac <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscar-isaac> 
Hernández in Guatemala, the middle child of a Guatemalan mother and Cuban 
father. The family settled in Miami when he was still young; Isaac dropped his 
surname to avoid being typecast, as he’s put it, as “a Latino gangster”.

He graduated from the Juilliard school in 2005 having successfully persuaded a 
lady in admissions to accept his late application (I can easily imagine him 
setting his large brown eyes to “pleading”) and insists that, since then, sheer 
luck played, “an enormous, enormous role in the whole thing”.

“I mean,” he adds, “there were people in school who I felt were considerably 
more talented than I was, so all I can be is thankful. Often I’ll watch things 
and think: bahh, I know people are liking that but I’m watching myself and I 
can see that I’m not there, you know? But then I just think: well, I’ll get 
there.”

His first experience of performance came aged 10 when he wrote a musical about 
a platypus that his teacher indulged. “We all put on costumes and put it on. I 
got to play the platypus.” So he cast himself as the lead? A vanity project! 
“The teacher cast me!” he protests. He spreads his palms in jokey defence.

He remains a star platypus, not least in his own esteem: “I was always, maybe 
stupidly so, very confident,” he admits, laughing. “It’s funny, because when I 
was first getting out of school I always thought,” he narrows his eyes into an 
imitation of make-or-break determination, “‘If they just give me that one shot, 
if they just give me that one chance, I know I can show ’em.’ And then I got a 
part in a movie – a really great part! – and it came and went.”

This was the role of Joseph in 2006’s The Nativity Story. “And then I thought: 
‘One more chance! If they just give me another chance!’ And then that would 
happen, and I’d get another part and it would come and go…” Consistently 
excellent performances followed: 2010’s Robin Hood, 2011’s Drive, and 2012’s 
The Bourne Legacy were among them. “And eventually I started realising: it’s 
not about the one shot, that’s a lot of pressure to put on yourself; why don’t 
you think about actually just getting better as an actor, maybe that’s a better 
place to put all your energy. So finally when the chance came to play a lead in 
a film, and not just any film but a film for the Coen brothers, I felt ready.”

It was a game changer for him before filming had even begun. The moment he 
signed on, bigger roles and better scripts started pouring in and then, once 
the film was released, the accolades flowed. The New Yorker heralded his 
performance as “the birth of a major actor”, declaring, “His face, voice and 
manner are among the most iconic presences of the cinematic year.” However, a 
film about mediocrity and failure is not exactly a well-worn route to Oscar 
glory. Its message – that hard work and talent so often don’t pay off – is 
about as un-Hollywood a sentiment as you can imagine. Nonetheless, fans were 
aggrieved when Isaac failed to receive a best actor nomination. This year might 
redress that: his name is already ubiquitous on Oscar prediction lists and the 
buzz has only got noisier since the National Board of Review awarded A Most 
Violent Year best film, best actor and best supporting actress (for Jessica 
Chastain as his on-screen wife).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F03%2Foscar-isaac-most-violent-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419265006815%2F92993010-f200-4aaf-a147-5db4319dc6ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscar%20Isaac%3A%20the%20star%20set%20for%20a%20most%20interesting%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F03%2Foscar-isaac-most-violent-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscar%20Isaac%3A%20the%20star%20set%20for%20a%20most%20interesting%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F03%2Foscar-isaac-most-violent-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419265006815%2F92993010-f200-4aaf-a147-5db4319dc6ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Inside Llewyn Davis. Photograph: Allstar 
A Most Violent Year may be Isaac’s best chance of an Oscar, but it’s Star 
Wars: The Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>
 that will make him a superstar. The film isn’t released until next December 
but a short teaser released last month sent the internet into tailspins of 
happy derangement. Isaac, who will play a character called Poe Dameron, has 
said that director JJ Abrams and everyone else have been “loosening it up a 
little bit” and making it “a little more fiery and messy”.

“My family are huge Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> 
fans,” he adds, “and the first movie I ever saw was Return Of The Jedi, but 
X-Men was what I went for autonomously; I chose to find the comic and I was 
like: ‘What is this, this is amazing!’”

X-Men: Apocalypse begins shooting in April and Isaac will play the titular 
villain. He admits that he’d love to go back in time to tell his nine-year-old 
self what’s in store. “It’s pretty crazy because I remember sitting in my room 
with my friend and we would cast it, like: ‘Imagine if they ever made a movie.’ 
I had Tom Cruise for Cyclops, I had Jack Nicholson for Wolverine. I had Julia 
Roberts for Jean Grey.” A beat: “And of course me for Apocalypse.”

Shooting blockbuster superhero mega-franchises may seem like another world of 
experience to, say, making a film like Llewyn Davis, but Isaac disagrees: “My 
job is the same between action and cut; again it’s about the subconscious 
working, so for me it’s so much about expression.” There follows a boyish 
disquisition on human nature.

“Anything that’s made by humans is about humans,” he enthuses, “whether it’s 
about gods or aliens or anything, it’s about some sort of expressive nature 
about us.”

He falters a little – “This is just my own musings based on the comics and my 
interest in all things apocalyptic” – and then he laughs, dorky and apologetic 
but, really, not sorry about a thing.

A Most Violent Year is in cinemas from 23 Jan
 