
This year's â€¦

The Descendants <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142799/descendants>. 
Same director (Alexander Payne), same line in off-beam social comedy, same 
theme of family dysfunction in America's quieter corners. Rather less George 
Clooney.

What's it all about?

Nebraska <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nebraska> stars 1970s veteran Bruce 
Dern as Woody Grant, a befuddled alcoholic who sets out on a mission to redeem 
what he believes is a winning lottery ticket. Along the way, he and his son 
become becalmed in his old hometown of Hawthorne, where the paint peels off the 
house-fronts and home loan hoardings preside over Main Street. And so the stage 
is set for a bittersweet tale of blood ties and the financial crash, with Woody 
cast in the role of an aging American everyman - an exhausted Tom Joad who has 
lost his bearings.

How did it happen?

Very slowly. When Alexander Payne first leafed through Bob Nelson's script 
nearly 10 years ago, he was fresh from makingAbout Schmidt <>, all set to direct
Sideways <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/104447/sideways> and 
altogether resistant to the idea of shooting yet another road movie. But after 
The Descendants, he felt the time was right. The retired Gene Hackman 
reportedly turned down the chance to play Woody Grant, allowing the underrated 
Dern the chance to secure his best role since Coming Home way back in 1978.

Nominations it wants

We're guessing Payne already has his seat reserved at the Dolby theatre. Both 
The Descendants and Sideways won the best adapted screenplay Oscar, while About 
Schmidt picked up nominations for stars Jack Nicholson and Kathy Bates. The 
Academy likes Payne. Nebraska stands a good chance of staking its claim right 
across the all-important best film, actor and director categories.

What it might win

Dern caught most pundits by surprise when he won the best actor award at 
Cannes. But he still remains a long shot in a crowded Oscar field. Nebraska's 
rewards will come elsewhere. If it doesn't win for Nelson's screenplay, Phedon 
Papamichael's luminous black-and-white cinematography may just take the prize.

Reasons to fall for it

Nebraska throws a sweet human story against a broad social canvas, implicitly 
spotlighting the economic rot in the American heartland. It looks gorgeous, is 
directed with a loose, easy swing and boasts a terrific performance from Dern 
as a modern-day pilgrim chasing an impossible dream.

Reasons it might fail

The family tensions, the off-beam comedy, the carefully arranged Americana. 
Haven't we driven this road before, in the company of the same director? 
Nebraska may be soulful and satisfying, but Payne is hardly breaking new ground 
here. He's done all this before, and possibly better.

When can we see it?

Nebraska premiered in competition at the Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> back in May. It opens 
November 15 in the US and December 6 in Britain. It is, in other words, 
perfectly timed for Oscar season.

In four words

Winning ticket, slightly torn.
 