
First, if I can make a fashion editor's speech of my own: the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> are all about the message, and that 
applies to the red carpet as much as the awards. As one critic put it last 
week, the best picture race between The King's Speech and The Social Network 
came down to the Academy members making a choice between a chilly tale of money 
and ruthless ambition, and a heartwarming story of friendship and adversity 
overcome. You do the maths on that one.

The red carpet is a platform for female actors to get a message across about 
who they are. Beauty is part of it, but it's more than that: the dream is to 
get all those folks at home cooing over you, believing in you, rooting for you. 
Because if you can bring that to the table, Hollywood directors will pay good 
money for it. This is why the faux-bridal look has recently been so popular at 
the Oscars. Everyone loves a bride. Probably the only thing more adorable than 
a bride is a kitten, but as Björk proved all those years ago, channelling 
wildlife on the red carpet is risky. So actors tend to go with a pale, frothy, 
wedding-cakey dress, in the hope that it will get the little people on side.

If you don't believe me, consider the Marchesa factor. Marchesa is the label 
behind most of those off-white tulle fantasy gowns. Sandra Bullock, Kate 
Hudson, Kate Beckinsale, Halle Berry – the list of actors who have worn long, 
white Marchesa on red carpets goes on and on. Marchesa is designed by Georgina 
Chapman, who is married to Harvey Weinstein, of King's Speech fame. He makes 
the movies that secure Oscar glory with their heartwarming message – she makes 
the gowns to match. Quite a team.

Trouble is, by now every starlet in town has cottoned on to the bridal ruse. A 
couple of years ago, it got to the point where the Oscar red carpet looked a 
bit like one of those mass weddings they have in South Korea, except with a lot 
more Harry Winston diamonds. And, no offence, but mass weddings aren't 
adorable. So the smarter cookies have moved on, and the red carpet has got a 
little bit more interesting again. And here, without further ado, are the 
winners and the losers of the night.

Queens

Penélope Cruz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372141015&index=5>

The red carpet is usually pretty much an all-girls event, but this was the 
year of the power couple. From a British perspective the Firths have been 
pretty much owning the awards-season power couple thing, what with Colin's 
charming speeches and Livia's laudable Green Carpet Challenge (shewears only 
ethical clothes on the red carpet 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/blogs/livia-firth/default.aspx>). But the honour was 
snatched from them tonight by the Cruz-Bardems, making their first post-baby 
appearance. Penelope looks not only unbelievably hot in her L'Wren Scott dress, 
she also looks incredibly happy. The low-key hair and accessories and the 
slightest suggestion that she has had to squish into that dress, rather than 
every ounce of her baby weight having magically vanishd within a month, all 
make her seem human and therefore even more lovely. The message: I'm just like 
you, girls, apart from being about a zillion times sexier.
 Cate Blanchett at the Oscars 2011 
Cate Blanchett 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet>

Full disclosure: I am totally biased here because I am literally obsessed with 
this Givenchy haute couture collection. On the off-chance you are one of the 
few people I haven't already bored to death on the subject, let me tell you 
about the embellishment on this dress: those beads are pearls and gems trapped 
between the layers of fabric, the idea being that over the decades, the chiffon 
starts to rub and the beads show through, and so the dress develops. These 
dresses are incredibly body-conscious but not in a cheesy boobs-and-bum way. 
Lavender and egg yolk yellow isn't the obvious, go-to red carpet colour 
combination – but that's part of the point. Probably only Blanchett could pull 
this off. And that's the message here: I'm special. I don't do girl-next-door, 
but if you're looking to cast a queen or a white witch, I'm the one.

Natalie Portman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372141050&index=11>
 Best actress nominee Natalie Portman arrives for the Oscars ceremony. 
Photograph: Andrew Gombert/EPA 
She looked really cute with her husband, but for Portman this night wasn't 
really about working the power couple thing. It was about her and her bump. 
Actually, about her, her bump and her cleavage. The dress is kind of 
old-fashioned for Rodarte, which usually does edgier stuff – it doesn't look a 
million miles away from a maternity dress you might find in the formalwear 
section of a home counties department store – but I love the way her cleavage 
and her bump vie for your attention. And either that colour really, really 
flatters her, or that girl actually glows. The message: I may be only 29, but 
I'm an old-fashioned movie star.

Scarlett Johansson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372139894&index=13>

Scarlett Johansson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> is the 
face of Dolce & Gabbana perfume, which means they get to dress her for awards 
shows. This is a good hire. Dressing Johansson in really tight lace is 
essentially product placement in a million sexual fantasies. If anyone else 
wore this dress it would look a bit like upholstery, but when Johansson does it 
– and with that Monroe-ish open mouth, wanton-eyes thing she does – it's 
killer. Also, it's a fantastic colour with that dirty-blonde hair. The message 
in this one is brilliantly uncomplicated, and I won't spell it out because this 
is a family newspaper. It's like the old-fashioned casting couch, except she 
seduces the public directly, and doesn't have to actually sleep with the 
directors. Clever.

Helena Bonham Carter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372140123&index=2>
 Helena Bonham Carter arrives at the Vanity Fair Oscar party Photograph: 
Michael Buckner/WireImage 
Some people think that HBC doesn't get red carpet dressing, but she absolutely 
does. She had this dress made by costume designer Colleen Atwood, because she 
wanted her dress to celebrate film, not fashion. If that's not understanding 
that red-carpet dressing is sending a message, I don't know what is. The 
message: the lady said it herself.

Princess

Hailee Steinfeld 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372137536&index=16>
 Hailee Steinfeld at the Oscars. Photograph: Jason Merritt/Getty Images 
This is a dress that would look silly on anyone older than Hailee Steinfeld's 
14 tender years, and ridiculous anywhere less dressy than the Oscars. In other 
words, it is the perfect dress for this girl on this night. The style is called 
"tea length", by the way. Love that. My one gripe is that the Ferragamo shoes 
are wrong: too high, too showgirl-ish. A kitten heel would have been more 
appropriate, both for the dress and for her age. The message: if you're not 
going "Aw", you must be some kind of cold-hearted, kitten-drowning freak.

Ladies in waiting
 Florence Welch at the Oscars. Photograph: John Shearer/Getty Images 
Florence Welch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372138703&index=8>

I love this. It manages to look very Fashion, and yet very much in keeping 
with Welch's established on-stage look. And all the details (jewellery, nails) 
work too. The message: I'm not all kook any more. I'm all about the polish, now 
that I'm cracking America.

Michelle Williams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372138880&index=19>

OK, I have a theory about Michelle Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michelle-williams>. On the red carpet, she is 
the one who absolutely should be killing it: she's beautiful, and she's got 
great personal style when off duty. But somehow it never happens. This is 
Chanel, but the T-shirt shape totally lacks punch. And the pearls don't show up 
too well – from a distance, it looks like a sweater dress gone bobbly. And her 
body language is stiff and defensive; she doesn't sell it. It's as if the 
message is: I don't want you to know anything about me. Theory over.

Anne Hathaway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372138859&index=10>

Which one? This is the question. Now we know why she accepted the hosting gig: 
the costume changes meant she got to have multiple bites of the apple. Weirdly, 
the worst one was the gown she wore on the actual red carpet. The hair and 
makeup are lovely but then there's a whole section from neck to hip where 
there's literally nothing going on, just a very thin lady in red, and then it 
all gets jazzy around the hips but by then we've lost interest. Later on, 
things improved. I wasn't wild about the gold Oscar de la Renta, but the black 
Westwood, the burgundy Versace and the cream Givenchy were nice, and the Armani 
navy sequins and the Tom Ford black lace were hot. I even liked the Lanvin tux. 
Anne needs to work out what message she's trying to sell us. She sort of knows 
she's not sexy, but she doesn't want to do good girl, and she's too gawky to do 
cute. Seven dresses = mixed messages.

Mila Kunis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372137902&index=15>
 Mila Kunis poses at the Governors Ball following the Oscars. Photograph: 
Valerie Macon/AFP/Getty Images 
This woman is ridiculously beautiful. I think what she's trying to do here is 
move on from the super-charged Black Swan erotica, and show that she has a 
soft, romantic side. That's the message I'm getting from Elie Saab lilac lace. 
I'm a genius, right? It doesn't totally work: the dress seems a bit too big, or 
something, because it should have more shape than that. And the lace panels, 
which are exquisite close up, look a bit raggedy from a distance. But the 
thought is there.

Commoners
 Livia and Colin Firth at the Oscars. Photograph: Ethan Miller/Getty Images 
Livia Firth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372140703&index=3>

I wanted to love this dress. Of course I did, because I'm not an entirely cold 
and callous human being. In case you have been living in a cave, to recap: 
Livia only wears ethical clothes, and this dress was made out of 11 dresses 
from the era of The King's Speech. The trouble is, that's exactly what it looks 
like. Great concept, bad dress. I would feel bad saying this, but Livia did get 
to swan around LA all Sunday night drinking champagne and waving her husband's 
Oscar around.

Annette Bening 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372140645&index=6>

I think people are pretending to like this dress because they like Bening. 
Well, duh. Obviously we love Bening. She's an incredible actor and totally 
beautiful and she has Warren Beatty standing next to her on the red carpet 
gushing about how she's the greatest woman ever. She does not need our 
sympathy. The colour is good but the lines are all going in the wrong 
directions, somehow, making it an unflattering shape.

Amy Adams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2011/feb/27/oscars-fashion-red-carpet#/?picture=372139406&index=20>

This dress is by L'Wren Scott, who is Mick Jagger's girlfriend. You know, 
she's the one who's about twice his height. Anyway, I like the dress, it really 
suits her, but I don't get what's happening with that necklace and the hair. I 
guess the necklace is probably priceless, because it's not pretty. Maybe she 
likes it, but in that case, why half-cover it? And why not wash your hair, 
maybe? It's the Oscars, Amy. Push the boat out and get a blowdry.

Jennifer Hudson

This Versace is fine from the waist down, but – goodness me. I don't consider 
myself a prude, but I am not wild about dresses where you can see the whole 
contour of and almost the entire underside of a woman's breasts.
 Jennifer Hudson at the Vanity Fair Oscars party. Photograph: Craig 
Barritt/Getty Images 
Nicole Kidman

I am quite amazed Nicole didn't rethink the Dior in the wake of the Galliano 
scandal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/feb/25/john-galliano-suspended-arrest-antisemitic-insults?INTCMP=SRCH>
. It seems like most other people did, because there wasn't a lot of it about. 
And it's not even like it's a nice dress. There's a Japanese theme here 
somewhere I think, kind of origami-folds and a fan shape, but I don't really 
get it. And the orange shoes? And, sorry, one last thing: the fringe. It's as 
if at the last minute she wanted to soften the effect of the outfit, which is 
pretty harsh what with her pale colouring and her bony shoulders, so she pulled 
a bit of hair out of her ponytail. Or, maybe it's her husband's fault. Bad hair 
is contagious, you know.

Gwyneth Paltrow

Another shocker from Calvin Klein. This is a spiky, unlovable look. Amazing to 
think that this is the same woman who once wore sugar-pink to the Oscars – and 
won, remember? My take on Paltrowpost-Tracy Anderson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/03/tracy-anderson-personal-trainer-madonna>
 is that's she's a bit too cold-and-mean looking, especially when she has her 
hair poker-straight, but the legs are fabulous. So this is about my 
least-favourite look for her, with no legs and just lots of harsh, metallic 
straight lines. Fail.

Hilary Swank

Hilary Swank <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hilaryswank> always wears such 
pretty dresses, and yet somehow always looks to me like a school athlete whose 
mom has made her dress up for the prom – she's smiling gamely, but really she 
just wants to get back to shooting hoops. Anyway. I think she overdoes the 
frou-frou, and that's why I don't find it believable. This Gucci featherfest 
does nothing to change my mind.

Reese Witherspoon

I don't mind the Armani dress, although it's a bit safe, and also a bit too 
much of an homage to Julia Roberts in 2001. But the hair and the makeup! Reese, 
get a grip on yourself. That cheerleader bouncy hair – yes, it looked great on 
you in Legally Blonde. But that was a comedy. And years ago. Get over it! 
Because this is cheese. Cheese on toast.
 