
I believe that tolerance begins where agreement ends. So over the past month I 
have had to be at my most tolerant as the 149 bus passes my office bearing the 
words "There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy your life. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/06/atheist-bus-campaign-nationwide>
" The words have been posted by humanists and atheists, as a response to 
phrases from scripture that have been placed on bus hoardings in recent months.

The Bible is clear that only a fool says "There is no God" (Psalm 53 
<http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Psalm%2053;&version=31;>). Even 
then such a fool only says so inwardly in their heart. They do not spend 
£140,000 on an advertising campaign. That, I suppose, takes the type of fool 
that is easily parted from their money.

Notwithstanding such foolishness, atheists and humanist are, of course, a 
minority group. Most people, whilst not being attached to an "organised 
religion", do believe in God. There is, as it were, an innate recognition of 
God in mankind. The Bible does, however, say "Answer a fool according to his 
folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes.' (Proverbs 26:5).Our party's bus 
advertising campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/feb/05/atheist-bus-christian-response>, 
which says "There is definitely a God. So join the Christian party and enjoy 
your life", does just that – it answers the foolishness of the atheist and 
humanist ad. Indeed, the recentAdvertising Standards Authority ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jan/21/asa-clears-atheist-bus-ad-campaign>
 on the humanist ad seems to suggest that we all can express our opinions on 
the side of buses. So from next week our adverts will compete alongside the 
atheist ads in a simple case of "Don't get mad, get your own advert up."

But the Christian party's campaign has another purpose. We are preparing for 
elections – the European Elections in June this year. Last year, in a joint 
campaign with the Christian Peoples Alliance, the Christian party came sixth in 
the Greater London Assembly elections beating UKIP, the Respect party and a 
raft of other small parties. However, we failed to beat the far-right BNP, who 
came fifth, and thereby won a seat on the Greater London Assembly – to London's 
shame.

So what the atheists have done through their campaign is provided the 
Christian party with an irresistible opportunity to both proclaim the existence 
of God and promote the existence of the Christian party. That almost has me 
saying "Thank God for atheists."
 