
In 2014, there was a protest outside the Royal Courts of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2014/jul/31/eric-pickles-taste-for-dogma-eats-localism-for-breakfast>
. The protesters were colourful: with flowery dresses, a bee costume and 
balloons. They had clever signs such as: “Give Peas a Chance” and “Don’t Lose 
the Plot”. The protest was described as a “turf war” by newspaper headline 
writers, because they love a pun, and because it was about allotments. Last 
Friday, theprotesters were back 
<http://www.watfordobserver.co.uk/news/14816820._This_is_a_very_emotional_day___High_Court_hearing_to_decide_future_of_allotments/?commentSort=score>
, this time with wheelbarrows, pumpkins and produce, because once again Watford 
council had applied to closeFarm Terrace allotments 
<https://www.facebook.com/SaveFarmTerraceAllotments>, and once again some of 
the people of Watford refused and fought back.

On paper, Watford council’s rationale for closing Farm Terrace may sound 
reasonable, even though the plots have been there since 1896 and have statutory 
protection. The council wants to build a“health campus” 
<http://watfordhealthcampus.org/>, an Orwellian-sounding scheme that 
incorporates a new hospital, green spaces and that dreaded phrase beloved of 
planners, a “community hub”. Watford’s elected mayor, Dorothy Thornhill, 
interviewed the last time the turf war got to court, said that it would bring 
“up to 1,300 new jobs, much-needed homes, green open spaces which can be 
enjoyed by all and community facilities, including a community hub with shops”. 
She also said Farm Terrace plots were “a really hideous, derelict site 
<http://www.watfordobserver.co.uk/news/11052313.Allotment_holders_bring_campaign_to_TV/>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fallotments-farm-terrace-watford-council%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d534013e839ab407661fea3f6a2aa79f6a8303%2F177_0_3060_1836%2F3060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20precious%20allotments%20are%20being%20destroyed%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20get%20our%20hands%20dirty%20%7C%20Rose%20George&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fallotments-farm-terrace-watford-council%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20precious%20allotments%20are%20being%20destroyed%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20get%20our%20hands%20dirty%20%7C%20Rose%20George&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fallotments-farm-terrace-watford-council%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d534013e839ab407661fea3f6a2aa79f6a8303%2F177_0_3060_1836%2F3060.jpg>
 ‘The Farm Terrace case matters because it is a fight about what is of value.’ 
The campaigners in 2014. Photograph: Cathy Gordon/PA Archive/PA Images 
It’s difficult to object to a new hospital or 1,300 new jobs. But anything 
that uses the expression “green spaces” raises my hackles, because it means 
that the rest of the project is hard spaces and concrete. The council’s “master 
plan” is actually unclear: even the hospital doesn’t know what it will use the 
site for yet (Sara Jane Trebar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/09/farm-terrace-allotment-holders-launch-campaign-to-save-nations-plots>
, a Farm Terrace campaigner, thinks it will become68 houses and a car park for 
Watford football club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/17/allotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces>
). But if it were to be built without allotments, as the mayor’s comments 
imply, it would be an own goal. Gardening, as aSocial Care Institute for 
Excellence review of evidence 
<http://www.scie-socialcareonline.org.uk/gardening-as-a-mental-health-intervention-a-review/r/a1CG0000001ztthMAA>
 showed in 2013, reaps “a range of benefits across emotional, social, 
vocational, physical and spiritual domains”. Allotments are as good for the 
people of Watford as that community hub with shops (which Watford presumably 
already has plenty of).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fallotments-farm-terrace-watford-council%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4c28eb0d9234e803b0e14a6364fda58a2e6f6b%2F0_183_2750_1650%2F2750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20precious%20allotments%20are%20being%20destroyed%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20get%20our%20hands%20dirty%20%7C%20Rose%20George&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fallotments-farm-terrace-watford-council%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20precious%20allotments%20are%20being%20destroyed%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20get%20our%20hands%20dirty%20%7C%20Rose%20George&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fallotments-farm-terrace-watford-council%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4c28eb0d9234e803b0e14a6364fda58a2e6f6b%2F0_183_2750_1650%2F2750.jpg>
 ‘Five minutes at my allotment, kneeling to weed, putting my hands into soil, 
and my spirit lifts.’ Photograph: Sam Frost for the Guardian 
I support the Farm Terrace fighters because I’d fight for my plot, even though 
I’m a haphazard gardener. Slugs have eaten more this year than I’ve managed to 
grow. But when I’ve struggled with depression, when even getting out of the 
house seemed like the hardest thing in the world, I still sometimes walked five 
minutes to my plot, past the neat and flourishing allotments that shame me; 
past the scruffy ones that comfort me, to my higgledy-piggledy plot with its 
rose bed, sturdy greenhouse and pathetic tomato plants, my glorious collard 
greens and magnificent roses.

Five minutes there, kneeling to weed, putting my hands into soil, and my 
spirits lift. There are other riches there too: the businessman who arrives 
stressed and leaves less so; the young families who leave with children 
clutching sweetcorn or potatoes, now knowing that not all fruit and vegetables 
come wrapped in plastic; the old boys who offer advice, wanted or unwanted. 
Growing your own isn’t always cheaper, but it’s always better. It is one of the 
best counter-balances that remains to our cult of lonely, commerce-driven 
individualism.

Losing the plot: the fight is on to save our green and pleasant allotments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/17/allotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces>
In law, allotments are apparently well protected, from the 1908 Small Holdings 
and Allotments Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1908/36/pdfs/ukpga_19080036_en.pdf> that 
instructed councils to supply allotments to meet demand, to further 
strengthened legislation in 1925. Allotments on statutory land, such as Farm 
Terrace, can’t be disposed of without ministerial consent. But pressure groups 
such as Save All Allotments andDon’t Lose the Plot 
<https://www.facebook.com/Dont-lose-the-plot-187435658032477/> think the 
Localism Act of 2011 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/localism-act-2011-overview> and 
recent 2014 guidelines that supposedly simplified the law only made it simpler 
for plot land to be turned into building sites. In afreedom of information 
request <https://homefarmer.co.uk/save-all-allotments/>, Save All Allotments 
found that between 2007 and 2014, 194 of 198 applications to close allotments 
were granted by the secretary of state. TheNational Allotment Society 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/> is more sanguine, pointing out that of the 65 of 87 
applications for disposal that were granted between 2010 and 2013, most were 
for small bits of land for access or flood alleviation, or land that had long 
been disused.

But Farm Terrace isn’t disused, nor derelict, nor hideous. The case matters 
because it is a fight about what is of value. Of course hospitals and houses 
are needed. The problem with Farm Terrace is that Watford council can’t see the 
worth of the plots, nor that a proper health scheme can be more than a 
community hub, shops and a bit of green space. The judicial review adjourned on 
Friday with no decision reached, but my grubby allotmenting fingers are crossed 
that peas will be given a chance. I hope that there is room, still, in our era 
of cat-calling, spite and profound uncertainty, for the simple, humble act that 
is putting your fingers into the earth, and reaping what you sow.
 