
Welcome to 2015, a year in which genre film-makers will be doing their level 
best to look back to 1977 (Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>), 1982 (The Legend of 
Conan) and 1984 (Terminator: Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/04/terminator-genisys-arnold-schwarzenegger>
). Oh and let us not forgetMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/28/comic-con-2014-mad-max-fury-road-trailer-release-tom-hardy>
 (riffing off 1979’s Mad Max and its 1981 and 1985 sequels),Cinderella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/kenneth-branagh-cinderella-needs-frozen-girl-power>
 (looking even further back to Disney’s 1950 animated classic) andThe Jungle 
Book <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-jungle-book> (doing the same for the 
Mouse House’s wonderful 1967 take on Rudyard Kipling’s fantasy fable).

Elsewhere, this year’s upcoming slate features a torrent of sci-fi sequels 
(June’sJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/157940/jurassic-world>, November’s The 
Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part Two), as well as the odd comic book movie based 
on pre-existing properties (Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>, 
Avengers: Age of Ultron.) All in all, there’s not a lot of originality to look 
forward to, which should come as no surprise to anyone who has kept at least 
one eye on Hollywood in recent years.

Animated fantasies

Let us kick off then, by celebrating the fact that Pixar will deliver two 
original animated movies in 2015. The Disney-owned studio which gave us Toy 
Story, Ratatouille, The Incredibles, Up and Wall-E hasalready debuted the 
trailer for Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/11/inside-out-trailer-pixar-disney-animation>
, which arrives in June in US cinemas (24 July in the UK), while we’ve just 
been treated to somenew concept art for November’s The Good Dinosaur 
<http://screenrant.com/good-dinosaur-pixar-205-artwork-images-logo-synopsis/>. 
Of the two, Inside Out looks closer to the spirit of the studio’s truly 
pioneering productions, with its vision of a young girl’s everyday life as seen 
through the eyes of the anthropomorphised emotions who live in the Star 
Trek-style “bridge” that represents her mind.

Then again, any half-decent animated movie about dinosaurs is going to be very 
hard to beat at the box office, at least if cinemagoers aged eight and under 
have anything to say about it. Might The Good Dinosaur be the new Cars – hugely 
popular with merchandise makers but Pixar’s least effective movie in terms of 
concept and realisation – or can Peter Sohn’s film about a 70-foot tall 
Apatosaurus who befriends a human boy transcend its slightly hackneyed 
storyline? Pixar has already delayed the movie once and kicked Up’s Bob 
Peterson off the project. That should be bad news, bar for the fact the studio 
usually knows what it’s doing in these situations. Brenda Chapman, who came up 
with the original storyline for Brave, was sidelined in favour of Mark Andrews 
on the 2012 Caledonian-themed medieval fantasy, which nevertheless went on to 
win the Oscar for best animated film the following year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFavW-Y1kaxs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFavW-Y1kaxs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFavW-Y1kaxs&media=>
 Watch the Almost Home short 
Meanwhile, Pixar rivals DreamWorks Animation is also showing signs of life. 
The studio’s films tend to come thick and fast compared to those of its peers, 
and can be a mixed bag beyond the Kung Fu Panda and How to Train Your Dragon 
sagas. Yet Home, about a Steve Martin-voiced alien leader who brings his lost 
race of squidgy-legged extra terrestrials to Earth in search of refuge from 
their intergalactic nemeses, looks bright and endearing. Check out the short 
Almost Home, which shows what happened to the ever-optimistic space gang before 
they arrived in our solar system.

Flamboyant space opera

Unbelievably, cinemagoers still have almost a year to go until Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens hits cinemas on 18 December 2015. Will it be any good? JJ Abrams 
has enveloped the production in such a shroud of secrecy that it remains very 
hard to tell, but the signs are positive. The teaser trailer is on course to be 
themost-viewed of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/02/star-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-most-popular-ever-internet>
, and there has been so much hype regarding the use of real sets and 
animatronic characters that you have to wonder if Andy Serkis is quaking in his 
boots for fear of a negative reaction to his reported mo-cap based creation.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417193289728%2FStar-Wars-The-Force-Awake-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417193289728%2FStar-Wars-The-Force-Awake-017.jpg>
 Watch the Star Wars teaser trailer 
It would be almost impossible for a film-maker of Abrams’ talents working from 
a screenplay written with The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi’s 
Lawrence Kasdan to create a movie any worse than any of the three prequel 
films. The key to The Force Awakens’ success, and with it the chances of a slew 
of sequels and spin-off movies being planned by Disney, will lie in the 
director’s ability to find genuine warmth in the cold recesses of space. A 
machine-honed, by-the-numbers Star Wars-lite movie simply won’t cut it, no 
matter how much money the studio throws at it. To keep cinemagoers happy, 
Abrams must deliver a dose of cosmic joy so pure and unfettered that it sets 
the midi-chlorians whirling like star-swept dervishes caught in the half-light 
of a departing X-Wing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjupiter-ascending-mila-kunis-channing-tatum-trailer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F12%2F10%2F1386677813536%2FMila-Kunis-in-Jupiter-Asc-020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jupiter%20Ascending%3A%20watch%20Mila%20Kunis%20and%20Channing%20Tatum%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20Wachowskis'%20new%20sci-fi%20adventure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjupiter-ascending-mila-kunis-channing-tatum-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jupiter%20Ascending%3A%20watch%20Mila%20Kunis%20and%20Channing%20Tatum%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20Wachowskis%27%20new%20sci-fi%20adventure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjupiter-ascending-mila-kunis-channing-tatum-trailer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F12%2F10%2F1386677813536%2FMila-Kunis-in-Jupiter-Asc-020.jpg>
 Watch the Jupiter Ascending trailer 
Also heading beyond the Earth’s borders is the Wachowski siblings’ 
considerably more garishJupiter Ascending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/10/jupiter-ascending-trailer-matrix-wachowskis>
, in which the maverick film-makers imagine Mila Kunis (as if) as a lowly 
earthbound janitor who discovers her destiny has vast galactic significance. 
From the trailers, this one looks part The Matrix, part The Fifth Element, with 
a little bit of David Lynch’s Dune thrown in for good measure. After the 
disappointing box office of Cloud Atlas, you have to wonder whether the 
Wachowskis can ever repeat the success of the Matrix trilogy. At a cost of 
$175m, Jupiter Ascending might just be their last chance at a big-budget genre 
movie. Let’s hope the critics are kind and the cinema sales swift when the 
movie debuts next month.

Dystopian future visions 

Into (slightly) more serious sci-fi territory now, and 12 June sees the 
arrival of Jurassic World, with Colin Trevorrow, director of indie time-travel 
comedy Safety Not Guaranteed, taking charge of the gargantuan prehistoric 
monster franchise developed for the screen by Steven Spielberg. “You just went 
and made a new dinosaur. Probably not a good idea,” says a suitably laconic 
Chris Pratt in the trailer, which probably tells you everything you need to 
know here. But hey, at least theydropped the brain-bendingly nutty “dinos with 
guns” idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/oct/12/jurassic-park-iv-half-human>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRFinNxS5KN4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRFinNxS5KN4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRFinNxS5KN4&media=>
 Watch the Jurassic World trailer 
Likely to score just as highly in terms of thrills and spills, even as the 
franchise itself limps into the futuristic sunset, is November’s The Hunger 
Games: Mockingjay – Part Two. The fabulous Jennifer Lawrence continues to do 
her damnedest to keep this long-running dystopian saga’s head above water, but 
ever since story-planners bid a sad farewell to the terrifyingly bloodthirsty 
Arena in 2013’s Catching Fire and began exploring the future dystopian nation 
of Panem in excruciatingly pointless detail, the whole thing has gone downhill. 
Director Francis Lawrence can throw as many hi-tech special effects at the 
screen as he likes in this adaptation of the second half of Suzanne Collins’ 
weak final Hunger Games book: unfortunately they’ll never escape the nagging 
suspicion that things were a whole lot better when this was just a well-tooled 
Hollywood rip-off of Battle Royale.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYWNWi-ZWL3c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYWNWi-ZWL3c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYWNWi-ZWL3c&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Mad Max: Fury Road 
Elsewhere, May’s Mad Max: Fury Road has been picking up hype following the 
release of two gorgeous-looking trailers. Personally, I always wondered why the 
residents of future dystopian Australia never worked out that you could set up 
by the coast – possibly near a convenient source of water – and avoid the need 
for punky eye makeup and constant battles over dwindling petrol resources 
altogether. The new film, which stars Tom Hardy as Max, does look like an awful 
lot of fun.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1k59gXTWf-A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1k59gXTWf-A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1k59gXTWf-A&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Tomorrowland 
May brings us Tomorrowland, the latest movie from Brad Bird of The Incredibles 
and Ratatouille fame. Starring George Clooney, Britt Robertson, Hugh Laurie and 
Judy Greer, the film appears to centre on a mysterious object that allows the 
user to travel instantly to another reality. Meanwhile March’sChappie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/07/chappie-intelligent-robots-neill-blomkamp>
 is District 9 director Neill Blomkamp’s return to the streets of metropolitan 
South Africa in the company of a Short Circuit-style sapient robot and Die 
Antwoord members Yolandi and Ninja.

Arnie comebacks
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D62E4FJTwSuc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D62E4FJTwSuc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D62E4FJTwSuc&media=>
 Watch the Terminator: Genisys trailer 
This year might just mark Arnold Schwarzenegger’s last chance to return to the 
Hollywood A-list after a torrent of poor releases in the wake of his seven-year 
stint as governor of California. Both July’s Terminator: Genisys and The Legend 
of Conan, which is still slated for a 2015 release but may now miss the 
deadline after a series of delays, will see the Austrian Oak return to familiar 
territory. The trailer for Genisys suggests a time-travel plot straight from 
planet crazy, but at least the film-makers havefollowed James Cameron’s lead in 
their efforts to explain why Schwarzenegger’s T-800 appears as aged as the 
actor himself 
<http://filmschoolrejects.com/news/james-cameron-old-arnold-schwarzenegger-terminator-genisys.php>
. Genisys has a decent supporting cast in Game of Thrones’ Emilia Clarke and 
Zero Dark Thirty’s Jason Clarke, but director Alan Taylor’s best effort is 
2013’s middling Thor: The Dark World. The jury remains out.

Comic-book epics

Finally, no Week in Geek preview would be complete without a rundown of the 
coming year’s superhero stylings. Yet 2015 promises to be something of a calm 
before the storm, at least in terms of the number of new comic-book movies 
released ahead of an unholy smackdown of films set to arrive via Marvel and 
Warner/DC between 2016 and 2020. April/May’sAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/23/avengers-age-of-ultron-film-trailer-released-after-leak>
 looks the best bet to blast the genre to new levels of epic spectacle, with 
Iron Man, Thor, Hulk, Captain America et al taking on the villainous titular 
robot with possible help from newcomers Quicksilver (Aaron Taylor-Johnson) and 
Scarlet Witch (Elizabeth Olsen). With Joss Whedon returning to the director’s 
chair and providing the whip-smart dialogue, the sequel promises to be the 
comic-book movie that superhero naysayers just can’t help enjoying, providing 
the endgame doesn’t descend too far into Transformers-style brain-battery this 
time around. Much will depend on whether James Spader’s CGI Ultron can equal 
Tom Hiddleston’s opulently evil Loki last time out. Marvel hasn’t got a great 
record when it comes to digitally enhanced bad guys, with this year’s Guardians 
of the Galaxy triumphing despite the presence of a particularly insipid Josh 
Brolin-voiced Thanos.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Favengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-joss-whedan-marvel-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421157574891%2Fcrop_KP-67536_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Avengers%3A%20Age%20of%20Ultron%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Joss%20Whedon's%20Marvel%20sequel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Favengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-joss-whedan-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Avengers%3A%20Age%20of%20Ultron%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Joss%20Whedon%27s%20Marvel%20sequel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Favengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-joss-whedan-marvel-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421157574891%2Fcrop_KP-67536_640.jpeg>
Next up, on 17 July, comes the much-discussed Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/23/ant-man-marvel-film-edgar-wright>
. With poor Edgar Wright having been unceremoniously dumped due to creative 
differences with Marvel, the movie could not have suffered from more rampant 
negative buzz – particularly in the UK – had it decided to follow the famously 
derided domestic battery storyline from the comics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dent7BoDR1yE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dent7BoDR1yE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dent7BoDR1yE&media=>
Replacement director Peyton Reed (Yes Man) looks like a shoddy stand-in for 
the co-creator of Spaced, Shaun of the Dead and Hot Fuzz. But Marvel is 
developing a reputation as a producer-driven studio capable of getting by 
without installing celebrated names to take charge of the cameras, much like 
the makers of the James Bond series, Eon Productions. Whether this meansAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> is all set to be Marvel’s Quantum of 
Solace remains to be seen.

Finally, we are in theory due to see the new Fantastic Four movie hitting 
cinemas in July following at least one significant rewrite. Fan ire over 
casting – the movie features Miles Teller as Mr Fantastic, Kate Mara as 
Invisible Woman, Michael B Jordan as The Human Torch and Jamie Bell as The 
Thing – would appear to be a storm in a superhero tea cup. The concern for me 
is whether director Josh Trank can deliver a fresh perspective on the superhero 
movie without overdoing the whole found-footage dynamic which (for me) 
ultimately rather ruined his previous effort Chronicle. It would also be a pity 
if the film-makers plumped for a rumoured “dark” take on what has always been a 
pretty bright and breezy superhero ensemble. But the new team can hardly fare 
worse than their distinctly throwaway big-screen predecessors, who floundered 
in 2005 and 2007 despite the presence of a pre-Captain America Chris Evans. And 
in Britain’s Toby Kebbell, Trank et al have a Doctor Doom who’s more than 
capable of stealing every scene he appears in.
 