
Is it Middlemarch, War and Peace or a pair of skiing trousers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/01/freedom-jonathan-franzen-review>? 
Our paperback guru Nicholas Lezard didn't greet Jonathan Franzen'sFreedom 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780007269761/freedom> with 
quite theunalloyed cheer it received on first publication 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2010/aug/23/jonathan-franzen-freedom>
, but he still found in it – as well as a shopping list for the Great American 
Novel – "wise, expansive, knowing" entertainment.

One of the most urgent and important novels of 2010 comes out in paperback 
this month – David Grossman'sTo the End of the Land 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099546740/to-the-end-of-the-land>
, the story of a Jewish mother who feels she has lost her son to the army and 
anti-Palestinian nationalism. She embarks on an odyssey from Jerusalem to 
Gallilee, seeking to outrun the military "notifiers" who could knock on her 
door at any moment with news of his death.Jacqueline Rose called it 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/sep/18/david-grossman-end-of-the-land> 
"without question one of the most powerful and moving novels I have read"; "a 
novel that recounts like no other I have read the lengths to which a mother 
will go to preserve the life of her child".

More psychological and geographical journeys in Will Self's Walking to 
Hollywood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9781408809945/walking-to-hollywood>
, a blend of fiction and memoir in which,as M John Harrison put it 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/sep/18/walking-hollywood-will-self>, 
"almost everyone is played by, or plays, someone else". It takes in conceptual 
art in north London, a hallucinatory Los Angeles, and the disappearing 
shoreline of the Yorkshire coast.

The Booker-shortlisted Snowdrops 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781848874534/snowdrops> by 
AD Miller exposes a fascinating world: corrupt, cash-rich Moscow, with sharp 
practice around every corner. A "snowdrop" is a snow-buried corpse revealed in 
the spring thaw; expat lawyer Nicholas, the morally weak (anti)hero, only sees 
the scam he's caught up in when it's too late.Our review 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jan/01/snowdrops-a-d-miller-review> 
considered it "both a very good novel and a slightly disappointing one", 
written with tremendous energy but also a certain amount of stereotyping.

One not to miss is the Austrian writer Daniel Kehlmann's Fame: A Novel in Nine 
Episodes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9781849163781/fame-a-novel-in-nine-episodes>
, a series of comic skits on the opportunities new technology gives us to play 
around with our identities; it was described by Jonathan Franzen as "a real 
beauty of a book, farcical, satiric, melancholic, and humane". Meanwhile 
there's comedy of later life from Armistead Maupin, whoseMary Ann in Autumn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780552777063/mary-ann-in-autumn>
 is the eighth in his San Francisco-set Tales of the City series, now running 
for nearly 40 years. Vital to the early books' appeal,said our reviewer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/nov/20/mary-ann-autumn-armistead-review>, 
was Maupin's "genial observation of a hedonistic paradise related in an 
approachable style that made depravity seem curiously wholesome": this new 
volume may be darker and tinged with loss, but style-wise the author has "got 
his mojo back" and is "back to his rapturous best".

"The big difference between 'conflict diamonds' and 'conflict oil' is that one 
is a luxury and the other a necessity, which means the international community 
turns a blind eye," wrote our reviewer of Helon Habila'sOil on Water 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780141046846/oil-on-water>. 
Habila's third novel highlights the environmental and human rights abuses of 
oil drilling in Nigeria, painting a grim but compelling picture of the "fetid, 
viscous, menacing landscape".

Jennifer Egan's success with A Visit from the Goon Squad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781849010337/a-visit-from-the-goon-squad>
 has prompted Corsair to repackage her second novel, 2001'sLook At Me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781780330990/look-at-me>, 
about a New York model who becomes unrecognisable after a car crash and engages 
in desperate behaviour, online and off, in a bid to reestablish her identity. 
The New York Timescalled it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/23/books/growing-accustomed-to-her-face.html> 
an "opaque, surreal tale of maladjustment". Reaching further back, the fantastic
Faber Finds <http://www.faber.co.uk/faberfinds/> - "The Place for Lost Books" - 
has rescued Sylvia Townsend Warner's 1966 sharp story collectionA Stranger With 
a Bag and Other Stories 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9780571280100/a-stranger-with-a-bag-and-other-stories>
. The author ofLolly Willowes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781853815027/lolly-willowes-or-the-loving-huntsman>
 is now, as Sarah Waters says, "shamefully under-read"; this edition might help 
to correct that.

• That's a selection of our paperback reviews: don't forget to add your own 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/search/results?query=Title%2C+author+or+ISBN&searchBy=all>
.
 