
The aerial photograph or video is one of the dominant visual genres of our 
age. It is certainly the most domineering. Newly released, vibrant colour 
images of a previously uncontacted Amazonian tribe have beenphotographed 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/01/31/brazilian-indians-threate_n_816346.html#233132>
 by a Brazilian Indian affairs department aircraft near the border with Peru. 
In collaboration with the Brazilian government, these have been released by
Survival International <http://www.uncontactedtribes.org/brazilphotos>, an NGO 
that is campaigning for the tribe's protection.

One of the most widely circulated shows an adult male and four children by 
their hut. They are at a loss as to what to do about the intruder above. The 
man has his bow half-raised. One child points. Another holds a machete 
defensively to their chest. I take in, but cannot reciprocate, the stunned gaze 
of those swooped upon by this camera from the air.

Transfixed by their looks, I spontaneously recall similar images. There are 
Francis Ford Coppola's Wagnerian helicopters strafing a Vietnamese village, 
shot in even more amplified colour, inApocalypse Now 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0078788/>. While in the spring of 2010, the 
WikiLeaks release ofUS classified footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2010/apr/07/wikileaks-collateral-murder-iraq-video>
 of an Apache helicopter's strafing of innocent civilians in Iraq again made 
visible the loss of foreign bodies to war. It was these that were absent from 
the CNN missile-head camera images of precision bombing in the first Gulf war 
and the satellite images presented by Colin Powell to the UN security council 
as evidence of supposed Iraqi WMD. Nevertheless, the post-facto relaying of 
atrocity footage by WikiLeaks, seen through the cross-hairs of the gunner who 
shot it, sickeningly replayed the inevitable fixing, classification and 
punishment of those videoed from above.

In the age of the drone and the satellite, being viewed from above is the 
first step to being considered a worthy subject to be viewed, controlled, or 
worse. In our own urban environment in the UK, the prerequisite of being a 
citizen with a legitimate right to occupy public space is to be placed under 
the surveillance of countless cameras looking down at us.

Taken at the moment, that brief pause, before the risk of contact or 
contamination is encountered, these nostalgic images of a lost tropical world 
tantalise us with the vain prospect that there are still undiscovered corners 
of the planet. In fact, it is the tribe's very connectedness with the economic 
dynamics of its region that puts it at risk. Illegal loggers on the Peruvian 
side of the border have displaced the tribe intoBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, motivating the release of the 
images by the Brazilian authorities.

The photographs also recall a history of mapping and colonisation.

The photographs also recall a history of mapping and colonisation. The 
invention of photography in the first half of the 19th century precedes the 
emergence later in the same century of anthropology as an academic discipline. 
Photography thus provided one of the latter's key instruments in identifying 
and classifying the human subjects of newly colonised territories. The founding 
ofNational Geographic <http://www.nationalgeographic.co.uk/> magazine in 1888 
is symptomatic; more or less coinciding with the colonial expansion of the 
United States abroad from 1898 onwards, a high proportion of its early issues 
were devoted to the Caribbean, Central America, the Philippines, Guam and 
Hawaii. Detailed maps, high-quality photography and writing often resembling a 
descriptive inventory of human and natural resources, assessing the potential 
of profitable development for the burgeoning superpower.

These vivid but detached photographs are currently being distributed 
relatively indifferently through social networks, somewhat eclipsed by aerial 
images of the crowds inTahrir Square <http://twitpic.com/3vfg34>. On Twitter, 
@tearfuldogs writes: "Couldn't someone have given that lost tribe a map?". 
Bearing in mind that discovery has a dreadful history in Latin America, 
photography will certainly fix this Amazonian tribe as a co-ordinate on the 
maps of those who would protect, integrate, exploit, or erase them. Whether the 
tribe itself will have its own maps to enable it to navigate its newly found 
visibility is a moot point. For the moment, as a photograph of two tribesmen 
resplendent in war paint shows, firing arrows at the aeroplane above is their 
only active response.

â€¢ This article was amended on 2 February 2011. It originally stated that 
photography was invented at the end of the 19th century, rather later than was 
in fact the case. This has now been corrected
 