
Day 1
 When you reach Oban, you begin to see why the Scots feel the need for a drop 
of the hard stuff. It's a beautiful town, built into the wooded hillsides 
around the harbour; but it's a remote place and the warm, long evening that 
greets us can't be a permanent feature this far north. Over the next week, Oban 
will begin to seem like a metropolis.

I am to board the Eda Frandsen: a gorgeous, wooden, 60-year-old Danish sailing 
cutter, and one of 100 boats to join the Classic Malts cruise, sailing around 
the Inner Hebrides via the whisky distilleries of Scotland. It's piloted by 
skipper Toby Robinson, whose Cornish rasp sounds reassuringly seaworthy; his 
mother Mary cooks in the galley and friend Thew is first mate. If we are to be 
marooned on an island, the family Robinson will make ideal companions. Six 
willing, if not able, landlubbers are joining them as rope-pulling guests for 
the week. Before setting sail, we take a tour round Oban Distillery. It's a 
little complicated, but this is essentially the magic formula: take barley, add 
water, ferment and barrel it, and presto! - a bottle of single malt. Forget 
splitting the atom. This stuff is science.

Day 2
 Crowds wave us off as our boats parade back and forth around Oban harbour. We 
tack, then consider a spot of gybing - or so I'm led to believe, because I 
don't really know what we're doing, except that I'm pulling very hard on ropes 
as instructed. One thing I am quick to learn is that the huge wooden pole 
swinging dangerously around over my head is the boom. When the boom swings, 
duck. Easy.

And then we're off into a landscape of green hills, grey cliffs and blue sea, 
signs of human habitation sliding further away with every minute. A whale 
breaches, 50 yards from our boat.

We make a stop ashore one of the Garvellachs, a small island named Eileach an 
Naoimh. We heave to (a kind of braking manoeuvre with sails), let down the 
dinghy and jet off across the waves. There's no sign of life beyond sheep, and 
the ruins of a 9th century monastery. I climb the steep slope until the land 
gives way to the sheerest of cliffs. It is magical: I stand aloft on the 
clifftop, the breeze running through my crew cut, until a seagull divebombs my 
head, and I realise I'm not quite sure how to get down.

Later we drop anchor in a secluded bay on the Isle of Jura, miles from the 
nearest road. It comes as something of a shock for the naturist couple who have 
pitched a tent on the beach when our boat is joined by five others in 
preparation for an all-night barbie and sing-song.

The sunset fills the bay with a red glow. For my shipmate David, a distillery 
manager, it is the perfect moment for a whisky nosing. As the days go by, we 
discover that few are the moments that can't be enlivened with a dram. A 
full-on tasting, or nosing, is a serious affair. David lines up six nosing 
glasses for each participant. We check for colour, body, and then we're on to 
aromatic vapours. I take a deep sniff, enough to eradicate the final traces of 
delicate nasal sensory equipment left to me after years of city life. Tears 
form in my eyes.

David suggests adding water, which I do. This, he explains, will release the 
rich aromas. Frankly, I'm not getting much in the way of different flavours. 
Another shipmate Peter, says he's getting beeswax. I suspect him of making it 
up.

We try the next, a Dalwhinnie. I try to distinguish a new scent, but my nose 
fails me. David's disappointment is barely masked. Peter though, is getting 
lavender. "Lavender, eh?" says David, impressed. An old colleague of his is on 
the next boat. "Peter's getting lavender," he tells him. The colleague looks at 
him seriously, and picks up the glass. "Lavender, eh?"

"Let's try another!" David beams. "Come on, Gwyn. Remember, there are no right 
or wrong answers."

I swig the next single malt, a Glenkinchie, desperately. "I'm getting pears!" 
I cry.

There is a short silence. "Don't take the piss," David says quietly.

A voice beside me interrupts: "Is thatÂ¿ molasses?" Peter is freeform whisky 
tasting to the highest order. I give up and return to the red wine. For the 
record, Talisker tastes of TCP but loads of people love it. I'd go for the 
Dalwhinnie or the Oban, but mine is not a nose to trust.

Day 3
 We pull out of Pig Bay. Lit from the west by the rising sun, the bay looks a 
completely different place, possibly even more beautiful than the night before.

Sailing down past Jura to Islay, the wind is low, and there are clear blue 
skies: enough to pull several members of our party overboard to test the cool 
seas. David, the distillery manager, is persuaded to pose lying on his back 
with a bottle of Dalwhinnie on his stomach, balancing despite the waves lapping 
at his paunch.

We continue down through the Sound of Islay past, to great excitement, the 
Paps of Jura. Nowhere do they look more pap-like than from our next mooring 
point, Caol Ila Distillery, set in a natural harbour across the water on Islay.

Peaty Islay is jam-full of distilleries. We visit one of the most picturesque, 
Lagavulin, established back in 1816. The grave of the founder's father lies 
within its walls, testifying to an 86-year lifespan - double the 19th century 
average - that the distillers put down to a daily dram or more. (The word dram, 
incidentally, can be uttered with a perfectly straight face, but is better 
received when delivered with a twitch of the mouth and perhaps a cocked 
eyebrow, indicating a certain self-reflexive kitschness and the knowledge that 
a wee dram will end up with at least half a bottle sunk.)

Back at Caol Ila, other boats have moored and rafted alongside us, next to the 
tall ship Jean de la Lune on the pier. We cross over to ingest a few drams on 
Jean's deck in the moonlight, but the tranquillity of the evening is shattered 
by a boat that races through the Sound. Two huge waves set the whole raft of 
boats jumping violently in the water, masts clashing, sides scraping. There is 
dismay, then fury among the skippers and crew checking for damage. The culprits 
are identified as the US navy: regularly on manoeuvres around these parts and, 
according to my seafaring companions, lacking in basic nautical civility.

It is a shocking breach of the peace. But, Jon, a whisky writer on board, is 
not to be outdone. Barely have we settled when sirens fill the night air. 
Islay's fire brigade is roused. Only later does the sordid truth emerge. On a 
lone visit to the distillery, Jon's hand, steadied by the flow of single malt, 
broke the fire alarm's protective glass while attempting to locate a light 
switch.

Day 4
 Inspected in daylight, the damage proves to be less serious than feared. Our 
Eda Frandsen has suffered a minor crack in the woodwork and Jean de la Lune's 
freezer has stopped working. There are mutterings of suing the US navy for a 
replacement part.

With a huge day's sailing ahead, we set off early. A strong swell pushes the 
boats towards shore. The forecast is mixed and there's the anticipation of a 
rough ride ahead. We are given oilskins, and a brief but serious safety talk 
from Toby on the procedures for abandoning ship and rescuing a man overboard. 
Strangely, I don't need to be told twice.

I have no nautical experience, although several generations of my family were 
named after my great-great-grandfather's friend, the captain of the Titanic. 
The right moment to share this fact with the crew never really seems to arise.

But the wind and the waves don't diminish the fun; on the contrary, for the 
first time I see sailing's edge. We plunge forward at speed, water flooding 
onto the deck as the boat heels to left and right. In wide open, calmer waters, 
I'm briefly allowed to take the wheel. Sitting at the helm, steering as the 
boat leans, the bow plunging up and down through the spray, it's a great 
feeling - like how I'd imagine it would be to sit astride a Harley, or a 
particularly large, wet horse.

We sail past Mull, the religious community of Iona, and the small isles, Rum, 
Eigg and Muck. In the evening we drop anchor in Tarbert Bay, Canna.

Day 5
 Canna is idyllic - a comparatively lush, green island, with a population of 
20 or so. In the morning, I go ashore and climb its hills for fantastic views. 
Back at the boat, fishermen pull up, and we barter a bottle of Cragganmore for 
some crab and lobster freshly plucked from the sea.

Today it's a shorter sail, to the southern tip of Skye, where we drop anchor 
beneath the Cuillins in Loch Scavaig. Grey clouds are congregating on the 
hilltops, but this, our first taste of wet weather, seems suitably atmospheric.

A colony of seals lies on the rocks beneath the cliffs. We take a dinghy to 
see them close up. Only when we are a few yards away do these clubbable 
creatures shuffle off the rocks and into the sea. All around our boat, a 
multitude of curious heads pop up to watch our next move.

Dark clouds gather, and we retreat below deck. It's a choppy night at sea, but 
not enough to dissuade Jon from adding to his catalogue of shame. Stealing away 
with the last full bottle of single malt, he persuades a Dutch shipmate to 
unhitch Eda's dinghy and row silently across the loch to another, part 
female-crewed boat, the pair only returning - whisky and gin-soaked - the next 
morning.

Day 6
 Today is the triumphant entrance into Skye's Loch Harport, where all the 
ships on the cruise are to meet at the Talisker Distillery for a ceilidh and 
general knees-up. In theory, it should be a fairly easy day's sail around Skye, 
but the prevailing winds are not kind. The Eda Frandsen is steering a wide 
course, and Vilnia, a small boat crewed by a couple, is seen struggling behind. 
The news comes over the radio: her topsail sheet is caught in the prop. Though 
once I would have found this information baffling, my maritime days have left 
me fluent. Basically, there is a rope caught in the engine and Vilnia is up 
shit creek.

We heave to. While our skipper cannot leave us, Thew can go to their aid in 
the dinghy. But he requires one other to lend a hand. Cometh the hour, cometh 
the man. Jon, scourge of fire services and nocturnal whisky-rustler, steps 
forward. The pair speed off, over the seas round Skye. It is an anxious wait. 
Finally, the news: Vilnia has been repaired. Ropes have been spliced. We see a 
dot on the horizon, growing ever larger, until Thew and Jon are back aboard. 
For Thew, an everyday episode of maritime heroism. For Jon, even if his own 
role in Vilnia's rescue is never fully explained, it's a fittingly epic 
redemption.

We sail proudly down Loch Harport. Not even an ungainly dropping of the 
mainsail by us amateur seamen can tarnish the Eda Frandsen's glory. Tomorrow, I 
will awake to discover my face burnt and my nose red, peeling and swollen from 
spirits and the sun. But tonight I am a sailor, there is music, and we will 
dance.

Â Gwyn Topham joined the Classic Malts cruise 
<http://www.clyde.org/Classic_Malts_Cruise/classic_malts_cruise.html>, which 
takes place in the last two weeks of July each year. For information about the 
cruise, emailcmcruise@udv.com <mailto:cmcruise@udv.com>, or write to The Clyde 
Cruising Club, Suite 408, The Pentagon Centre, 36 Washington Street, Glasgow G3 
8AZ.

Â You can take a guided tour of most of the distilleries all year round, 
Mon-Fri, the last tour generally leaving at around 4pm. Call ahead for details: 
Oban (Stafford St, Oban, Argyllshire PA34 5NH), 01631 572004; Talisker 
(Carbost, Isle of Skye, IV47 8SR), 01478 614308; Lagavulin (Port Ellen, Isle of 
Islay, PA42 7DZ), 01496 302400.

Â Sailing on the Eda Frandsen starts at Â£450 for a six-day trip. See the Eda 
Frandsen website <http://home.clara.net/atibbetts/eda.htm> or call 01687 462 
667 for details.
 