
Controversial lobbying group Alec has received an early Christmas gift from 
Overstock.com <http://overstock.com/>. The online retailer recently rejoined 
the group, bucking a trend among tech companies, many of which have recently 
disassociated themselves from it.


Alec, the American Legislative Exchange Council, has lost the support of a 
number of top tech firms in recent months over its stance on climate change. 
Last weekeBay became the latest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/dec/19/ebay-google-dumps-alec-climate-change-denial>
 to cut ties to the group, which lobbies for legislative change at the state 
level.

Ebay’s decision followed an exodus by tech firms that started after Microsoft 
quit the group. Following Microsoft’s exit, Google chairman Eric Schmidt said 
his company could no longer be aligned with people who deny climate change.
“They are just literally lying,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/23/google-to-cut-ties-with-rightwing-lobby-group-over-climate-change-lies>
 he said. Alecdenied Schmidt’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/25/alec-google-climate-change-lies-letter-rebuttal>
 charges.

Overstock was previously a member of Alec but let its membership lapse. 
Overstock confirmed it had rejoined Alec to lobby on internet sales taxation 
issues.

“Overstock.com did re-join Alec recently”, said a spokesman. “Our relationship 
with Alec is based on the organization’s access to lawmakers involved in the 
internet sales tax issue, which is a very weighty one for us. Alec’s stance on 
climate change did not factor into our decision, one way or another”.

Nick Surgey, director of research at the nonprofit Center for Media and 
Democracy, said Overstock, unlikeGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and many other Silicon Valley 
companies, had never espoused progressive values on climate change or other 
issues.

Patrick Byrne, Overstock’s chief operating officer, is chairman of the 
Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice, a free market lobby group set up by 
the late Nobel economist Milton Friedman that champions vouchers for education, 
a cause also supported by Alec. “It appears they have made a business decision 
to push on a tax issue”, Surgey said.

Google and Microsoft were followed away from Alec by AOL, Facebook, Yahoo and 
Yelp. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/facebook-abandons-rightwing-lobby-group-alec>

“In the last four months, Alec has lost the support of companies worth 
trillions of dollars”, said Surgey.

The recent wave of tech exits followed another exodus over Alec’s support of 
Florida’s “stand your ground” legislation, which became controversial 
nationally after the death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin in 2012. Alec worked 
with the National Rifle Association to lobby for similar legislation in other 
states. Amazon, Coca-Cola, General Electric, Kraft, McDonald’s and Walmart 
terminated their memberships after the killing.
 