
A military backed court in Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> has torpedoed efforts by the 
embattled ruling party to find a new prime minister by ordering the arrest on 
of the leading candidate just hours after he had been nominated.

Makhdoom Shahabuddin was accused by the court of using his former position as 
health minister two years ago to allow huge quantities of chemicals to be 
diverted to producers of illegal methamphetamine.

On the eve of a parliamentary vote on a new prime minister the ruling Pakistan 
People's Party (PPP) promptly dropped their candidate.

Even by Pakistan's high standards of political intrigue Shahabuddin's 
short-lived nomination came as a surprise and heightened concerns that a 
government at loggerheads with powerful state institutions, including an 
increasingly assertive judiciary and a military that has long disliked PPP 
rule, will struggle to remain in power much longer.

The latest political crisis was triggered on Tuesday when the supreme court 
ordered the sacking of the prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gilani, following months 
of legal skirmishing over his refusal to reopen a dormant money laundering 
investigation into PresidentAsif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>.

But barely six hours after Shahabuddin, a feudal landlord and close ally of 
Zardari, was nominated to replace him, a magistrate from the Anti Narcotics 
Force issued its arrest warrant accusing him of approving the manufacture of an 
enormous quantity of ephedrine by two pharmaceutical companies during his time 
as health minister.

Drug control officials say the 2,500kg allotted to the two companies involved 
was far in excess of that required for the substance's legal use for making 
cold medicines.

The companies are said to have passed the ephedrine on to producers of meth, a 
highly addictive drug on the rise in South Asia.

The arrest warrant also ordered the detention of Ali Musa Gilani, the son of 
the recently deposed prime minister, for his alleged involvement in the scam.

Although Shahabuddin has been linked to the case for some time, the timing of 
the warrant is seen as deeply suspicious, with analysts assuming either the 
country's military establishment or the judiciary must be behind it.

The ruling party now has to decide whether to tell its MPs to vote for one of 
two other possible candidates: former ministers Qamar Zaman Kaira or Raja 
Parvez Ashraf. Ashraf is thought to be less likely as he has been implicated in 
yet another scandal involving private electricity generating companies.

Even when a head of government is appointed there remain grave doubts over 
whether the PPP will be able to cling on to any prime minister for very long.

The new prime minister is likely to immediately run into the same legal 
quagmire that led to the downfall of Gilani â€“ a demand by the supreme court 
that he write to authorities in Switzerland formally requesting a reopening of 
the fraud case against Zardari, something the PPP is determined not to do.

"If the next prime minister refuses to write that letter he might survive for 
a couple of weeks or maybe a month before facing disqualification by the 
court," said Raza Rumi, policy director of the Jinnah Institute thinktank. "A 
similar clash with the supreme court is absolutely on the cards."

Continued deadlock between the court and the government will smother any hopes 
of the country grappling with the many serious problems it faces, including 
Taliban militancy on its western border, a crippling energy crisis, freefalling 
economy and acrimonious relations with the United States.

The crisis may ultimately force fresh elections, robbing the PPP of its goal 
of becoming the first government in Pakistan's history to finish a full 
five-year term in office.
 