
It is not just the survivors of Tuesday’s assault on Peshawar’s Army Public 
School who have been reliving the nightmarish attack that left 132 teenage boys 
dead. The entire country has been traumatised by graphic accounts of gunmen 
spraying bullets into a hall full of children and then later sadistically 
killing others after checking whether their parents served in the military.

On Wednesday, Pakistan’s army made a point of letting scores of television 
crews trample over the crime scene in order that they could broadcast pictures 
of rooms blasted by suicide bombers, floors covered with pools of barely dried 
blood, and the sad detritus of an ordinary school day suddenly interrupted by 
seven terrorists.

Rifaat Hussain, an academic, said the military was trying to generate a 
commodity that has long eluded Pakistan: a national consensus to fight 
terrorism. “The army had already decidedPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> will never know peace or become a 
normal country unless these guys are put out of business, but they are using 
this horrific event to drive the point home,” he said.

That Pakistan should need any encouragement to tackle a problem that has 
claimed 50,000 lives since 2001 baffles outsiders. But decades of state support 
for jihadist groups, combined with reluctance by politicians to confront 
violent groups, has led to a national confusion over who Pakistan’s enemies are.

In the aftermath of Tuesday’s attack, politicians and many members of the 
public were unwilling to say publicly whether they thought theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> had really carried out the 
atrocity, even though the Islamist movement’s franchise in the country – the 
Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) – had wasted no time in claiming 
responsibility.

At Friday prayers few mullahs dared utter the word “Taliban”, with many 
shifting the blame on to vague conspiracies hatched by the west. “May God bless 
the departed souls and give courage to bereaved families,” the cleric of one 
unexceptional mosque in a prosperous area of Islamabad told the worshippers, 
before adding: “May God foil the conspiracies of the Jews and infidels aimed at 
dividing the Muslims.”

Such statements are what Pakistani journalist Ejaz Haider calls 
“whataboutery”. “When you say we have a real problem here, the other side will 
say ‘what about the Americans inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>?’, or ‘what the western world 
is doing’, or ‘what the Israelis are doing’,” he said. “It is part of the 
extremist mindset which has seeped deep into sections of society.”

Many blame Zia ul-Haq, the 1980s military ruler and hardline Islamist who 
massively increased Pakistan’s use of militants as proxy warriors in its 
struggle to dominate Afghanistan and win control of Indian-controlled Kashmir. 
Backed by US and Saudi money, Pakistan created a vast infrastructure of radical 
religious schools and training camps. The “mujahideen” that resulted were sold 
to the public as heroes ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> who 
kicked the Soviet Union out of Afghanistan. Generations of schoolchildren have 
since been brought up on textbooks praising holy war and vilifying Hindus and 
India.

Pakistan repeated the trick in the 1990s, sending jihadists to stoke 
insurgency in Indian-held Kashmir and giving massive assistance to the Taliban, 
the once lowly mullahs’ movement that had seized control of Afghanistan in 1989.

Even after the al-Qaida attacks on the US in 2001, Pakistan refused to abandon 
the Taliban, despite being a nominal ally of the western powers who toppled 
Islamabad’s client regime in Afghanistan. Pakistan continued to shelter the 
Taliban, even as some militants, feeling betrayed by the country, turned 
against their old masters with attacks on the country, such as the 2008 truck 
bombing of the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad.

This is the bizarre-sounding phenomenon known as “good Taliban” and “bad 
Taliban” that for a decade has sown deep confusion among the Pakistani public 
and infuriated western powers. As Hillary Clinton put it in her 2011 warning to 
Islamabad, “you can’t keep snakes in your backyard and expect them only to bite 
your neighbours”.

Some are now daring to hope that Pakistan has finally learned its lesson. 
Sartaj Aziz, Pakistan’s acting foreign minister, described the attack as “our 
9/11” and a “game changer” that has finally exposed the futility of targeting 
some groups but not others.

“It was realised that in the end they support each other and that if you do 
this you’re creating space which can become dangerous in the future,” he said.

On Wednesday the prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, announced that “there will be 
no differentiation between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ Taliban”.

The end of Pakistan’s disastrous “double game” has been predicted before. This 
time around, optimists are encouraged by new leadership in the region. The 
Afghan president,Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, 
is determined to improve relations with Pakistan, which under Sharif also has a 
civilian government interested in trade rather than proxy wars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fpakistan-myth-of-good-taliban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419104617580%2Ffc952127-6328-4963-9b2b-c3507b7e1804-2060x1175.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pakistan%20dares%20to%20ask%3A%20will%20school%20attack%20finally%20end%20myth%20of%20the%20%E2%80%98good%20Taliban%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fpakistan-myth-of-good-taliban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pakistan%20dares%20to%20ask%3A%20will%20school%20attack%20finally%20end%20myth%20of%20the%20%E2%80%98good%20Taliban%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fdec%2F21%2Fpakistan-myth-of-good-taliban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419104617580%2Ffc952127-6328-4963-9b2b-c3507b7e1804-2060x1175.jpeg>
 Some of the students and teachers of the Army Public School in Peshawar who 
were killed by the Taliban in a combination of photographs provided by their 
families. Photograph: AP 
There are also high hopes for General Raheel Sharif, the powerful army chief 
appointed last year, who in June sent troops into north Waziristan, the 
infamous terrorist sanctuary bordering Afghanistan where many politicians had 
long dreaded a showdown with the TTP. On Tuesday both Sharifs ordered an 
immediate blitzkrieg against the TTP, with revenge air strikes on militant 
hideouts even as Peshawar’s hospitals were still filling with casualties.

Dozens of alleged militants have been killed since by aircraft, ground 
assaults and “encounters” by security forces around the country. On Friday 
night Pakistan executed its first two prisoners since 2008 after abandoning a 
death penalty moratorium.

For all the action against the TTP, sceptics point out that there is no sign 
of the “good Taliban” being inconvenienced. In an attempt to remain in official 
favour, several groups responsible for atrocities against civilians rushed to 
denounce the Peshawar attack, including the Afghan Taliban and even a vicious 
TTP splinter group called Jamaat-ul-Ahrar. And in an astonishingly ill-timed 
move, a court on Thursday ordered the bailing of Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi, 
mastermind of the 2008 attack on the Indian city of Mumbai, which killed 166 
people. The government quickly promised to try to get the decision reversed 
after New Delhi expressed outrage.

Few analysts believe Pakistan is ready to take on Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), the 
militant group that Lakhvi co-founded and which is devoted to “liberating” 
Kashmir. With its huge corps of jihadists hardened by years of fighting in 
Kashmir, it is arguably too big to confront at a time when Pakistan is battling 
the TTP.

In a country with weak public services, the LeT has worked hard to ingratiate 
itself with ordinary Pakistanis through its welfare organisation, the 
Falah-e-Insaniyat Foundation (FIF). It is now one of the largest charities in 
the country, running ambulance services in nearly 200 cities and towns, as well 
as six hospitals and hundreds of schools. In Peshawar last week hundreds of FIF 
activists wearing fluorescent jackets were helping survivors in hospital and 
hanging around funerals. The group’s leader, Hafiz Saeed, is subject to a $10m 
US bounty, but he moves around Pakistan freely. This week heclaimed India was 
responsible for the attack in Peshawar.

Then there are Pakistan’s vicious Sunni supremacist groups responsible for 
killing minority Shias. Despite their crimes, Sharif’s faction of the Pakistan 
Muslim League has been accused of striking electoral pacts with them in his 
heartlands of Punjab province. The biggest battle of all, though, will be to 
overcome decades of pro-jihad propaganda that has made many Pakistanis 
susceptible to conspiracy theories, such as the view that the shooting in the 
head of schoolgirl Malala Yousafzai was a “drama” staged by western powers.

Last week a couple of hundred people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/18/islamabad-red-mosque-protest-school-massacre>
 attempted to push back against such noxious narratives by protesting outside 
Islamabad’s Red Mosque, a bastion of Taliban sympathisers that could not bring 
itself to unequivocally condemn the Peshawar attacks. But as the night echoed 
with chants denouncing Taliban apologists as traitors,some in the crowd quietly 
admitted their doubts. “We’ve been at this point before,” said Sarwar Bari, a 
journalist, recalling a similar outrage sparked in 2009 by a video of a Talib 
flogging a woman in Swatwho was accused of adultery. “There was a great hue and 
cry and everyone came out – but pretty soon the mullahs sabotaged the consensus 
and it all went quiet again.”
 