
Pakistan's government has told the nation's supreme court it will not reopen 
an old corruption case against the president, defying a judicial order that has 
brought down one prime minister and threatens his replacement.

The crisis has affected Pakistan's political system for months, distracting 
attention from what many Pakistanis believe are more pressing problems, such as 
the country's ailing economy and fight against the Taliban.

The dispute centres on a case against the president, Asif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>, dating back to the late 
1990s in a Swiss court. The Pakistani supreme court has demanded the government 
write a letter to Swiss authorities asking them to reopen the case. The 
government has refused, saying Zardari enjoys immunity from prosecution while 
in office.

The court convicted former prime minister Yousuf Raza Gilani of contempt and 
ousted him from office in June for refusing to write the letter. The ruling
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> People's party rallied 
support to elect a new prime minister, Raja Pervaiz Ashraf, and has remained 
defiant.

Pakistan's attorney general, Irfan Qadir, appeared before the court on 
Wednesday and told the judges that Ashraf also refused to reopen the case 
because of the president's immunity. "Your order is not implementable," said 
Qadir.

He accused the lead judge, Asif Saeed Khosa, of being biased against the 
president and said he should recuse himself from the proceedings â€“ a demand 
rejected by Khosa.

Many government supporters have accused the supreme court of relentlessly 
pursuing the case because of bad blood between Zardari and the chief justice, 
Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry.

Khosa demanded the new prime minister write the letter to the Swiss, but also 
seemed to soften the court's stance, saying the judges would respect the 
president's immunity if the government obeyed their order.

He also gave the government more time to come up with a solution. Wednesday 
was the initial deadline for the government to say whether it would fulfil the 
court's order, but Khosa adjourned the hearing until 8 August.

The judge's somewhat softer stance could be a reaction to criticism of the 
court for threatening to bring down the first civilian government poised to 
finish its five-year term in the country's history. Past governments were 
toppled by direct or indirect intervention by the country's powerful army, 
often with help of the judiciary. The current government's term ends in early 
2013.

It's unclear whether the judge's comments will alter the government's stance. 
Zardari has said in the past that his government would never write the letter.

"I will make a genuine and serious effort to solve this issue," said Qadir.

The case against Zardari relates to kickbacks he and his late wife, former 
prime minister Benazir Bhutto, allegedly received from Swiss companies when 
Bhutto was in power in the 1990s. They were found guilty in absentia in the 
Swiss court in 2003.

Zardari appealed, but Swiss prosecutors dropped the case after the Pakistani 
parliament passed an ordinance giving the president and others immunity from 
old corruption cases that many agreed were politically motivated.

The bill was decried by many in Pakistan, who saw it as an attempt to subvert 
the law. The supreme court ruled it unconstitutional in 2009 and ordered the 
government to write a letter to Swiss authorities requesting they reopen the 
case.
 