
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> is in political turmoil 
after the supreme court disqualified the prime minister from office.

If Yousuf Raza Gilani is forced to step down, the government – which had hoped 
to become the first in Pakistan's history to complete a full five-year term – 
could collapse, forcing an early election.

The court's decision follows the prime minister's conviction in April for 
contempt after he refused to accept a court order to reopen a long-dormant 
corruption investigation against the president,Asif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>, the widower of Benazir 
Bhutto.

Gilani served a symbolic 30-second period of detention in the court in April, 
but it was unclear whether he would lose his position as head of the 
government. To the fury of opposition parties, the speaker of parliament, a 
fellow member of Gilani's Pakistan People's party (PPP), ruled it was 
unnecessary for him to stand down.

On Tuesday the chief justice, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, said Gilani was 
effectively disqualified as a member of parliament on 26 April. "He has also 
ceased to be the prime minister of Pakistan, with effect from the same date, 
and office of the prime minister shall be deemed to be vacant accordingly," he 
said.

Chaudhry ordered Zardari to take steps to appoint a new prime minister. That 
may be difficult because the PPP is just one member of a fractious ruling 
coalition. Finding a candidate acceptable to all the parties may prove 
impossible.

After the court's announcement senior party leaders, including Zardari, Gilani 
and Bhutto's young political heir apparent, Bilawal, gathered in Islamabad to 
discuss the crisis.
 