
A lot has been written on the problems that women in Stem face. The numbers 
<http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2015/nsf15311/start.cfm> evidencing gender 
inequality 
<http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-union/pdf/competitiveness-report/2011/iuc2011-full-report.pdf>
 in science, and the so-called“leaky pipeline” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/plug-leaky-stem-pipe>, are widely known 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/jun/13/how-well-are-women-represented-in-uk-science>
. In recent years, many cases ofhostility <http://mansplained.tumblr.com/> in 
the academic workplace have been madepublic, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/10/nobel-scientist-tim-hunt-female-scientists-cause-trouble-for-men-in-labs>
 producing a series of long overduereactions 
<https://thinkprogress.org/how-female-scientists-responded-to-brutally-sexist-comments-from-a-nobel-laureate-2ea84d4c857e#.7p2591avn>
. Further, theTwo-Body Problem 
<https://tenureshewrote.wordpress.com/2013/09/18/solving-the-two-body-problem/> 
(lack of institutional flexibility for spousal hires and the assumption that if 
the woman is following the man she is “second-rate”) has been extensively
recognized <http://www.sciencemag.org/careers/2003/03/love-and-two-body-problem>
. As a Latin woman in science, I am interested in understanding the how these 
issues operate, how they manifest themselves on women of colour, and what the 
particular issues are in relation to palaeontology, my field of research.

Promoting equality in science: what works, and what doesn't?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/oct/11/promoting-equality-in-science-what-works-and-what-doesnt>
I consider myself lucky to have never faced “serious” gender-related issues, 
as all my male advisors/mentors/hosts have been amazingly supportive, and never 
made me feel less (or more) because I am a (Latin) woman. On the contrary, they 
constantly empowered me and provided me with the tools to build confidence to 
overcome other minor gender-related issues I have encountered during my career.

These minor issues have been a handful of isolated cases of mansplaining 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mansplaining> and sexist/racist attitudes from 
some colleagues. I admit that I find it hard to assess whether these cases have 
reflected their position on women’s roles, or if they are trying to be funny. 
As a Colombian, I have learned to live with the commonuninformed 
<http://colombiareports.com/colombia-the-drug-consumer/> and insensitive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/23/colombia-farc-killed-mothers-justice>
 jokes about cocaine andPablo Escobar 
<https://medium.com/@nickbrownxo/stereotypes-of-colombia-in-netflix-narcos-b29f7cbb48d3#.clms9vtx5>
. I have developed a sort of flexible and understanding attitude towards 
sexist/racist comments, along the lines of: “wow, that comment kind of hurts, 
but I know he is a good guy and didn’t mean it in a bad way”. However, I wonder 
to what extent such comments and attitudes are part of a bigger problem, in 
which case they shouldn’t be ignored.

In my search for a better understanding on how women’s issues operate in my 
field, I found two explanations for the leaky pipeline, both rooted in complex 
biological and societal issues. One is that, in general, publication rates are
lower <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169534712002753> in 
women than men. Since number of publication is a metric for employment, this 
results in a systematic bias against women, because such a metric is not 
equitable. The second explanation I found is based onexperimental  
<http://www.pnas.org/content/112/17/5360>evidence, and shows a 2:1preference 
<http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/2015/04/women-preferred-21-over-men-stem-faculty-positions>
 in favour of women for tenure track positions, and that women’s 
underrepresentation is actually a result of fewer women applying for jobs.

In terms of the situation for women of colour, I found that gender bias 
<http://www.uchastings.edu/news/articles/2015/01/double-jeopardy-report.pdf> 
acts differently depending on a woman’s race. Forexample 
<https://hbr.org/2015/03/the-5-biases-pushing-women-out-of-stem>, black women 
are more likely to deal with the constant requirement to prove themselves 
capable, Asian women have to deal with the stereotype of being the smartest one 
in the lab, and Latin women are more at risk of being seen as angry when 
expressing themselves in the workplace. This problem is reflected in the 
representation of women of colour in science:only 3% of professorships in the 
US are given to women of colour 
<http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-sciences#footnote11_j1n3mnw>. Indeed, 
being a minority within a minority adds another layer of complexity to the 
gender-bias problem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fpalaeontology-is-full-of-dinosaurs-and-not-in-a-good-way-for-womens-careers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F488b768ad577dc045a4694c671e4cc32e18e03f6%2F0_0_768_461%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontology%20is%20full%20of%20dinosaurs%20-%20and%20not%20in%20a%20good%20way%20for%20women's%20careers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fpalaeontology-is-full-of-dinosaurs-and-not-in-a-good-way-for-womens-careers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontology%20is%20full%20of%20dinosaurs%20-%20and%20not%20in%20a%20good%20way%20for%20women%27s%20careers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fpalaeontology-is-full-of-dinosaurs-and-not-in-a-good-way-for-womens-careers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F488b768ad577dc045a4694c671e4cc32e18e03f6%2F0_0_768_461%2F768.jpg>
 Dr Catalina Pimiento collecting fossil shark teeth in the field Photograph: 
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute/Catalina Pimiento 
To examine the particular issues women face in palaeontology, I used three 
approaches. First, I searched for the top 10 most cited papers in palaeontology 
journals to assess what percentage were led by women; I looked for reports on 
women’s representation in professional conferences; finally, I asked all the 
palaeo-women I know to tell me the biggest gender-related problem they have 
faced as palaeontologists.

Here is what I found.

Papers 

Only 10% of the most cited papers in Paleobiology 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/paleobiology/most-cited>, Journal of 
Paleontology 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-paleontology/most-cited>, 
Paleontology <http://www.palass.org/publications/palaeontology-journal>, and 
Paleo3 
<http://www.journals.elsevier.com/palaeogeography-palaeoclimatology-palaeoecology>
, were lead by a woman. No women led any of the 10 most cited papers in the
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 
<http://vertpaleo.org/publications/journal-of-vertebrate-paleontology.aspx>.

Conferences 

Reports show that female representation in paleontological associations are 
close to 50% 
<http://vertpaleo.org/Society-News/Blog/Old-Bones-SVP-s-Blog/March-2016/Historic-Conference-Quite-Possibly-the-First-All-W.aspx>
 in terms of students members. However, professional memberships are 
disproportionallylow 
<http://scienceblogs.com/pharyngula/2013/02/13/need-more-paleontological-women/>
 relative to those of men (leaky pipeline in action). With regards tomeeting 
<http://www.geosociety.org/gsatoday/archive/24/11/pdf/i1052-5173-24-11-44.pdf> 
participation, even though the number of abstracts with female authors has 
increased in the last 40 years, women are still underrepresented (more “cold 
hard numbers” can be found on blogThe Bearded Lady Project 
<http://thebeardedladyproject.com/about/the-cold-hard-numbers/>).

Testimonies 

Around 20 palaeo-women (ranging from undergrads to senior professors, from 
different parts of the world including the US, Europe, Latin America and 
Africa) responded to my survey with their personal experiences. According to 
their responses (a diverse selection is presented at the end of this article), 
it seems like women in palaeontology are often assumed incompetent until proven 
otherwise. I realise, however, this is an issue not exclusively associated with 
being a palaeontologist.

Fieldwork-related problems were commonly mentioned and range from attempts to 
police outfits (although this happens in labs/offices as well), to being 
ignored (or, asone 
<https://muellerlaboratory.wordpress.com/2015/06/04/sara-varela/> of my friends 
puts it: having the super-power of being invisible) or patronised by their 
coworkers. Even when fieldwork-related issues are not exclusively linked to 
palaeo, the termpalaeontology 
<https://www.amazon.com/Issues-Palaeobiology-Global-Interviews-Essays/dp/3905923173>
 is often associated with macho behaviour related to fossil collecting. This 
perceived need for machismo of course clashes with thewrong-headed 
<http://thebeardedladyproject.com/trailers/> perception of feminine identities 
being weaker and not well-suited to theharsh conditions 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6299/526> associated with fieldwork. 

As gender bias against women in palaeontology could also occur to a member of 
any other minority, I asked (admittedly, only a few) male palaeontologists who 
are members of a minority, whether or not they have ever felt any kind of bias 
against them. Based on the responses of five Hispanic and three gay 
palaeontologists, it seems like they don’t feel any particular bias, and if 
they do, that typically occurs only at the beginning of their careers. However, 
gay palaeontologists mentioned they feel they need to be particularly careful 
when doing fieldwork in the remote sites of certain countries (e.g. Latin 
America or the Middle East). Further, a transgender palaeontologist commented 
on the restrictions relating to health care provision when looking for jobs. 
Since mobility is expected in academia, this imposes a major problem for 
transgender scientists in all disciplines.

The reason we should care about the situation of women and minorities in 
palaeontology is not simply because of social justice. Diversity ispivotal 
<http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/voices/diversity-in-stem-what-it-is-and-why-it-matters/>
 to the achievement of scientific excellence, and therefore, providing an
adequate working environment 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/diversity-in-science-why-it-is-essential-for-excellence/>
 to diversify the pool of scientists should be considered a crucial aspect of 
all research agendas.

On Ada Lovelace Day, let's also celebrate 19th-century renaissance woman Agnes 
Clerke | Rebekah Higgitt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-h-word/2016/oct/11/ada-lovelace-day-celebrate-19th-century-renaissance-woman-agnes-clerke>
Of course, everything I have found on my personal quest for a better 
understanding of the issues women and minorities face in my area of research 
would have to be systematically assessed to constitute sound scientific 
evidence. However, the fact is that even though evidence suggests that women 
are preferred for academic jobs, women are still underrepresented, endure 
pressure over our appearances and face a battle to have our ideas recognised 
and be credited to us, not to mention experiencing constant mansplaining. From 
this I conclude that“yes we can” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HoFqV3qVMGA> 
achieve much as female palaeontologists, but only if we prove ourselves not 
once, but many times through our careers. This needs to change. The many 
“minor” issues we face on a daily basis are part of a bigger problem, and 
should never be ignored.



In their own words

To further illustrate the points I’ve made above, here is a selection of the 
testimonies I received from palaeontologists recounting their experiences.

As a grad student, a white male - [who] used to be my friend and [who] 
collaborated with me in a couple of papers - never attended any of my 
presentations in any of the multiple professional meetings we coincided (nor 
asked me once abut my research!). I always felt bad about it, and I knew that 
it was because he never thought my work was worth it. When my PhD research got 
published, he claimed I had scooped him. I think that instead, his sexist 
approach to meetings attendance proved to him inefficient.”

When I competed for an open postdoc position, a very good friend and colleague 
who also applied and did not get it, sourly told me that I only got offered the 
position because I am female. I got very frustrated at the remark, because I 
know, that by all the common benchmarks, (publications, citation, grants) I am 
a much better candidate than him.”

While doing my PhD, advisers and collaborators used the following phrases: 
“you can share the computer that is in the corridor”; “you might become a good 
secretary”; “why don’t you accept the technician position? It fits you!”; 
“better you don’t try there, it is a good journal, you know?”; “I am sure that 
you did not realise it, but the idea you just said is great!”

On my first time doing fieldwork, I was told to pack light, so I did: one 
sweatshirt, only the boots I was wearing, and no extras. The temperature went 
down dramatically in 12 hours and I had to borrow a sweatshirt from each of the 
three men there (who all had plenty of clothes) to not freeze. We had to wade a 
river, and I had to do it barefoot and slashed my foot. I had to wear my boots 
on the way back through and then had to borrow an extra pair of shoes from one 
of the guys. I learned that I was the only one who was told to pack light, and 
none of the students had ever been in the field, so it wasn’t because I was a 
newbie, it was clearly because there’s a female stereotype of overpacking.”

A student [who] worked for me was told that she dressed ‘like a librarian 
rather than a scientist’ because she would frequently wear dresses and heels. 
She was told (often by other women) that she should dress more seriously if she 
wants to be taken seriously.”

I couldn’t count how many times I have made a point in a group discussion that 
seems to fall flat initially but when repeated later by a male colleague, 
magically becomes worthy of serious consideration.”

On the first day at a SVP meeting, as I was entering, a man stopped and asked 
what the convention was for. I told him and he shook his head. He told me that 
I was the only black person that he had seen attending the convention that 
didn’t work there. I am used to being the only black woman in the room, but it 
has never been pointed out before. I was very aware of it for the rest of the 
conference. I felt proud to be breaking that wall.”

When I apply for jobs I have to seriously consider how friendly the state and 
city are given the current political climate. Most places in the US explicitly 
don’t cover transgender related health care, and even if we pay out of pocket 
most doctors do not know our needs. I’ve not applied to jobs I wanted because 
they’re in states without health care and they’re in an area where I wouldn’t 
feel comfortable living.”

I was asking a senior colleague with a permanent research position advertised 
at his institution what kind of person they were looking to hire (I was 
thinking along the lines of areas of research emphasis - e.g. taxonomic group, 
geological time period, types of research questions addressed etc.) only to be 
told that they were looking to hire a man because women couldn’t handle 
fieldwork.”

I happened to be two months pregnant during a field season and no colleague 
was aware of my condition. The fieldwork was successful but upon my return, I 
developed some medical complications that got me admitted [to hospital]. I got 
well and life was back to normal again. But after my boss learnt what happened, 
he always asks whether there [is] anybody pregnant before we depart for a field 
trip, and even asked me whether he should seek permission from my husband.”

While working on palaeontological mitigation, three different workers asked me 
out, and while they were all respectful I started to hear scary stories from 
other female colleagues, so I became more guarded. Even so, one somehow found 
my phone number and started calling me in the middle of the night and showing 
up at talks I gave with gifts. One even tried to kiss me when I showed him a 
fossil I’d found. Because of this, my behaviour changed to the point where I 
didn’t talk to people, didn’t wear makeup, and stayed in worn, baggy clothes. I 
remember even considering wearing a fake wedding ring.”

In a developing country, the main challenge I had while pursuing a graduate 
training and carrier in palaeontology was the lack of successful female role 
models in my country, who were born and raised in a similar cultural and 
educational background … simply, someone who I can easily relate to and look up 
to.”

 * The main body of this blog benefited from conversations with many 
palaeontologists, especiallyMarcelo Sánchez 
<http://www.pim.uzh.ch/institut/mitarbeitende/index.php?show=34>, Ellen Currano 
<http://www.uwyo.edu/geolgeophys/faculty/ellen-currano.html>, Kay Behrensmeyer, 
<http://paleobiology.si.edu/staff/individuals/behrensmeyer.html> Kristof 
Veitschegger <http://www.pim.uzh.ch/institut/mitarbeitende/index.php?show=996> 
andApril Carr <https://twitter.com/PaleoLagus>, although it should be noted 
that none of the testimonies above should be attributed to them.
 