
So I see that the former half-termer went on Sean Hannity last night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jan/18/sarah-palin-defends-blood-libel>. 
I can't fetch up a transcript, but Gateway Pundit live-blogged ithere 
<http://gatewaypundit.rightnetwork.com/2011/01/liveblogging-the-sarah-palinsean-hannity-interview/>
.

Let me begin by saying one thing on Palin's side of the question. Accusations 
that she had blood on her hands as a result of the shooting are unfair. That's 
a charge of direct responsibility, and that's overstating things. For my own 
small part, in mycolumn  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/jan/09/us-shooting-republicans-giffords-loughner>
the day after the shooting that garnered nearly 1,000 comments, I never accused 
her or anyone of direct responsibility and, indeed, said clearly at one point 
in the piece that such accusations were inaccurate. I did impute to 
"Republicans and conservative commentators" an indirect responsibility, insofar 
as their repeated violent allusions constituted playing with fire in front of a 
frenzied public, and I stand comfortably behind that. But anyone who laid 
directly responsibility on her went too far.

That said, the interview was a predictable exercise in self-justification. She 
still doesn't know what "blood libel" actually means historically, saying that 
"blood libel obviously means being falsely accused of having blood on your 
hands." MaybeRandy Scheunemann <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Randy_Scheunemann> 
can work on that with her one of these days, after she sorts out the difference 
between South and North Korea.

Overall, she was, as they say, "defiant", vowing that she will not back down. 
It showed again why she just can't appeal to anyone outside her anointed 
circle. It doesn't appear that Hannity asked her anything resembling a 
challenging question. So, in sum, she went on a network that pays her to be a 
pundit and was asked sympathetic questions by a guy who obviously is totally in 
her corner.

It remains kind of amazing that this very well-known political figure can live 
an almost totally journalism-free existence. This is completely new in American 
society. I think now she understood when she quit the governor's job, that 
this, in addition to minting money, which seems to have been priority number 
one, would be a distinct advantage of not being a current office-holder.

Most people who might seek the presidency are office holders, and so they have 
to answer questions from the press. If she were still governor, she'd at least 
be confronted by the statehouse gaggle in Juneau from time to time. If she does 
run, it'll be interesting to see what kind of exposure to the journalists 
covering her she permits herself.
 