
The governments of Egypt and Turkey are brazenly leading a multi-pronged 
assault on writers, artists and intellectuals. Turkish president Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan last monthdenounced his critics among Turkish academics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/14/turkish-prosecutors-investigate-academics-criticised-erdogan-petition>
 as treasonous fifth columnists of foreign powers; many of them have been 
subsequently dismissed and suspended. Both Turkey and Egypt have imprisoned 
journalists, provoking international protests. But the suppression of 
intellectual and creative freedoms is assuming much cannier forms in India, a 
country with formal and apparently free democratic institutions.

'This is not a suicide but murder': protests in India over lower-caste 
scholar's death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/this-is-not-a-suicide-but-protests-in-india-over-lower-caste-scholars-death>
Controlled by upper-caste Hindu nationalists, Indian universities have been 
purging “anti-nationals” from both syllabuses and campuses for some months now. 
In a shocking turn of events last month, Rohith Vemula, a PhD student in 
Hyderabad,killed himself. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/this-is-not-a-suicide-but-protests-in-india-over-lower-caste-scholars-death>
 Accused of “anti-national” political opinions, the impoverished research 
scholar, who belonged to one of India’s traditionally and cruelly disadvantaged 
castes, was suspended, and, after his fellowship was cancelled, expelled from 
student housing. Letters from Modi’s government in Delhi to university 
authorities revealed that the latter were under relentless pressure to move 
against “extremist and anti-national politics” on campus. Vemula’s 
heartbreaking suicide note attests to the near-total isolation and despair of a 
gifted writer and thinker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc17816029a129e21859c11e711f52e0701ba96d%2F54_0_4820_2892%2F4820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc17816029a129e21859c11e711f52e0701ba96d%2F54_0_4820_2892%2F4820.jpg>
 Students in New Delhi protest at an anti-government rally after the suicide of 
Rohith Vemula. Photograph: Shaurya Yadav/Demotix/Corbis 
The extended family of upper-caste nationalists plainly aim at total 
domination of the public sphere. But they don’t only use the bullying power of 
the leviathan state – one quickly identified by local and foreign critics – to 
grind down their apparent enemies. They pursue them through police cases and 
legal petitions by private individuals – a number of criminal complaints have 
been filed against writers and artists inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. They create a climate of impunity, 
in which emboldened mobs ransack newspapers offices, art galleries and cinemas.

And they turn the medium into their message in a variety of ways. Big business 
cronies of prime minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) are 
close to achieving Berlusconi-style domination of Indian television. The Hindu 
nationalists have also learned how to manipulate the new media, and shape 
instant opinion: they hire, to use Erdoğan’s words, a “robot lobby” on social 
media to drown their audiences in disinformation – until two plus two looks 
five.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2853103023ba538cdd0800332d3e9f5499ad315%2F0_252_3361_2017%2F3361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2853103023ba538cdd0800332d3e9f5499ad315%2F0_252_3361_2017%2F3361.jpg>
 Indian Hindu nationalist prime minister Narendra Modi. Photograph: Reuters 
It is possible to identify institutions and individuals across the realms of 
business, education and the media who serve as attack-dogs and sentinels for 
the party in power. All these networks of political, social and cultural power 
– from suave editors to rancid trolls – work synergistically to build 
dispositions, and dictate perceptions. Together, they can exert pressure at 
multiple points on individuals much less vulnerable than Rohith Vemula.

Last week, as the novelist Arundhati Roy abruptly faced criminal trial for 
“contempt of court” 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/profsaibabas-bail-cancelled-contempt-notice-against-arundhati-roy/article8022484.ece>
 that could result in imprisonment, a circulating text message claimed that the 
writer was part of a conspiracy by Christian missionaries to murder Vemula and 
break up India. It wasn’t easy to dismiss this farrago of paranoid nonsense. 
And then the indifferent, if not hostile, reports in India’s mainstream media 
could have made anyone think that Roy had a case to answer.

Institutions and individuals from business, education and the media serve as 
attack-dogs for the party in power

In reality, Roy’s “offence” to the court was an article in May last year 
<http://www.outlookindia.com/article/professor-pow/294265> calling attention to 
the incarceration of a severely disabled academic called Saibaba, a lecturer in 
English at Delhi University who had been kidnapped by the police and imprisoned 
for his “anti-national activities”. Roy had argued in passing that if Modi’s 
associates, convicted of dozens of murders, could be granted bail, so could a 
wheelchair user with rapidly deteriorating health.

Seven months later, a judge in the central Indian city of Nagpur, while 
rejecting bail,chose to denounce Roy 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/blind-to-justice/> as a 
“nasty”, “surly”, “rude” and “boorish” individual whose article, part of a 
nefarious “gameplan” to get Saibaba out on bail, constituted contempt of court 
(never mind that there was no bail petition for Saibaba pending at the time 
Roy’s article was published; nor had she criticised any court judgment or judge 
while asking for due legal process). He accused Roy of using the “prestigious 
awards” she is “said to have won” to rail against a “most tolerant country like 
India”. Roy, who has been working on her second novel in recent years, emerges 
in his thunderous indictment as a vicious foe of all those who “are fighting 
for prevention of unlawful and terrorist activities in the country”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47449df0a88c105dd782d3716d7002ded2e5d676%2F0_72_2543_1526%2F2543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47449df0a88c105dd782d3716d7002ded2e5d676%2F0_72_2543_1526%2F2543.jpg>
 A caricature is held up at a student protest in Guwahati after the death of a 
student Rohith Vemula. Photograph: Xinhua Press/Corbis 
You would have no trouble believing this if you recently watched a short film 
about Roy on one of India’s most popular channels owned by Zee Entertainment 
Enterprises, one of India’s largest media companies and Modi’s most fervent 
cheerleader. The film, broadcast in November, purports to show the “true” and 
wholly malign face of an anti-national.

Thus, Roy faces potent antagonists in the courts of law and public opinion; 
their calumnies throttle her freedom of speech and also destroy the relative 
freedom from worldly encumbrance and anxiety that allows a writer to stay in a 
room of her own and write. Of course, Modi’s government has left no clear 
fingerprints on this scene of a crime against art and thought. But then the 
suppression of artists and intellectuals in a formal democracy such as India 
manifests itself in many interlocking patterns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6202336edf27daa6e14c359e701819b76d10a3%2F0_341_4966_2978%2F4966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pankaj%20Mishra%20on%20Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20Hindu%20nationalists%20%E2%80%8Bhave%20many%20ways%20to%20silence%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fpankaj-mishra-arundhati-roy-hindu-nationalists-silence-writers-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6202336edf27daa6e14c359e701819b76d10a3%2F0_341_4966_2978%2F4966.jpg>
 Bollywood actor Anupam Kher: shouted such slogans as “beat the literati with 
shoes” at a demonstration against Indian authors who had returned their awards 
in protest. Photograph: Deepak Sharma/AP 
It involves not only censorship by a ruthless regime and self-censorship by 
its powerless individual victims. It depends on a steady deterioration in 
public and private morality, a rise in lynch-mob hysteria, and a general 
coarsening of tone in civil society, to which judge and jester contribute 
equally.

Narendra Modi: the divisive manipulator who charmed the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/narendra-modi-the-divisive-manipulator-who-charmed-the-world>
On the day Roy faced criminal charges in Nagpur, the Jaipur literary festival, 
unironically sponsored by Zee, hosted a debate on freedom of speech. The 
rowdiest arguments against the motion “Should Freedom of Speech be Absolute?” 
were presented by Anupam Kher, a Bollywood actor popular for his buffoonish 
turns. In November, Kher organised a demonstration against Indian authors who 
had returned their literary awards in protest against the assassination of 
three writers and the lynching of Muslims and Dalits. He repaired from shouting 
such slogans as “beat the literati with shoes” to pose for photos with Modi at 
the prime minister’s official residence in Delhi.

The presence of Kher, a disturbing case of a jester on screen mutating into a 
dangerous clown in politics, at a literary festival would have been egregious 
even if he hadn’t pumped his fists and joined members of the audience chanting 
“Modi, Modi”, or if he and his fellow debaters had mentioned the silencing of 
Roy. It would have still spoken of a broadening – and increasingly normalised – 
contempt for the life of the mind and the individual conscience. Writers – from 
Adam Mickiewicz to Rabindranath Tagore – once wrote the national community into 
being. The Hindu nationalists are now demonstrating that there are many ways to 
assassinate a writer.
 