
Let us turn our attention to Lionel Richie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/12/ionel-richie-behind-the-scenes-photographs-alan-silfen-is-it-me-pictures>
, who has announced plans to have another child at 67. “I’m willing to become a 
father again,” hetold the Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/lionel-richie-admits-planning-more-8363906>
, using the type of language that screams non-negotiable, possibly legally 
binding relationship dealbreaker. It’s good news all round as he joinsRonnie 
Wood <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ronnie-wood>, who became a father to 
twin girls at age 69 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/31/ronnie-wood-rolling-stones-welcomes-twin-daughters-with-sally-humphreys>
, and Mick Jagger who is expecting his eighth child atage 72 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/15/mick-jagger-to-become-father-for-the-eighth-time-at-the-age-of-72>
.

Lost in Showbiz is a bit cautious about late-in-life fatherhood. Not just the 
physical stuff (to paraphrase the line inWhen Harry Met Sally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/when-harry-met-sally>: “Charlie Chaplin had 
kids at 73.” “Yeah, but he was too old to pick them up”). Or the double 
standards when a woman does it; consider the relative disgust and outrage when
Janet Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/janet-jackson> announced she 
was having a baby at 50 
<http://www.hellomagazine.com/healthandbeauty/mother-and-baby/2016050531251/janet-jackson-pregnant-first-child/>
. No, it’s more the way the fundamentals of childrearing have changed since the 
baby boomers did it, locking infants in cars, pushing them to write toJimmy 
Savile <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile> and feeding them 
Vimto in nursing bottles. Times have definitely changed, but here are two key 
points to bear in mind (Lionel, feel free to cut out and keep this bit):

Ronnie Wood welcomes twin daughters with Sally Humphreys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/31/ronnie-wood-rolling-stones-welcomes-twin-daughters-with-sally-humphreys>
1) Teletubbies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/03/teletubbies-bbc-return-touch-screens-stomachs>
 have their own babies now. I know. It’s bizarre and unclear how this happened, 
as they appear to have stayed exactly the same age as before. We’re pretty sure 
this makes, like, total sense if you’re under 25.

2) Celebrity baby names have gone off the silly chart. Ronnie called his twins 
Gracie and Alice. BORING.Alanis Morissette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette> hit the jackpot, naming 
her daughterOnyx Solace 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3681711/Alanis-Morissette-shares-photo-newborn-daughter-Onyx-Solace-saying-family-blessed.html>
, possibly after a new hair removal therapy.

Lost in Showbiz, whose heart’s desire as a parent is to “just sit here and do 
nothing and talk to no one for a minute”, worries about how Richie and co will 
cope with this Brave New baby World. So much so that we will withstand the 
compulsion to make a gag along the lines of: “By the time Richie Jr is out of 
nappies, Richie Sr could be need some,” or “Time to do a Huggies bulk-buy.”


Well done us.
 