
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> have 
received encouragement from Manchester United that their pursuit of Ángel Di 
María can be successful this summer as the French champions seek to make amends 
for missing out on the Argentina winger a year ago when he left Real Madrid.

PSG are free to re-enter the transfer market aggressively following the 
relaxation of Uefa’s financial fair play (FFP)regulations and are understood to 
have formally contacted United to inquire about the availability of Di María, 
their principal target.The £59.7m British record signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/03/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america>
, who arrived from Real Madrid last summer, endured a difficult first season at 
Old Trafford and United, bolstered by the arrival ofMemphis Depay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/07/memphis-depay-manchester-united-tarzan-tattoos>
 andBastian Schweinsteiger <>, are now prepared to think of allowing the 
27-year-old to leave.

Víctor Valdés will not be joining Atalyaspor, says agent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/13/victor-valdes-agent-not-joining-atalyaspor-manchester-united>
The French champions, who had courted Di María a year ago only for FFP to 
restrict their ability to compete for his signature, are expected to lodge a 
formal offer of around £47m for the winger, who is believed to be open to the 
move but will seek wages of around £185,000 a week after tax at Parc des 
Princes.

The PSG manager, Laurent Blanc, has publicly expressed his interest in 
securing Di María while admitting a deal is far from certain. Wolfsburg’s Kevin 
de Bruyne is apparently the club’s fallback option. “Yes, I like him [Di María] 
very much,” he said. “But at our level, trying to improve your team, you are 
competing for players who belong to big clubs. And, even if one club has more 
money, you are not competing alone in the market.

“We have more freedom [in the market] but it remains a difficult one for us to 
do because we’re not alone in wanting him. The competition is very, very tough. 
Don’t forgetManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> paid a fortune to sign 
him. The decision to relax FFP regulations was favourable to PSG but it 
happened late in the day. Now it has, new avenues are open to us for 
recruitment. We fell behind but we’ll catch up.”

Contact is expected to be made with Jorge Mendes, the Argentina forward’s 
agent, and PSG had hoped to offer wages of nearer £130,000 a week after tax. A 
compromise is likely to be attainable.

Di María, who was injured early in the final of the Copa América 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/05/chile-argentina-copa-america-final-match-report>
, would follow Robin van Persie in leaving Old Trafford; the Dutch 
international is in Istanbul for a medical before the completion of a transfer 
to Fenerbahce. The 31-year-old has been offered a three-year contract worth 
around £240,000 a week to end his three-season association with United 
following a £24m switch from Arsenal in 2012.

There is optimism at United that Schweinsteiger’s eye-catching arrival from 
Bayern Munich can still be followed by the signing of Morgan Schneiderlin of 
Southampton as Louis van Gaal continues to reshape his squad this summer. An 
initial bid of £20m was rejected, falling at least £7m short of the south-coast 
club’s valuation, but the Southampton manager, Ronald Koeman, has admitted he 
is planning for life without the France international.

Schweinsteiger flew to Manchester on Sunday to undertake a medical and sign a 
three-year contract after bidding farewell to Bayern’s fans in a statement and 
video posted on Twitter. “The decision was very hard to make because you and 
FCB have and always will be an extremely important part of my life,” said the 
30-year-old, who won eight Bundesliga titles, seven German Cups and the 
Champions League in a 17-year career in Bavaria. “Nevertheless, I would like to 
again gain experience at a new club. My destination is Manchester United. I 
hope you understand my decision. No one can take away the incredible journey we 
had together.”

The midfielder will cost in the region of £15m following on from the arrival 
of Matteo Darmian from Torino and the £21.5m addition of Depay from PSV 
Eindhoven earlier in the summer. Schweinsteiger is expected to play some part 
in United’s pre-season tour of the United States, on which they depart on 
Monday.
 