
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is under 
pressure to abandon his pledge to make GPs available seven days a week 
following a survey which has found that few patients want a weekend appointment 
and there is almost no demand for Sunday appointments.

The findings are a blow to the prime minister’s determined drive to ensure 
that patients in England will be able to consult a GP from 8am to 8pm seven 
days a week by 2020.

GPs condemn David Cameron's open-all-hours surgery plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/oct/18/gps-condemn-cameron-surgeries-plan>
GP leaders said the study underlined their view that seven-day GP surgery 
opening was unnecessary and a luxury that the cash-strappedNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> could not afford.

An analysis of the views of 881,183 patients showed that the majority – 
712,776 making up 81% – are happy with existing GP surgery opening times. The 
hours are frequently 8am to 6pm, or 7pm on weekdays. Survey respondents did not 
report any problems with those times.

However 168,407 (19%) said their GP practice was not open at a time that was 
convenient for them. Of those, 76% – only one in seven (14.5%) of the total 
number of respondents – reported that weekend opening would make it easier for 
them to see a doctor.

Of those who felt their surgery was not open at a time convenient for them 
2.2% preferred the idea of access on a Sunday rather than Saturday.

The results, published this Friday in the British Journal of General Practice, 
arise from an analysis by academics from East Anglia and Oxford universities of 
opinions supplied by the 881,183 patients to researchers dealing with the 2014 
General Practice Patient Survey.

Maureen Baker, chair of the Royal College of GPs, last month told the prime 
minister andJeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, the 
health secretary, they were “living in cloud cuckoo land” with their 
determination to introduce 8am-8pm seven-day opening, and that chronic GP 
shortages made that a “recipe for disaster”.

The new study, Baker said, added more weight to the argument against routine 
Sunday opening for GP practices. “Patients themselves do not want it. Our 
patients have better things to do on a Sunday afternoon than have their ears 
syringed. We hope this research will quell the government’s obsession with 
seven-day working once and for all.”

Instead, she said, ministers should ensure that extra investment in NHS 
general practice went into hiring extraGPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> and “a robust five-day service and 
existing GP out-of-hours services”.

Chaand Nagpaul, chair of the British Medical Association’s GPs committee, also 
urged ministers to admit that “a one-size fits all approach [to GP surgery 
opening hours] will clearly not work”. An audit published last week of NHS 
England’s experiments with weekend opening “showed extremely poor demand from 
patients for appointments on Sundays and in many cases on Saturday afternoons”, 
he said.

Patients wary of David Cameron's plan for seven-day GP services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/30/patients-wary-of-david-camerons-plan-for-7-day-gp-services>
He added: “This has resulted in precious NHS resources being wasted on keeping 
near empty practices open and staffed, and has taken GPs away from caring for 
patients in greatest need.”

Pulse magazine reported in September that almost half of all the places that 
had offered GP appointments on a Saturday and Sunday had later reduced their 
opening hoursbecause too few patients were interested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/29/almost-half-seven-day-trial-gp-surgeries-cut-hours-after-lack-of-demand>
.

John Ford, from UEA’s Norwich medical school, said: “Weekend working is a 
flagship policy of the UK government. Their plan is that by 2020 people will 
have access to GPs seven days a week. Some argue that it will reduce pressure 
on hospitals, while others say that it is unaffordable and mismatched with what 
patients need.”

People working full-time or who said they would not get time off work to visit 
a GP during the day, as well as people with a wide range of conditions, 
including angina, cancer, asthma and diabetes, were among those more likely to 
want surgeries to open at weekends, the new study has found.

A Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
spokeswoman said: “The public wants GP appointments seven days a week to suit 
their busy lives, and innovative GPs are already making this a reality. That 
demand is being met by nearly half a million evening and weekend appointments, 
and patients say the service is invaluable.” The pilots of extended GP opening 
had also reduced visits to A&E units by people with minor ailments by 15%, she 
added.
 