
High up in the National Theatre, Patrick Marber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marber> is huddled in the corner of a small, 
drab room. “Is this going to be in-depth?” His fingers are bunched around a mug 
of instant coffee. “I was told the Guardian wanted something in-depth. But I 
thought, ‘I haven’t got enough depth to plumb.’” He grins ruefully.

We’ve only been here a few minutes, but his exchanges are settling into a 
pattern: it’s hard to tell where seriousness ends and the joke begins. Or 
perhaps it’s the other way round – seemingly innocent humour that turns lethal.

Marber’s work has the quality, too. Whether in his debut play, Dealer’s Choice 
(1995), which wryly examined the agonies of lonely, frustrated men addicted to 
gambling, or his screenplay adaptation of Zoë Heller’sNotes on a Scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/feb/02/drama.periodandhistorical> 
(2006), few contemporary writers have teased apart the faulty workings of the 
human heart with such wit and surgical precision. Most audiences will know 
Marber’s name fromCloser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/06/closer-patrick-marber-donmar-warehouse>
, the 1997 play that became an international sensation, then a starry Hollywood 
movie, and was revived earlier this year at London’s Donmar Warehouse. With a 
series of interlocking, almost Jacobean sexual betrayals and an eerily 
prescient plot twist involving an online chatroom, the script rams home the 
vacuity and folly of desire, particularly in a world where it can ostensibly be 
satisfied on tap. “Oh, I’m not totally sure I see it that way,” says Marber. 
“It’s quite a tender play, really. Most of what I write is comedy.” Perhaps the 
joke is on us.

This summer he is back where Closer began, at the National. In fact he is 
practically in residence: his new play,The Red Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/11/the-red-lion-review-patrick-marber-football-play-daniel-mays>
, opened last month; when we meet he is in final rehearsals forThree Days in 
the Country <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/three-days-in-the-country> 
, a version of Ivan Turgenev’s study of love and lust, thwarted idealism and 
slow-fizzling marital despair. If you’re puzzling over what the Turgenev is 
called, don’t worry: Marber has made abbreviations, the title being one. 
Turgenev’s month of rural un-bliss has been condensed to 72 hours; the script 
is tighter and sharper, more pointed, a touch more painful.

“It’s a wonderful play, full of beauty, but it’s a big old beast,” Marber 
reflects. “My instinct was to distil it, and every now and then invent and 
change. Some people who know the work will go, ‘hang on’, but generally 
speaking it’s the same people doing fairly much the same stuff.” The rueful 
smile again. “Generally speaking.”

Perhaps the most famous thing about Turgenev’s play, written in the early 
1850s but only premiered in 1872, is that it is Chekhov a generation before 
Chekhov. With its interlocking stories of the unhappily married Natalya and 
Arkady, Natalya’s dithering and never-consummated relationship with Arkady’s 
best friend, and a calamitous romance between a tutor and a bright-eyed 
ingenue, it is easy to spot ingredients the younger playwright would deploy so 
devastatingly inThe Cherry Orchard and Uncle Vanya. In both Turgenev and 
Chekhov, the country-house setting allows the characters to eddy and collide, 
sour self-realisations to emerge. The oppressive languor of the Russian summer 
becomes a guarantee that nothing can ever be resolved.

“Not that much happens, but everything happens,” agrees Marber. “The 
fundamentals feel Chekhovian – the slight driftiness of it, the steady 
accumulation of plot, all these different plots spinning – but Turgenev came up 
with that form.”

Wasn’t Chekhov adamant 
<http://modernism.research.yale.edu/wiki/index.php/Anton_Chekhov> that his 
plays, too, were comedies? He smiles. “I think I write serious comedies. I 
would love to be able to write for pure pleasure, but the undertow is always 
loneliness.” He makes a gesture of helplessness. “At the age of 50 you have to 
recognise these things keep recurring.”

If Marber sometimes has the air of a man struggling to believe he has made it 
this far, it is with good reason. In the 1990s it was as if he could do no 
wrong: there were the brilliant collaborations with comedians such as Armando 
Iannucci, Steve Coogan and Chris Morris (Alan Partridge,The Day Today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/daytoday/>); there was Dealer’s Choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/oct/05/theatre2>, which made his name, 
and a smart update of Strindberg’sMiss Julie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/22/after-miss-julie-review> to 
Britain on election night in 1945, when the future of the country hung in the 
balance. Even when the film version ofCloser opened to mixed reviews (the 
Guardian declared it had “the cutting edge of a butter knife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,4267,1389604,00.html>
”), Marber’s status as the English Mamet, or an in-yer-face Pinter, seemed 
assured. Great things were expected.

But things were already beginning to go awry. In 2001, Howard Katz, an 
examination of male midlife crisis, sank amid lukewarm reviews.Don Juan in Soho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/dec/07/theatre2>, though politely 
received, only achieved a brief run at the Donmar. There were screenplays, 
notablyNotes on a Scandal, but the words came less readily. One day they dried 
up altogether. Recently Marber told the Independent that he didn’t write a 
thing for “four or five years”. In 2012, he considered throwing in the towel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fpatrick-marber-interview-turgenev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F24%2F1437739769306%2F0ffa7de3-c83e-4360-aa6f-220ed9e2f426-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Your%20heart%20skips%20when%20someone%20is%20saying%20your%20lines%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fpatrick-marber-interview-turgenev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Your%20heart%20skips%20when%20someone%20is%20saying%20your%20lines%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fpatrick-marber-interview-turgenev%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F24%2F1437739769306%2F0ffa7de3-c83e-4360-aa6f-220ed9e2f426-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Three Days in the Country at the National Theatre, with Amanda Drew and John 
Simm Photograph: Mark Douet 
“I don’t want to bore on about it,” he says hastily when I ask. “But if you 
can’t work, you’ve got a big problem. My vision for my 40s was that I was going 
to write five plays, because that’s how many I’d written in my 30s. And my 40s 
were a disaster.”

The crisis was a long time brewing, he thinks now. One factor – perhaps 
perversely – wasCloser, which he directed as well as wrote: “I really enjoyed 
its success at the time, but I didn’t write anything for two years. It was 
exhausting.” Another factor is the decision he and his wifeDebra Gillett 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/discover-more/artists/debra-gillett> took in 
2007 to relocate to the Sussex countryside with their three young boys. The 
decision now appears to flummox him: “I thought I could write anywhere, but it 
was too peaceful, just too … nice. I was having a coffee in Waitrose in 
Crowborough, reading the Guardian sports pages, and I suddenly thought, I need 
to get out.” He grimaces. “I was only in my mid-40s.”

While – as in Turgenev – this countryside sojourn may have threatened Marber’s 
emotional health, it also offered a way out. One turning point was his 
acquisition, with a group of fellow fans, of Lewes FC, turning it from a club 
nearing bankruptcy to aflourishing community-owned enterprise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/aug/22/patrick-marber-boardroom-lewes>
. Another was the play that resulted,The Red Lion, about a struggling team 
whose members (somewhat like Lewes’s) are doing their utmost to square a 
utopian belief in the beauty of the beautiful game with the financial ugliness 
that dominates contemporary football. The script emerged in painful fits and 
starts, and only found its final form when he and the family moved back to 
London a few years ago.

Marber is quick to say that The Red Lion would never have happened had it not 
been for directorIan Rickson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/14/ian-rickson-betrayal>, to whom 
Three Days is dedicated: “He got me back at my desk and read every draft, read 
it act by act as I was delivering it. He was a great midwife. I absolutely owe 
my ability to write again to Ian.”

I’m struck by how full of tenderness both plays are, I say: if the dialogue in 
Marber’s earlier work is steely, speeches scissoring sharply across each other, 
what he has produced recently seems more compassionate in tone; more autumnal, 
perhaps.

He holds the thought, considering it from every angle. “That might be right,” 
he says eventually. “The Red Lion is a lot about childhood, Three Days, too; a 
lot of it is seen through the eyes of a 10-year-old boy [Natalya and Arkady’s 
son]. Having children myself is a lot to do with that. I feel I know these 
boys. But I hope that all my plays feel like plays written by me. They have a 
particular flow in them.” He sighs, mock-lugubriously. “I’m condemned to be the 
writer I am.”

There's no stranger feeling than when someone says, ‘please welcome Patrick 
Marber’, and suddenly you're there on stage

Marber’s bouts with his demons have been well-chronicled: his struggles with 
gambling, which landed him in Gamblers’ Anonymous (though it was a fiction he 
lost £10,000 a night: “I wish I’d had that kind of money”); the therapy that he 
has been in, on and off, since the age of 17. In conversation, he is a curious 
mix of openness and a sweet, faintly diffident shyness.

Does he still find writing hard? He scans the skyline. “Ages ago I was with 
Tom Stoppard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>. I was moaning about 
something, he was moaning about something. And he said,” – he shifts into 
flawless Mitteleuropean – “‘Patrick, to be a playwright is to have your heart
broken every day.’” He laughs. “And I was thinking, like, ‘Shit, even Tom 
thinks that, and he’s God.’”

He thinks some more. “But your heart also skips a beat, when you’re in 
rehearsals, when someone’s saying your lines … ”

At 50, Marber looks like a man in a hurry. In addition to the National Theatre 
plays and the revival ofCloser, he has another play “sort of on the go”, a 
screenplay that he’s hoping to write this winter if it gets the green light, 
and a new script for the National’sConnections 
<http://connections.nationaltheatre.org.uk/> festival of drama for young 
people. He is writing every day, determined not to get comfortable. “I would 
like to write a ballet, I’d like to write a libretto, I want to write a musical 
… I’ve got a lot of other things I’d like to do.” Inspired by a two-minute 
appearance in James Graham’s election-themedThe Vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/10/the-vote-review-james-graham-donmar-warehouse-all-star-general-election>
 (the same role Jude Law did on another night, he beams), he’s even keen to get 
back on stage.

What sort of parts is he after? “I’ll write it myself if no one else does. 
Small comic cameo, couple of scenes. I remember this from being a standup: 
there’s no feeling stranger, being backstage and someone says, ‘please welcome 
Patrick Marber’, and suddenly you’re there … The same person but transformed.” 
His eyes are wide. “How marvellous.”

He looks aghast when I remind him he once said that his ambition was to write 
a play that survived. “Now I just hope to write anything,” he says. “The 
chances of your plays being remembered are minuscule. These days my bar is 
very, very low.”

This time, when it comes, the smile isn’t sad at all. “Just doing it is 
enough.”

• Three Days in the Country opens on 28 July, The Red Lion runs until 30 
September, both at the National Theatre, London SE1.nationaltheatre.org.uk 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>.
 