
It is almost two decades to the day since Paul Rudd first came to public 
attention and two things about him have remained unchanged since. The first, 
most obviously, is his face. Save for some faint lines on his forehead, Rudd 
looks unnervingly similar to how he did in Clueless, which celebrates its 20th 
anniversary next week and in which he played the love interest Josh. So much so 
that his lifelong friend Jon Hamm has suggested this is down to“all that crazy 
virgin blood he’s drinking”. 
<http://www.elle.com/culture/celebrities/a11741/paul-rudd-interview/>

The second is his personality: Paul Rudd is just so darn nice. Every interview 
he has done mentions this and every one of his co-stars says this about him 
(Amy Poehler recently described him to me in an interview as “Mr Perfect”). 
Last year, the American comedian Stephen Colbert dropped his carefully honed 
rightwing blowhard persona on The Colbert Report to talk seriously about how 
Rudd is “the nicest person on the planet”, describing the time Rudd sang Oops! 
... I Did It Again on loop withColbert’s six-year-old daughter to keep her 
entertained 
<http://uproxx.com/tv/2014/06/stephen-colberts-chat-with-paul-rudd-is-why-hell-be-a-great-late-show-host/>
.

“Ah, you know, he was biased. It was just that I was playing with his kids,” 
Rudd shrugs when I bring this up, as though he is offering proof that he is 
cheating his way to likability as opposed to further evidence of his niceness.

Hollywood and audiences also tend to think of him as the ultimate nice guy – 
the go-to man for the safe boyfriend role. But many of Rudd’s best-known roles 
have involved him playing embittered cynics, such as in the underratedRole 
Models <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSk0B0dVq4g>, which he co-wrote, The 
40-Year-Old Virgin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pYBo5eS5pW8>, in which he 
played an unhinged ex-boyfriend, andKnocked Up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qqe5p8S5-ws> ,as the frustrated husband Pete 
(“Isn’t it weird when you have a kid and all your dreams and hopes go right out 
the window?”). Then there are the characters Rudd describes as“the full-on 
buffoons” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gDyM1I9bxM4>, such as reporter Brian 
Fantana in Anchorman, who gives names to his testicles and – still my favourite 
Rudd performance – Andy the obnoxious summer camp counsellor in cult 2001 comedy
Wet Hot American Summer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZbPGGfPWWWk>, which is 
being revived on Netflix this summer, in which Rudd will co-star alongside 
original cast members including Poehler and Bradley Cooper. Yet such is Rudd’s 
shining niceness that his public image as Mr Good Guy, the perfect fantasy 
boyfriend, has remained unaffected by the roles he plays.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel's%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel%27s%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch the trailer for Ant-Man 
By the time I meet up with Rudd, he has been stuck inside an airless London 
hotel room doing interviews for his performance as the eponymousAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
, the latest superhero film in Marvel’s hugely lucrative stable, for more than 
eight hours, starting at 7am. Yet in his trim suit and dark shirt he couldn’t 
look less ruffled and more psyched to see me, urging me to partake in 
refreshments (“No tea? You sure? But you must be so hot!”) and latching 
immediately on to my transatlantic accent. I’m not surprised that Rudd seizes 
on my accent – his parents were British Jews from Edgware and Surbiton, and 
while Rudd was born in New Jersey in 1969 and raised in the US, he was often in 
Britain as a kid to visit relatives in London’s less glamorous suburbs and 
Basingstoke.

Ant-Man review: diminishing returns for latest expansion of Marvel universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
“I’ve always felt genuinely at home here, just from the little things. As a 
kid, I was elated I could get all the chocolates I never could get back in the 
States. The world is small when you’re small, so that was HUGE,” he says, his 
eyes growing wide at the memory of all those Wonka-esque sweets, such as 
Rowntree Fruit Gums for his dad (“Never the pastilles!”), and Smarties and 
Crunchie bars for his younger sister and him.

“I’m now getting asked about the comics I read as a kid [because of Ant-Man], 
but the comics I loved were the Beano and Dandy: Desperate Dan, the Bash Street 
Kids, Dennis the Menace. You say ‘Dennis the Menace’ in America and it’s a
totally different thing,” he says with solemn emphasis.

Then there were the cultural legacies of growing up with English parents: 
“Tea! Tea has always been a big thing in my life. And I’m not talking about 
Liptons with lemon or iced tea, or any of that nonsense. Has to be hot PG Tips 
with milk. So growing up [in the States], it was a constant struggle …” he 
deadpans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436451467637%2F19c591d8-32d1-4434-9658-a7cc2576b4c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Rudd%20on%20Ant-Man%2C%20being%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20go-to%20nice%20guy%20and%20growing%20up%20with%20English%20parents%20in%20Kansas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Rudd%20on%20Ant-Man%2C%20being%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20go-to%20nice%20guy%20and%20growing%20up%20with%20English%20parents%20in%20Kansas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436451467637%2F19c591d8-32d1-4434-9658-a7cc2576b4c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 With Seth Rogen and Romany Malco in The 40-Year-Old Virgin. Photograph: PR 
Part of Rudd’s reputation for niceness comes from his eagerness to 
self-deprecate – not a common trait among Hollywood celebrities – and I had 
lazily assumed this, too, was an inheritance from his English background. Even 
in the bromantic comedies with which he has become synonymous, it always feels 
like Rudd’s character is knowingly self-mocking rather than engaging in the 
more bullying comedy style of his frequent co-star Seth Rogen. But Rudd puts 
his self-deprecation down to something more complicated than nationality. His 
father worked for the airline TWA and the family moved a lot, before settling 
in Kansas when he was 10.

“I was always in new schools and had British parents, which was not the norm, 
and I think there was also … I’m not particularly religious, but I was born 
Jewish and I always felt like the outsider because I wasn’t Christian or 
Catholic,” he says. “So I learned early on that I could be accepted if I made 
people laugh when I turned the joke on myself and, particularly in Kansas, if I 
made a joke about being Jewish, my friends would laugh really hard, harder than 
they perhaps should have.”

Yet he talks about his childhood, Kansas and, in particular, his family with 
enormous fondness, especially his father, who died six years ago and whom he 
idolised and references often in our time together. One of the defining 
memories of his younger years is watching his father crack up on the sofa while 
watching Monty Python, which planted the seed of him wanting to be a comedian 
and eventually an actor.

Paul Rudd: Hollywood's most lovable man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/29/paul-rudd-prince-avalanche-anchorman-2>
“Actors talk about a love of craft and contributing to artistic welfare. But, 
really, I think [the desire to act] came for me from wanting more attention 
from my parents,” he says. I’d always assumed that thedorky dancing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9gwRjQLKfkA> that he breaks out in nearly all 
his films was a homage to Carlton from The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air. But Rudd 
assures me, “There is family footage of me doing that same dance at the age of 
four, just to make my parents laugh.”

Is his friendliness part of that desire to please or does that come from 
growing up in the midwest? “There is something about growing up in the midwest 
that gives a different kind of sensibility,” he agrees. “But if I’m feeling 
insecure, the smiles and politeness get upped a notch, and maybe that isn’t 
totally reflective of how I’m feeling on the inside. But, you know, better to 
be thought of as a nice person than a dickhead.” He laughs and carefully – and 
correctly – pours himself a cup of tea.

While there might be some truth to that, the man is too sweet for it to be 
just a twitch of insecurity. He doesn’t even wince when he is asked – for what 
must be the 10 billionth time in his life – aboutClueless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/clueless>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436451143520%2F1ce0ac71-1066-41a3-9f26-61b5236f7b24-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Rudd%20on%20Ant-Man%2C%20being%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20go-to%20nice%20guy%20and%20growing%20up%20with%20English%20parents%20in%20Kansas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Rudd%20on%20Ant-Man%2C%20being%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20go-to%20nice%20guy%20and%20growing%20up%20with%20English%20parents%20in%20Kansas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436451143520%2F1ce0ac71-1066-41a3-9f26-61b5236f7b24-2060x1236.jpeg>
 As the Nietzsche-reading Josh in 1995’s Clueless, with Alicia Silverstone. 
Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
“Honestly, I’m just happy to be involved with something that struck a chord 
with as many people as it did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/30/clueless-best-fashion-film-twenty-years-cher-horowitz>
. I remember after we’d done the first table read and the whole cast went out 
to get something to eat and someone said: ‘How cool would it be if this movie 
is to kids now what those John Hughes movies had been to us?’ So that it turned 
out to be that way was just a fluke. Even the day it came out, the producer, 
Scott Rudin, called me and said: ‘Congratulations, we’ve got good reviews – 
don’t get used to this.’ Smart man,” he says.

Rudd could easily have been another cute guy in a 90s film whose career faded 
out of view in the next decade – another Freddie Prinze Jr, say, or, at best, a 
Josh Charles. That he isn’t is largely thanks to two career developments in the 
next decade: Friends and Judd Apatow. When Rudd was cast in Friends in 2002, he 
had been working steadily since the 90s, including making a small but amusing 
appearance in Baz Luhrmann’s Romeo + Juliet, but not in anything nearly as 
seminal as Clueless. But Rudd is largely dismissive of his experience on 
Friends: “The process [of making a sitcom] seemed really foreign to me, so it’s 
kind of a strange memory for me. I mainly hung out in the background and talked 
to Gunther. It was amazing but kind of like being the Jew with English parents 
in Kansas – that’s the way I felt on Friends. I just didn’t want to get in the 
way. So as far as having an impact on my career, it was really withAnchorman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101940/anchorman> and then The 40 Year 
Old Virgin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107816/40-year-old-virgin> 
where I took a left turn.”

These films certainly rejuvenated Rudd’s career, and presumably gave him the 
leverage to create the brilliant but too shortlived sitcomParty Down 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Party_Down>. But increasingly they started to 
look like they were trapping him. For every decent comedy in which he has 
appeared in the past decade, there have been plenty of meh ones (This is Forty, 
Our Idiot Brother) and too many terrible ones (Admission, Dinner for Schmucks, 
How Do You Know).

“Over the last 10 years, I never made a very concerted effort to mix it up. I 
just wanted to work on things that I liked. But I think I was feeling some 
fatigue over that and wanted to try something different,” he says.

Which brings us to Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>. While 
superhero movies are now part of Hollywood’s landscape, you would go through a 
lot of names before getting to Rudd’s when thinking of actors you would expect 
to add to the superhero roster. As Rudd says himself: “I knew being in this 
would make people say: ‘What? Really?’” But this is partly why he works in the 
film – after all, a movie about a man whose special power is that he becomes 
ant-sized is not calling for a classic macho man (although Rudd did buff up a 
little for the film, a process he describes, with sweet nerdiness, as 
“enjoyable – it was fun to have that kind of focus”).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436451255939%2Ffb45826e-c377-4136-a7b0-d78d63322155-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Rudd%20on%20Ant-Man%2C%20being%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20go-to%20nice%20guy%20and%20growing%20up%20with%20English%20parents%20in%20Kansas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Rudd%20on%20Ant-Man%2C%20being%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20go-to%20nice%20guy%20and%20growing%20up%20with%20English%20parents%20in%20Kansas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpaul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436451255939%2Ffb45826e-c377-4136-a7b0-d78d63322155-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The birth of a new career? Rudd contemplates life as Ant-Man. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney 
Rudd plays Scott, a (semi) reformed thief who is hired by science genius Dr 
Pym (a strangely bland Michael Douglas) to stop the evil Darren Cross (Corey 
Stoll) from using the shrinking technology for evil. It’s a visually sparky 
film, a mercifully far cry from the solemn ponderousness of too many superhero 
films today. But it’s hard not to wonder if much of the spark came from the 
film’s original director, Edgar Wright, who co-wrote the screenplay with Joe 
Cornish, before both were replaced at the eleventh hour by Peyton Reed as 
director and Rudd and Anchorman’s Adam McKay as scriptwriters. (Reed has said
the idea for the film’s best scene, set in a child’s bedroom, came from Wright 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/peyton-reed-edgar-wright-ant-man/>). Rudd eagerly 
credits Wright and Cornish with “doing most of the heavy lifting” on the 
script, but adds that he and McKay “did a pretty substantial re-write, although 
we wanted to stay true to what those guys had written, but also open it up.”

Does he know why Wright was let go? “I don’t, er – that’s really between Edgar 
andMarvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>. Yeah,” he says, with a 
slightly nervous look towards the PR in the room.

Whatever the truth of the story behind the film, Rudd will appear as Ant-Man in
Captain America: Civil War <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3498820/> and may well 
join the Avengers stable. After nailing teen romances in the 90s and fratty 
comedies in the earlier 2000s, the third and equally zeitgeisty part to Rudd’s 
career may well be beginning in superheroes. But for him, he says, the best 
part is that his son, who is 10, can enjoy his work for the first time (Rudd 
also has a young daughter and he and his family live in New York City).

“This is the first film of mine that he’s seen and it makes me proud and 
nervous at the same time. I took him to the premiere – he’d never been to a 
premiere, and that was a very moving experience for me. The best thing about 
anything is sharing it with your kid.”

Your son must think you’re pretty cool to be a superhero, I say. “Well, if I 
could now get a job playing with the Kansas City Chiefs or Man City, then I’d 
be really cool to him,” he says with a self-mocking, dorky-dad grin. Because, 
as he knows himself,Paul Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-rudd> is 
too nice to be cool.

Ant-Man goes on worldwide release on 17 July.
 