
A recent trend in British theatre has been towards interval-free evenings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/dec/06/london-theatre-shows-extra-short-or-extra-long>
, with their consequences for bar-takings, bladders and the tradition of Act 
One cliffhangers. However, new London productions of plays by Ibsen and Chekhov 
offer theatregoers a different kind of experience – and multiple opportunities 
to take in (or let out) a gin and tonic.


 Matthew Warchus’s staging of David Hare’s adaptation of Ibsen’s The Master 
Builder at the Old Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/04/the-master-builder-review-ralph-fiennes-ibsen-old-vic>
 has two intervals, whileUncle Vanya at the Almeida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/14/uncle-vanya-review-almeida-theatre-robert-icke>
, adapted and directed by Robert Icke, releases the audience from their seats 
three times. Restoring the Victorian idea of an evening’s theatre as a social 
gathering occasionally interrupted by acting, these decisions boldly go against 
the fashion for a cinema-like sequence of intermission-free action.

Robert Icke's new revolution: a Vanya to blow Chekhovians' samovars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/12/robert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre>
 Despite awarding Uncle Vanya five stars, Georgina Brown in the Mail on Sunday 
chided the director for having “three intervals, when one would do”. And my 
colleague Michael Billington, ingiving four stars to The Master Builder, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/04/the-master-builder-review-ralph-fiennes-ibsen-old-vic>
 also wondered about its stop-start structure. The fact that these 
disgruntlements did not result in a reduction of marks – or lessen my own high 
praise for both productions – indicates that intermissions themselves are not 
under review.

 Perhaps, though, they should be. A regular question in English and drama 
exams has invited students to consider where the interval should be taken in 
certain Shakespeare plays. Such study is justified because the director’s 
decision on when to let the audience out of a long show can significantly 
affect the rhythms and reception of a production.

 There is a practical aspect to the calculations. One reason for this Ibsen 
and this Chekhov having so many holes in them is that, in the structuring of 
their plays, the Russian and Norwegian masters deliberately took advantage of 
how the theatre of their time was designed to allow audiences to have drinks or 
even dinner between acts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmultiple-intervals-chekhov-ibsen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F711e3f83c43d3ee6a81dd8b9a17e063f84bb73b7%2F0_391_4280_2568%2F4280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pause%20and%20effect%3A%20tradition%20of%20multiple%20intervals%20gets%20a%20revival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmultiple-intervals-chekhov-ibsen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pause%20and%20effect%3A%20tradition%20of%20multiple%20intervals%20gets%20a%20revival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmultiple-intervals-chekhov-ibsen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F711e3f83c43d3ee6a81dd8b9a17e063f84bb73b7%2F0_391_4280_2568%2F4280.jpg>
 Vanessa Kirby, Tobias Menzies and Richard Lumsden in Uncle Vanya at the 
Almeida. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 The three scenes of The Master Builder take place in different rooms of the 
house, while the four sections of Uncle Vanya also change setting. So one 
advantage of the leisurely progress of these versions lies in allowing the 
striking designs (by Rob Howell for the Ibsen and Hildegard Bechtler for the 
Chekhov) to be fully realised.

 The alternative is either laborious scene-changes during extended blackouts, 
or serious rewriting. Whether by coincidence or design, the previous show at 
the Almeida –Richard Eyre’s version of Ibsen’s Little Eyolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/27/little-eyolf-review-richard-eyre-ibsen-almeida>
 – took the latter approach, collapsing the three acts into an unbroken script 
with a single setting.

The Homecoming and Little Eyolf: new views stay faithful to Pinter and Ibsen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/30/the-homecoming-little-eyolf-pinter-ibsen-adaptations-almeida-trafalgar-studios>
 But, if breaks are to be taken, their length also becomes relevant. In the 
two current productions, Ibsenites get two 20-minute breaks while Chekovians 
are given three of 10 minutes each. These arrangements bring different 
complications. Going to the bar twice in The Master Builder would both be 
expensive and potentially ruinous to the comprehension of the final act, while 
the short suspensions in Uncle Vanya provide time for either a tea or a pee but 
not both. It is probably too much of a fuss to leave the auditorium each time, 
which means using at least one of the slots for reading programmes, eating 
ice-cream or idling uncomfortably in the seat.

 There are also consequences for the actors – presumably urinary advantages, 
especially in Uncle Vanya, where a lot of tea and wine is drunk. But a regular 
dilemma that arises for performers – whether to stay in character during the 
interval or catch up with emails or online shopping – is multiplied in these 
productions. I imagine that for Ralph Fiennes as Ibsen’s Solness and Paul Rhys 
as John (the name Vanya is given in the Icke version), these roles must be 
rather like the innings of a cricketer who bats through a day’s play, having to 
get their eye in again after the lunch and tea breaks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmultiple-intervals-chekhov-ibsen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe182c805ec40a4593ef32c87076ff0332b100f17%2F0_322_4738_2842%2F4738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pause%20and%20effect%3A%20tradition%20of%20multiple%20intervals%20gets%20a%20revival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmultiple-intervals-chekhov-ibsen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pause%20and%20effect%3A%20tradition%20of%20multiple%20intervals%20gets%20a%20revival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmultiple-intervals-chekhov-ibsen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe182c805ec40a4593ef32c87076ff0332b100f17%2F0_322_4738_2842%2F4738.jpg>
 Linda Emond and Ralph Fiennes in The Master Builder at the Old Vic. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 The Almeida is discovering one of the risks of providing so many gaps in the 
action. Uncle Vanya involves a variety of radical reinterpretations, including 
a teapot instead of a samovar and baggy sweaters rather than frocks. 
Personally, I found the departures from the Chekhovian norm exciting and 
revealing, but a number of matinee-goers took the opportunity to leave after 
only 35 minutes, with another clutch following them when another opening for 
what we might call Chexit was offered 40 minutes later. In this respect, Icke 
is paying a price for combining a modernistic attitude to text with a classical 
approach to intervals.

 There is often a Darwinist aspect to theatrical fashion, with the art form 
adapting to survive against competing challenges. The perceived contest with TV 
and film has made theatre become shorter and more fast-paced, with a majority 
of new plays seeming briefer than a football match and lacking a half-time. 
These two productions’ current experimenting with a lengthy, regularly 
interrupted night of theatre, though partly driven by respect for the 
dramatists’ attempts to reflect the passage of time, may be intended to 
reassert a difference between the art forms. The rhythm, though, feels strange 
– as if, through the decades of 70-minute single-strip plays, we theatre-goers 
have evolved not to need to stretch our legs as often as Victorians did.
 