
Tyneside turned out in force to pay its respects to the former Newcastle 
goalkeeper Pavel Srnicek in an emotional farewell.

Hundreds of friends and fans joined family members at the Parish Church of St 
Andrew in the shadow of St James’ Park for a memorial service on Wednesday 
followingSrnicek’s death last month at the age of 47 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/pavel-srnicek-newcastle-united-sheffield-wednesday-west-ham-dies-aged-47-cardiac-arrest>
.

Former team-mates Alan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer>, Steve Harper, Shay Given, 
Rob Lee, Lee Clark, Alan Thompson, Scott Sellars, Steve Howey, Darren Peacock, 
Steve Watson and Brian Kilcline were in attendance, as were the former chairmen 
Sir John Hall and Freddy Shepherd, the current managing director Lee Charnley, 
the manager Steve McClaren, the football development manager Peter Beardsley 
and the players Tim Krul and Steven Taylor.

Harper, who was a 17-year-old aspiring keeper when he first met Srnicek, led 
the tributes. “You loved Newcastle, Pav, but I can assure you that Newcastle 
loved you,” he said. “It was a privilege to meet you, it was a privilege to 
learn from you, it was a privilege to know you and call you my friend.”

Srnicek’s friend and agent Steve Wraith thanked those who had sent cards and 
best wishes to the Srnicek family in the Czech Republic on behalf of his mother 
Bernadette and brother Milan, who was present, and told the congregation of 
Srnicek’s love for the city and for the club he represented with such 
distinction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fpavel-srnicek-memorial-newcastle-fans-players-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e19509ce8fd2182c004665e926c42b2302b92d2%2F368_676_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pavel%20Srnicek%20memorial%3A%20Newcastle%20players%2C%20staff%20and%20fans%20pay%20tribute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fpavel-srnicek-memorial-newcastle-fans-players-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pavel%20Srnicek%20memorial%3A%20Newcastle%20players%2C%20staff%20and%20fans%20pay%20tribute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fpavel-srnicek-memorial-newcastle-fans-players-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e19509ce8fd2182c004665e926c42b2302b92d2%2F368_676_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
 Newcastle and Manchester United players pay tribute to Pavel Srnicek before 
their Premier League match at St James’ Park on 12 January. Photograph: Michael 
Regan/Getty Images 
He said: “He may have arrived without a Geordie accent or an inkling of what a 
Geordie was, but somehow, he got it. He was a gentleman and a Geordie and his 
place will be forever written into the history ofNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited>. We love you Pavel, we 
do, oh Pavel we love you.”

During the service, which was led by the club’s chaplain the Reverend Canon 
Glyn Evans, the congregation sang the FA Cup final hymn Abide With Me and the 
23rd psalm, to which an extra verse had been added. It read: “Pavel is a 
Geordie evermore, He’s part of our family, He’s played in goal, God rest his 
soul, a Geordie like you and me.”

The service also included some of Srnicek’s favourite songs, Gerry and the 
Pacemakers’ You’ll Never Walk Alone and Lifted by the Lighthouse Family, and 
ended with a recording of a Czech song, the title of which translates as Me and 
You.

Shearer said: “It’s not surprising but it’s great to see so many old faces. 
People have come from all over the world, all over the country to be here, and 
that tells you what a nice, genuine, humble, honest, hard-working professional 
Pav was. He was great to be around.”
 