
On 16 January, a leading London QC will appear on the stage of the Music Box 
theatre on Broadway <http://www.shubert.nyc/theatres/music-box> as an extra in 
Mike Bartlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/20/king-charles-iii-mike-bartlett>’s
King Charles III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/12/king-charles-iii-review-shakespeare-mike-bartlett-wyndhams-tim-pigott-smith>
. He paid £10,500 for the privilege in a fund-raising auction held at the 
show’s producing theatre, the Almeida, last summer. Although no one has any 
animus against the individual concerned, his presence in the show has caused a 
bit of a storm. The cast held an Equity meeting to debate the situation and, by 
a vote of 11 to six, agreed to sanction his appearance.

Is it fitting that anyone should be able to buy the right to perform? 
Pragmatists will say “Why not?” The Almeida suffered a substantial cut to its 
Arts Council grant a few years back. And, while it needs to take £1.4m annually 
at the box office, it also has to raise another £1.2m from sponsorship. In 
tough times, all extra revenue is vital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftheatres-auctioning-background-roles-almeida-king-charless-iii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a2e1a0d349a7c7a2d9ded882cebe239e41c147%2F180_440_3745_2248%2F3745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pay%20to%20play%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20theatres%20auctioning%20background%20roles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftheatres-auctioning-background-roles-almeida-king-charless-iii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pay%20to%20play%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20theatres%20auctioning%20background%20roles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftheatres-auctioning-background-roles-almeida-king-charless-iii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a2e1a0d349a7c7a2d9ded882cebe239e41c147%2F180_440_3745_2248%2F3745.jpg>
 The National Theatre held an auction for an appearance in War Horse. 
Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Some theatres use auctions for specific purposes. Three times in the past 10 
years – forHis Dark Materials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/jan/05/theatre.fiction>, War Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/war-horse> and wonder.land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/03/wonderland-review-manchester-international-festival-damon-albarn>
 – the National Theatre has auctioned off the right to appear in crowd scenes: 
the money raised went to the theatre’s education department. The producers of
The Railway Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jul/13/the-railway-children-theatre-review>
 have acted similarly to raise money for homeless and runaway children. Who can 
argue with that?

But it strikes me, and many others, there is a vital principle at stake. It is 
one thing to invite members of the public or experienced amateurs to appear on 
stage to swell a crowd, as happened withPeter Hall’s National Coriolanus 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/coriolanus/> and RSC Julius Caesar. But to 
invite people to pay to appear in a production in order to adorn their CV or to 
provide a dinner table anecdote is another matter. As one actor said to me, 
“It’s the thin end of a dangerous wedge and calls into question the ethics and 
value of our profession. How would the QC who’s appearing in King Charles III 
react if I offered him money to turn up as his clerk in a key trial? I imagine 
he would feel professionally insulted.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftheatres-auctioning-background-roles-almeida-king-charless-iii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3075b8d50e3b959cf7d5ec8f4bc4f52c7465b1%2F0_183_2799_1680%2F2799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pay%20to%20play%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20theatres%20auctioning%20background%20roles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftheatres-auctioning-background-roles-almeida-king-charless-iii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pay%20to%20play%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20theatres%20auctioning%20background%20roles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftheatres-auctioning-background-roles-almeida-king-charless-iii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3075b8d50e3b959cf7d5ec8f4bc4f52c7465b1%2F0_183_2799_1680%2F2799.jpg>
 The Railway Children, currently at King’s Cross theatre, London, is raising 
money for thehomelessness charity of the same name 
<https://www.railwaychildren.org.uk/>. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
As I see it, there is room for compromise on this issue. I’ve twice taken part 
in charity auctions where bidders have won the right to shadow me on a first 
night. I always felt a bit sorry for a charming lady who came all the way from 
Dresden to accompany me to the first night ofMadame de Sade at Wyndham’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/mar/19/madame-de-sade-grandage>, only 
to be confronted by the only dud play Michael Grandage has ever directed. But 
the point is that the winner bought my time and company, rather than the right 
to contribute to my review. And just as orchestras auction the right to attend 
rehearsals and meet the players, I’d have thought theatres could sell off 
similar facilities.

Permitting rich patrons to appear in the crowd scenes of King Charles III – 
described to me as “the most intricately rehearsed in recent history” – is a 
different matter altogether. How long before a desperately cash-strapped 
theatre offers a rich patron the chance to play Hamlet or Hedda Gabler at a 
matinee in order to balance the books? Where, in fact, will it all end?
 