
The African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> thrives or 
fails according to how successful it is in preventing and resolving conflict. 
Over the past 14 years, since its foundational meeting in Durban, South Africa, 
the AU has constructed an impressive peace and security architecture. It has 
presided over an impressive decline in armed conflicts and military coups.

Last year, the commissioner for peace and security 
<http://www.peaceau.org/en/page/79-commissioner> asked us to review peace 
efforts in Africa with a view to informing AU policies. Ourreport 
<http://www.africanpeacemissions.org/> is published on Thursday. The next six 
months, as the AU chooses a new chair for its commission, are a chance to 
examine the state of peace and security in Africa – and, more important, the 
direction in which the AU can steer the continent.

The AU has built a solid foundation and adopted far-reaching principles. Africa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> routinely rejects unconstitutional 
changes in government, upholds the principle of “non-indifference” – meaning 
countries are required to intervene when mass atrocities are committed against 
civilians – and supports more inclusive peace processes. The AU has set up the 
peace and security council, high-level panels for conflict resolution, and the 
African standby force for supporting peace operations.

Why the crisis in Burundi is tying the African Union in knots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/06/burundi-african-union-assassination>
The AU’s successes have come about through political and diplomatic 
approaches. While the AU also mounts military operations, these are expensive 
and, while sometimes necessary, aren’t consistently successful.

Worryingly, Africa’s peace and security record has shifted in the wrong 
direction over the past five years. Old patterns of conflict and 
authoritarianism have recurred and new threats have emerged.

The biggest task for the new commission chair is how to put Africa back on its 
track towards fewer armed conflicts. Experience shows that this is best done 
through prevention and mediation.

Contested regime transitions – and particularly attempts by those in power to 
hang on despite constitutional term limits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/burundi-president-pierre-nkurunziza-threatens-fight-african-union-peacekeepers>
 – are a major driver of armed conflict and popular protest. While there is 
nothing sacred about a two-term limit for presidents, the principles of 
constitutional democracy are a core African value and need to be protected.

Inter-state rivalries are another important and under-acknowledged trigger for 
conflict. The AU has devoted much attention to resolving them and creating a 
common approach among “frontline states”. This is never simple, and one 
challenge is getting the right division of labour between the AU and regional 
economic communities, which have the advantage of being nearby, but are not 
always impartial.

Significant too is violent extremism and the spillover of crises from the Arab 
world. The Sahara-Sahel region, and increasingly west Africa and the Horn of 
Africa, are affected by the turmoil in the Middle East, including both the 
spread of militant extremism and rivalries among Middle East nations. Africa 
needs a new mechanism for political partnership in the shared spaces of north 
Africa, the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, so that African voices are heard and 
the agenda is not set entirely by others.

'At the first sight of a dictator the African Union loses its backbone'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/12/african-union-loses-its-backbone-robert-mugabe-burundi>
The AU has massively expanded its peace support operations, which now rival 
the UN’s in size and ambition. Yet the AU’s peacekeeping capabilities need to 
be fit for purpose. We propose two different roles for theAfrican standby force 
<http://www.peaceau.org/en/page/82-african-standby-force-asf-amani-africa-1>: 
one should be a light footprint deployment aimed at preventing conflict, and 
the other a fully combat-capable peace enforcement operation. These demand very 
different command and control systems – the first could be run by the AU 
commission, but countries that contribute troops will insist on keeping their 
national command systems.

At a recent summit, the AU’s high representative for the African peace fund 
<http://www.peaceau.org/en/article/the-african-union-adopts-the-au-peace-fund>, 
Donald Kaberuka, presented his report. It proposes that if African countries 
can cover 25% of the cost of AU peace operations, the UN will cover the 
remaining 75% from its member states’ regular contributions for peacekeeping. 
That’s an important proposal: AU peace operations must be put on a firmer 
financial footing. The AU needs to assure that African states pay their portion 
of the bill as there can be no political ownership without financial 
responsibility. But it would be futile to spend money on military missions 
while shortchanging the AU’s political instruments – prevention and mediation 
should be the top funding priorities.

This is a tough agenda and demands a vigorous commission chair, someone 
prepared to use the AU’s tools to their limits and bend them to grapple with 
new challenges. The AU has six months of transition to its new leadership: it 
should use this time to set its strategic priorities for peace and security, 
and ensure that its next chair can deliver.

 * Mulugeta Gebrehiwot is director of the African peace missions programme at 
theWorld Peace Foundation <http://fletcher.tufts.edu/World-Peace-Foundation> 
and Alex de Waal is the foundation’s executive director
 