
On the evening of 24 April 1915, 82 Armenian artists and intellectuals were 
taken into eastern Anatolia into the deserts of Syria and executed. The first 
in a wave of mass killings that saw Turkey’s 2 million population of Armenians 
reduced to around 400,000 in a series of widely reported executions, 
deportations, forced assimilation and Islamisation, as well asthe 20th 
century’s first genocide <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide>, 
the murders came after the executions of an Armenian unit within the Ottoman 
Turkish army whom the Young Turks had suspected of collaboration with the 
Russians.


 “Thus having eliminated the ‘muscle’ of the Armenian nation, the Young Turks 
destroyed the ‘brain’,” said historianRonald Suny  
<https://history.uchicago.edu/directory/ronald-g-suny>during a panel entitled 
Armenian Genocide: a Dark Paradigm, which ran as part of thePEN World Voices 
festival <http://worldvoices.pen.org/> on Wednesday night in New York. Held in 
honour of the centenary of the Armenian genocide, the attending experts on 
Armenian and Turkish literature also included playwrightEric Bogosian 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/19/books/review/19bkr-kanon.t.html?_r=0>, 
English PEN presidentMaureen Freely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maureenfreely>, writer and activist Nancy 
Kricorian <http://nancykricorian.net/>, psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2015/5/7/robert_jay_lifton_on_how_climate>, 
Turkish human rights activist and publisherRagip Zarakolu 
<http://www.pen.org/defending-writers/test-first-name-test-middle-name-test-last-name/ragip-zarakolu>
, and poet and novelistPeter Balakian <http://www.peterbalakian.com/>.

The genocide’s “dark paradigm”, as well as Armenia’s relationship with Turkey, 
which denies the massacres, was the focus of the meditative evening, as well as 
the readings of works by the executed Armenian writers such as poetSiamanto 
<http://armenianhouse.org/blackwell/armenian-poems/siamanto.html> and novelist 
Zabel Yesayan 
<http://100years100facts.com/facts/zabel-yesayan-woman-list-arrested-night-april-24th-1915/>
.

“People come away thinking that there was a lot of tension between these 
groups, but in fact, Armenians were a very important part of the Ottoman empire 
for centuries,” said Bogosian, whose latest bookOperation Nemesis 
<http://www.operationnemesis.com/> follows the true story of a secret 
assassination plot to kill the leaders of the genocide. Constantinople’s 
literary scene, for example, influenced by French and Russian writers, was 
vibrant, “lyrical, dense” but “contemporary”. When the arrests happened, many 
people did not see it coming.

 The shock was “intense” among the community, Bogosian continued. The 
Christian population had been moved into deportation caravans or killed with a 
“level of sadism and violence that cannot be overemphasised … It was if people 
were trying to think of how could they do the most cruel things to the most 
people.” As a result, many artists who had survived were scarred by witnessing 
the events, and many took on a “pact of silence”, unable to make head or tail 
of their suffering.

Lifton echoed this, noting that Raphael Lemkin 
<http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/en/article.php?ModuleId=10007050>, who coined the 
word genocide in response to the massacres, also considered the wiping out a 
culture’s institutions and rituals as a part of a cultural genocide. “When 
[artists and writers] are destroyed, what is being destroyed is not only a 
group of human beings, but a whole imaginative constellation that’s so crucial 
for any culture, and what results is a culture drained of its psychological and 
spiritual strength,” he said.

During the recent centenary, which saw the Armenian community unite in a 
series of memorials and gatherings, international communities increased 
pressure on various governments, including the UK, to recognize the genocide. 
Despite lobbying from senatorsand celebrities such as reality television star 
Kim Kardashian, who has Armenian heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/25/kim-kardashian-obama-armenian-genocide>
,Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/22/barack-obama-will-not-label-1915-massacre-of-armenians-a-genocide>
 once again stopped short of naming the genocide, due to the US’s desire to 
keep relations with Turkey for the fight against Isis.

The biggest question of the evening, however, was less about the need for 
international recognition and more about Turkey’s need to accept its own 
atrocities. “Turkey is not a person, but in the newspapers, Turkey is always 
described as a person who is doing the denying it,” said Freely, who grew up in 
Turkey and acknowledged that there are still two histories taught to school 
children, one that “cannot be spoken” and one that “must be memorized”. Echoing 
Zarakolu, she said, “for those of us who are Turkish … it is a deep question of 
conscience. Until that question is embraced openly there is no hope for the 
people ofTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.”

Despite these sentiments, the panelists remained positive. When a question 
from the audience came about how the panelists felt individually the effect of 
the centenary, Suny related a story about a recent lecture to a group of 
Armenians. “A very prominent scholar said to me, ‘Ron, I know you’re going to 
talk about genocide, but can you be upbeat about it?’... But I think we can be 
upbeat about it,” he said to the laughter of the crowd. “Overwhelmingly 
scholars, the New York Times, and others have come out and no one says alleged 
genocide, they say genocide … I would say over these past 10 years, I am 
un-depressed. I am more and more enthusiastic.”

It’s also about changing the narrative. “If we get some deep historical 
knowledge of that, that’s simply the first step to then being able to create 
our own story,” concluded Suny. And that task surely remains with Armenia’s 
writers and artists, whose legacy and words will always live on.
 