
Major authors from Arundhati Roy to William Dalrymple and Neil Gaiman have 
condemned Penguin's controversial removal ofWendy Doniger's book The Hindus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/23/hindus-history-wendy-doniger-review>
 from circulation in India, a withdrawal which has been described as an 
"egregious violation of free speech" and "deplorable" by the international 
literary community.

The decision is "shocking, appalling, dreadful and entirely negative," 
Dalrymple told the Guardian, while Roy, the Booker prize-winning author of The 
God of Small Things, has called on Penguin to explain why it "caved in". 
Doniger'swidely praised book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/23/hindus-history-wendy-doniger-review>
 was pulled from India following a lawsuit from the Hindu group Shiksha Bachao 
Andolan accusing the University of Chicago professor of "hurt[ing] the 
religious feelings of millions of Hindus" – a violation of the Indian penal 
code which prohibits "deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage 
religious feelings or any class by insulting its religion or religious 
beliefs". The lawsuit, which also says Doniger's book is "a shallow, distorted 
and non-serious presentation of Hinduism" which is "riddled with heresies and 
factual inaccuracies", has been played out over the last four years, and 
according to the petitioner's lawyer, earlier this week publisher Penguin 
agreed to withdraw the book, andto pulp copies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/11/penguin-books-india-pulps-academic-book-hinduism-doniger>
.

The move immediately triggered an avalanche of protest. The Indian branch of 
writers' organisation PEN said 
<http://www.pen-international.org/02/2014/india-writers-defend-best-selling-book/>
 that "choosing to settle the matter out of court, instead of challenging an 
adverse judgment, narrows India's intellectual discourse and significantly 
undermines freedom of expression", adding: "The removal of books from our 
bookshops, bookshelves, and libraries, whether through state-sanctioned 
censorship, private vigilante action, or publisher capitulation are all 
egregious violations of free speech that we shall oppose in all forms at all 
times."

In an open letter to Penguin India 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Wendy-Donigers-book-You-must-tell-us-what-terrified-you-Arundhati-Roy-writes-to-Penguin-India/articleshow/30306451.cms>
 – her own publisher – published in the Times of India, Roy predicted there 
would "soon no doubt be protesters gathered outside your office, expressing 
their dismay" at the pulping of The Hindus.

She asked Penguin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> – which has yet 
to respond to requests for comment on its decision – "what is it that scared 
you so", adding: "What are we to make of this? Must we now write only 
pro-Hindutva books? Or risk being pulled off the bookshelves … and pulped?"

"You have published some of the greatest writers in history," wrote Roy. "You 
have stood by them as publishers should, you have fought for free speech 
against the most violent and terrifying odds. And now, even though there was no 
fatwa, no ban, not even a court order, you have not only caved in, you have 
humiliated yourself abjectly before a fly-by-night outfit by signing 
settlement. Why? You have all the resources anybody could possibly need to 
fight a legal battle. Had you stood your ground, you would have had the weight 
of enlightened public opinion behind you, and the support of most – if not all 
– of your writers."

In the US, the National Book Critics Circle – which had shortlisted The Hindus 
for its prestigious non-fiction award in 2009 -called on Penguin 
<http://bookcritics.org/blog/archive/statement-by-national-book-critics-circle-on-wendy-donigers-the-hindus>
 to reverse its "deplorable decision to remove The Hindus from circulation in 
the country, a de facto act of self-censorship that will only contribute to a 
further rolling back of free speech in India".

In a statement, Doniger herself said 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=755643361112970&id=672735306070443&stream_ref=10>
 she was "angry and disappointed" at the situation, and "deeply troubled by 
what it foretells for free speech in India in the present, and steadily 
worsening, political climate".

But the author expressly said she did not blame Penguin Books India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, saying they took the title on 
"knowing that it would stir anger in the Hindutva ranks, and they defended it 
in the courts for four years, both as a civil and as a criminal suit".

"They were finally defeated by the true villain of this piece – the Indian law 
that makes it a criminal rather than civil offence to publish a book that 
offends any Hindu, a law that jeopardises the physical safety of any publisher, 
no matter how ludicrous the accusation brought against a book," said Doniger, 
pointing to a quote from the lawsuit in which she is accused of hurting "the 
religious feelings of millions of Hindus by declaring that Ramayana is a 
fiction".

The historian Dalrymple agreed, saying the "real villains are the laws in this 
country, which were old colonial laws drawn up in the 1890s, and which make 
insulting religion a criminal offence".

"They give the general impression we are in 1936 in Germany, with freedoms 
being curtailed on a daily basis," said Dalrymple, author of Nine Lives: In 
Search of the Sacred in Modern India, The Last Mughal, and White Mughals. "The 
reality is that it is very difficult to defend yourself because the law is 
stacked very heavily on the side of any lunatic. It's shocking, appalling, 
dreadful and entirely negative, but I can understand why Penguin did what it 
did. They should have defended it, but I can understand why, with the law as it 
is, they decided they couldn't win the case."
 Hari Kunzru: condemned 'the saffron offence machine'. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod 
Novelist Hari Kunzru joined the chorus of outrage, saying: "The Hindu far 
right … has become expert in wielding the weapon of offence to silence critics. 
India looksset to elect Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/03/india-manmohan-singh-rahul-gandhi-modi>
, who was quick to ban a recent biography of Mahatma Gandhi in his home state 
of Gujarat. Once he's in power, I fear the saffron offence machine will reign 
unchecked, and it will be very difficult for scholars, writers and artists to 
defend themselves."

PEN India pointed to other titles which have been suppressed in the country, 
saying that "Indian publishers have faced waves of threats from litigants, 
vigilante groups, and politicians". Siddhartha Deb's The Beautiful and the 
Damned was published without its first chapter because of a lawsuit, according 
to PEN, while Bloomsbury India withdrew from circulation Jitender Bhargava's 
book, The Descent of Air India.

"Sahara Group is suing Tamal Bandyopadhyay, author of Sahara: The Untold 
Story," said PEN India, and "foreign publishers have not distributed an English 
translation of The Red Saree, a book loosely based on Sonia Gandhi's life".

Dalrymple urged those who disagree with the pulling of The Hindus to "form a 
movement to change the law", while Doniger pointed out that "in the age of the 
internet, it is no longer possible to suppress a book. The Hindus is available 
on Kindle; and if legal means of publication fail, the internet has other ways 
of keeping books in circulation. People in India will always be able to read 
books of all sorts, including some that may offend some Hindus."

The withdrawal has already sent The Hindus: An Alternative History soaring up 
the bestseller charts, a consequence which "may not have been the outcome that 
the people who tried to get it suppressed had hoped for," according to the 
novelistNeil Gaiman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman>.

"The solution to a book you don't like is to explain why you don't like it, 
point out its flaws, write your own book," said Gaiman on his blog. "It's not 
to get the book pulped because it offends you. even if you think it's bad. 
Especially if you think it's bad."
 