
The old don’t, in my experience, grow much wiser – but one of David Cameron’s 
more cynical tropes is that anyone reaching pension age, however venal their 
former lives, is magically bestowed with virtue and sagacity. Showering 
better-off pensioners with bribes, Cameron avers it’s “what people who have 
worked hard and saved all their lives deserve” – regardless of the cost to 
current hard workers.

Some are about to be reminded that there’s no fool like an old fool. On “
pension freedom day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/28/pension-freedom-day-month-you-ready>
” – 6 April – watch the retired scramble to withdraw lump sums: a feelgood 
bonanza for those most likely to vote Conservative. Car manufacturers predict a 
sales jump, so do buy-to-let estate agents and travel firms. Some will be wise 
to take their cash: why not take a cruise with pension pots too small to make 
much difference. But there’s alarm that fraudsters will make off with colossal 
booty, and City scammers will cream off the rest.

The insurance provider Phoenix Group says 45% of pension savers have already 
been contacted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/26/pensions-pots-laws-protect-cashing-retirement>
 by outfits encouraging them to release their cash. Offers of phenomenal 
interest rates abound if they shift their pension into “amazing investment 
opportunities” – rare earth minerals and phoney carbon credits. Clever wording 
stays within the law – not offering “advice”, which requires Financial Conduct 
Authority registration, but a “no-obligation pension review” with “no upfront 
fees” and “no hidden charges”. Already people crippled by pressing debtsfall 
easy victim to “unlock your pension” offers for the under-55s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/sep/06/pensions-crooks-scrapping-annuity-rules>
, some losing entire pots by paying an unexpected 55% tax and usurious charges.

Surveys show people badly misjudge how long they will live, what inflation 
might do, and how much they will need

As most people are clueless about pensions and investments, never have so many 
lambs been so ripe for fleecing. Surveys show people badly misjudge how long 
they will live, what inflation might do, and how much they will need. 
Announcing the free-for-all George Osborne promised “financial advice”, but 
that’s not what people will get.

Dashing to hit its election deadline, the fledgling Pension Wise service 
<https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/?gclid=COj4vKeyisQCFQTJtAodZWcAxQ> will not 
offer enough protection against siren voices relieving pensioners of their life 
savings. Citizens Advice is offering face to face help; online and telephone 
guidance is from the volunteers at the equally excellentTpas – the Pensions 
Advisory Service <http://www.pensionsadvisoryservice.org.uk/>. Pension funds 
must discuss clients’ circumstances before releasing large sums. But this 
guidance will be impersonal and may be swamped: Citizens Advice in London lists 
the Pension Wise service in just three centres.

The government’s old people’s champion, Ros Altmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ros-altmann>, warns that lack of advice is 
“the weakest link”. Legally, “guidance” is not “financial advice” so these 
services are not allowed to assess a pensioner’s assets or personal situation. 
Nor can they suggest what investments or annuities to choose. By law that can 
only be done by a registered independent financial adviser – but that costs 
about £1,000. Many who have never paid for advice will balk at it.

Gregg McClymont <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gregg-mcclymont>, 
Labour’s pensions spokesman, has pursued this doggedly, and he says the Tories 
don’t understand the class gap. His recently widowed mother has a pension but 
neither she nor anyone she knows would dream of spending £1,000 on advice. 
Instead people will fall prey to those “free consultations” with “no upfront 
fees” from firms selling unsuitable products and charging far more but less 
openly.

The rightwing Centre for Policy Studies sounded the alarm this week 
<http://www.cps.org.uk/about/news/q/date/2015/02/27/michael-johnson-calls-time-on-traditional-retirement-pr/>
. Its pensions expert, Michael Johnson, warns that many people will make very 
bad choices and live long in penury to regret it. Backed by the TUC, he 
proposes people be auto-enrolled into annuities, from which they can still opt 
out. National Savings could offer annuities to keep them honest.

Steve Webb's pensions U-turn is a dead duck on the dust heap of disasters | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/24/steve-webb-pension-u-turn-dead-duck>
Pension freedom day could have been a genuine liberation from the clutches of 
a finance industry that has built its fortune for hundreds of years from 
milking savers. Until now the law backed the City by forcing people to take out 
annuities that have been shamelessly bad value due to sky-high but opaque 
charges. Almost all the £48.5bn the state spends on pension tax reliefs 
vanishes into the pockets of City firms’ charges.

Steve Webb, the pensions minister, first pledged “a full-frontal assault” on 
charges that could mean anyone saving £100 a month losing £160,000 over a 
lifetime. He promised tocap all charges at 0.75%, fixed for the new 
auto-enrolled workplace pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/02/fca-pension-fees-charges-cap-criticism>
.

But he was nobbled by the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/24/steve-webb-pension-u-turn-dead-duck>
. As a result, any investments or annuities that people shift their money into 
can carry any charge. Financial Conduct Authority rules make charges 
transparent, but they still bamboozle many who don’t understand the long-term 
impact of a few per cent.

With no cap and no genuine advice, even the former Tory chancellor Lord Lawson 
protested in the Lords that “the foxes are regulating the hen coop” in the 
City. “There is absolutely no correlation between investment and management 
fees and performance,” he protested, while “portfolios are being deliberately 
churned to generate commissions”. Even so, the government refused to cap 
charges – so it will be freedom day again for the boys in red braces.

Expect shocks for many. Even at this late date, nothing is known about whether 
the freedom to take capital will disqualify people from free social care. 
Nothing is known about whether possession of even a small pension will stop 
those on low incomes qualifying for housing benefit or council tax credit.

Meanwhile, those who think Cameron capped care fees at £72,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/27/care-costs-cap-elderly-pensioners-benefits>
 will be angry: very few will ever reach the cap, cheated by finding they pay 
far more than that in bed and board charges. Nor will the promise be kept that 
“no one need face the prospect of selling their home” to pay their care home 
fees. Details just emerged show no one with savings over £23,250 can use the 
“universal deferred payment” to avoid selling their home after all.

Cameron’s pensions mis-selling scandal may rival even the one set off by 
Margaret Thatcher’s “freeing” of occupational pensions. Baubles such as TV 
licences will be long forgotten when people find they are paying huge care 
costs they thought had been capped. Worse still, many risk finding they were 
fooled into losing their savings.

Pensioners may take Cameron’s shiny bribes in May, but years after the 
election – both on care and on pensions – many may feel sorely cheated.
 