
Have you heard about pension auto-enrolment? Chances are, if you’re an 
employer in the UK you have. If you are one of the1.8 million 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/press/pn15-37.aspx> UK small and micro 
business employers who need to offer an auto-enrolment scheme, here’s what you 
need to know:


What does auto-enrolment mean?

Automatic enrolment means most UK employers will be obliged to put in place a 
qualifying workplace pension scheme and automatically enrol their qualifying 
workers. Employers then have to make contributions to their workers’ pensions 
every pay period.


When will I be affected?

The size of your business determines when you have to enrol your employees 
into a workplace pension scheme. This is called your staging date.


Very large employers were the first to reach their staging date in late 2012. 
It’s now the turn of small and micro employers.


The Pensions Regulator should write to you regularly to confirm your staging 
date. You can also check ahead of schedule onThe Pension Regulator’s website 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/employers/staging-date.aspx>. All you 
need is your PAYE reference number.


Who do I need to enrol?


Workers fit into one of three groups: eligible, entitled and non-eligible. A 
worker assessment will help you identify which group each of your employees 
fits into.


How to prepare your small business for pension auto-enrolment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/jun/23/small-businesses-auto-enrolment-pensions>
Eligible workers must be automatically enrolled and you must pay minimum 
contributions. They are those who:


 * Aren’t already in a qualifying pension scheme at work. 
 * Are aged between 22 and the state pension age (the earliest age they can 
claim their state pension). 
 * Work in the UK. 
 * Earn at least £10,000 in a year (this figure is reviewed by the government 
each tax year). 
Non-eligible workers can ask to be enrolled into your scheme and if they do, 
you must pay minimum contributions. These are UK workers who are either:


 * Aged between 16 and 22 or between state pension age and 74 and earn more 
than £10,000 in a year, or 
 * Are aged between 16 and 74 and earn at least £5,824 but less than £10,000. 
Entitled workers can also ask to join, although you don’t have to pay 
contributions for this group. Entitled workers are those aged at least 16 but 
under 75 who earn less than £5,824.


How much do I have to contribute?

The government has set minimum standards that employers must meet. For most 
employers, this means paying minimum contributions, which will start at 1% of a 
worker’s “qualifying earnings” and increase to 3% over the next few years. When 
you contribute, so do your employees.


It’s important to remember that “qualifying earnings” does not mean all of an 
employee’s salary, but applies to earnings over a minimum amount (currently 
£5,824) up to a maximum (currently £42,385). These figures apply to the 2015/16 
tax year and will be reviewed every year by the government.


So for example, for someone earning £18,000 a year, the minimum percentages 
are calculated on the difference between £5,824 and £18,000, which is £12,176.


Of course, as an employer you can contribute more than the statutory minimum. 
The minimum contribution levels are intended to set a foundation for building 
the savings habit.

Auto-enrolment pensions: key questions on saving for your retirement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/29/auto-enrolment-pensions-saving-retirement>
How do I handle opt-outs? Can I ask my workers not to join?

So far, most workers have chosen to stay enrolled in their workplace pension. 
However, they have the right to opt out, and opt-out rates currently average9% 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/automatic-enrolment-commentary-analysis-2014.pdf>
 (pdf).

It is illegal to force or try to force a worker to opt out , and employers can 
be fined by the regulator for doing so. This means, for example, that you can’t 
offer a pay rise for opting out, or threaten a pay cut for staying in the 
scheme.

If a member opts out – which should be done within one month of being enrolled 
– you must pay back any contributions taken from their pay and the pensions 
scheme will refund any contributions you’ve made.


After the one month opt-out period is over, members can’t opt out and get a 
refund, but they can stop contributing. If they do, contributions already paid, 
including those from their employer, will remain invested in the pension scheme.


How do I choose the right pension scheme?

Choosing the right qualifying scheme for your workers is an important 
decision. You might want to consider criteria such as the scheme’s investment 
approach, whether it uses clear language to communicate, and how easy it is to 
administer.


A good place to start exploring what schemes are right for you is to look at 
schemes recommended byThe Pensions Regulator 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/employers/finding-a-provider.aspx> or 
those who arePension Quality Mark ready 
<http://www.pensionqualitymark.org.uk/pqmreadyschemes.php>.

Helen Dean is the executive director of product and marketing at NEST 
<http://www.nestpensions.org.uk/schemeweb/NestWeb/public/home/contents/homepage.html>
, which was set up by government for auto-enrolment. It is open to all 
employers.


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 