
The pensions freedoms that started just over a month ago shows no signs of 
running out of steam as more than a third of people over the age of 55 have 
indicated that they plan to take money out of their retirement pot in the next 
year.

Since 6 April pension savers have been able to access their money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/04/pensions-revolution-avoid-tax-bombshell>
 more easily to spend or invest as they wish, without facing huge charges for 
doing so.

A poll of 11,000 people by financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown undertaken five 
weeks into the reforms found that cars and properties were being shunned in 
favour of more sensible investment decisions.

Almost a quarter of people said they intended to withdraw their pension money 
in order to reinvest it in an Isa, while almost a third wanted to to use it for 
general living expenses.

“It appears that investors are gravitating towards more considered choices as 
time has gone on,” said Tom McPhail, head of pensions research at Hargreaves 
Lansdown.


Almost 20% intend to spend some of the money on a holiday, while only 7% plan 
to invest in buy-to-let.

Separate figures from the firm’s clients provide further evidence that 
annuities are no longer the investment of choice for retirees.

Fewer than one in 10 of those who have acted on the pension freedoms in the 
last few weeks have opted for an annuity, which provides an income for life in 
exchange for a lump sum investment.

The majority have instead moved their pension pot into an income drawdown plan 
to access their cash, while almost 17% have taken advantage of new rules that 
allow them to use their pension pot like a bank account and withdraw small sums 
of cash at several stages over time.

“We see evidence that demand for annuities may grow again over time as 
investors are looking for higher levels of secure income than flexible 
withdrawals,” McPhail said. “We’re also interested to see thatdeath benefits 
<http://www.hl.co.uk/pensions/drawdown/what-happens-when-i-die> are now being 
cited as a reason not to withdraw money from a pension.”

In September 2014 the chancellor, George Osborne, announced that he was 
abolishing the so called death tax 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/the%20http://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/sep/29/who-benefits-abolition-55-percent-tax-pensions>
, the 55% charge payable on an inherited pension pot. This has made it much 
more attractive to keep money in a pension fund.

Separate figures from pensions giant Scottish Widows show that the size of the 
average pension pot that has been cashed in in the last five weeks is £13,500.

The company has had 55,000 visits to its Retirement Freedoms website, with 
6,000 of these people going on to request access to their cash.

“We are also seeing a trend in overseas customers where many are choosing to 
cash in their pots to pay for property, and instances where people are looking 
to take a percentage lump sum for a specific purpose such as property repair 
works,” said Robert Cochran, retirement expert at Scottish Widows.

 