
The number of people who say they have no religion is escalating and 
significantly outweighs the Christian population in England and Wales, 
according to new analysis.

Knitting to BDSM: readers on where to find a sense of community
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/27/knitting-to-bdsm-readers-where-to-find-a-sense-of-community>
The proportion of the population who identify in NatCen’s British Social 
Attitudes survey as having no religion, referred to as “nones”, reached 48.5% 
in 2014, outnumbering the 43.8% who define themselves as Christian – Anglicans, 
Catholics and other denominations. In 2011 the BSA survey found 46% identified 
as having no religion. The 2011 census gave a much lower figure of 25%, but 
phrased the question differently.

“The striking thing is the clear sense of the growth of ‘no religion’ as a 
proportion of the population,” said Stephen Bullivant, senior lecturer in 
theology and ethics at St Mary’s Catholic University in Twickenham, who 
analysed data collected through British Social Attitudes surveys over three 
decades.


“The main driver is people who were brought up with some religion now saying 
they have no religion. What we’re seeing is an acceleration in the numbers of 
people not only not practising their faith on a regular basis, but not even 
ticking the box. The reason for that is the big question in the sociology of 
religion.”


The report did not examine data from Scotland or Northern Ireland. Last month 
a Scottish Social Attitudes survey found that52% of the population said they 
were not religious <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-35953639>, compared 
with 40% in 1999.


In Northern Ireland, which has long been the most religious part of the UK, 7% 
said in the 2011 census that they belonged to a non-Christian religion or no 
religion.

The new analysis will fuel concern among Christian leaders about growing 
indifference to organised religion. This year the Church of England said it 
expectedattendance to continue to fall for another 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/church-of-england-attendance-decline-30-years-general-assembly>
 as its congregations age and the millennial generation spurns the institutions 
of faith.


According to Bullivant’s report, Contemporary Catholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism> in England and Wales – which 
will be launched at the House of Commons on Tuesday, both the Anglican and 
Catholic churches are struggling to retain people brought up as Christians.


Four out 10 adults who were raised as Anglicans define themselves as having no 
religion, and almost as many “cradle Catholics” have abandoned their family 
faith to become “nones”.


Neither church is bringing in fresh blood through conversions. Anglicans lose 
12 followers for every person they recruit, and Catholics 10.

The vast majority of converts come from other Christian denominations, rather 
than non-Christians or people with no religion. “There’s a kind of 
denominational musical chairs,” said Bullivant. “No one is making serious 
inroads into the non-Christian population.”

The proportion of the population who describe themselves as Anglican plunged 
from 44.5% in 1983 to 19% in 2014. Catholics made up 8.3%, other Christians 
15.7% and non-Christian religions 7.7%.

Religions 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-23T15:45:28/embed.html>
The analysis throws up striking regional variations. London has the smallest 
proportion of people identifying as “nones”, at an average of 40%, accounted 
for by the capital’s large minority ethnic population. In contrast, 59.5% of 
people in Wales say they have no religion.

Regions 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-23T15:46:11/embed.html>
Half of all Christians in England and Wales are over the age of 55, although 
Catholics have a younger age profile. Of those describing themselves as 
Christian, 58.6% are women.

More than nine in 10 Christians are white, which is slightly higher than in 
the general population. Far more Catholics (27.5%) than Anglicans (8.9%) attend 
church once a week or more.
Upbringing 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-23T15:46:27/embed.html>
The report is intended to fill a gap in reliable up-to-date statistics about 
the state ofChristianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>, and 
particularly Catholicism. It drew on data from British Social Attitudes surveys 
between 1983 and 2014.

Are we ready to face death without religion? | Adam Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/13/are-we-ready-to-confront-death-without-religion>
“Churches need to take this kind of data very seriously,” said Bullivant. 
“When analysing data you see patterns that you might not necessarily notice 
otherwise. This can flag up areas for further research or groups that need 
particular pastoral attention.”

A spokesperson for the Church of England said: “The increase in those 
identifying as ‘no faith’ reflects a growing plurality in society rather than 
any increase in secularism or humanism. We do not have an increasingly secular 
society as much as a more agnostic one.

“In a global context, adherence to religion is growing rather than decreasing. 
Christianity remains the world’s largest religion with over 2 billion 
adherents. In the UK the latest census found the overwhelming majority of 
people to have a faith.”

Mark O’Toole, the Catholic bishop of Plymouth, said the report demonstrated 
“the challenge to Christian evangelisation in this country” and would “help 
hone priorities”.

He added: “The church is committed to reaching out to those who are seeking 
meaning in their lives and helping them discover the joy of an encounter with 
Christ.”

• This article was amended on 9 June 2016 to correct the subheading which said 
that the proportion of the population who identify as having no religion rose 
from 25% in 2011 to 48.5% in 2014. That compared figures from two different 
sources: the 2011 census and NatCen’s 2014 British Social Attitudes survey 
which asked questions about religion in different ways. The 2011 BSA survey 
found 46% identified as having no religion. The text of the article has also 
been amended to make this clear.
 