
JM Barrie <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/jmbarrie> might be most famous 
for his classic story of a flying boy who never grows up, but the author was 
also far ahead of his time when it came to cognitive psychology, according to a 
Cambridge academic who argues in a new book that the Peter Pan author’s 
whimsical stories deliberately explore the nature of cognition.

Neuroscientist Rosalind Ridley, of Newnham College in Cambridge, claims in the 
just-publishedPeter Pan and the Mind of JM Barrie 
<http://www.cambridgescholars.com/peter-pan-and-the-mind-of-j-m-barrie> that 
the author’s work identifies key stages of child development. One scene she 
spotlights in Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens, published in 1906, sees a girl 
giving a tearful Peter her handkerchief, which he is confused by. “So she 
showed him, that is to say she wiped her eyes, and then gave it back to him, 
saying: ‘Now you do it,’ but instead of wiping his own eyes he wiped hers, and 
she thought it would be best to pretend that this is what she had meant,” 
writes Barrie.

According to Ridley, Barrie is here illustrating his observation and 
understanding of a fundamental stage of child development: having a “theory of 
mind”, or the ability to understand that one’s knowledge, beliefs and feelings 
may not be the same as someone else’s. This is learned naturally by most 
children around the age of three or four, but the term was not used until the 
late 1970s.In 1985, psychologists would show 
<http://autismtruths.org/pdf/3.%20Does%20the%20autistic%20child%20have%20a%20theory%20of%20mind_SBC.pdf>
 that failure to employ theory of mind is a symptom of autism, Asperger’s 
syndrome and some psychiatric conditions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fpeter-pan-was-pioneering-work-of-child-psychology-claims-new-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c96e9bf7f79bb0054d393d00d89a19af17ed3d9%2F0_144_2033_2540%2F2033.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Pan%20was%20pioneering%20work%20of%20child%20psychology%2C%20claims%20new%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fpeter-pan-was-pioneering-work-of-child-psychology-claims-new-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Pan%20was%20pioneering%20work%20of%20child%20psychology%2C%20claims%20new%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fpeter-pan-was-pioneering-work-of-child-psychology-claims-new-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c96e9bf7f79bb0054d393d00d89a19af17ed3d9%2F0_144_2033_2540%2F2033.jpg>
 ‘Naturalist of the mind’ ... JM Barrie. Photograph: BBC 
Other apparently fanciful ideas included in Barrie’s Peter Pan stories include 
Peter’s lack of understanding of hide and seek, and his inability to comprehend 
what emotional love is. “These whimsical ideas comprise deliberate errors of 
cognition, that is to say, errors in the way we normally structure our 
thoughts, leading to the suspicion that Barrie was deliberately exploring the 
nature of cognition in these stories,” writes Ridley in the book, newly out from
Cambridge Scholars Publishing 
<http://www.cambridgescholars.com/peter-pan-and-the-mind-of-j-m-barrie>.

“Barrie’s whimsicalities serve to compare the cognitive abilities of babies, 
children, and fairies (who represent children’s imagination) to those of adult 
humans. He is demonstrating that children need to develop cognitively, that is 
to say, they need to acquire skills of thinking, rather than that they are 
little adults who need merely to acquire factual information in order to grow 
up. He was very forward thinking in this respect and much of his motivation 
seems to have been a plea for a greater understanding of the mental and 
emotional needs of children.”

Cognitive psychology, she writes, was in its infancy when Barrie was writing, 
and “in many cases, his accurate observation of animal and human behaviour 
precedes the analysis of these behaviours by the scientific community”.

Calling Barrie a “naturalist of the mind”, she shows how he explores the 
nature of consciousness, from closely observed details about human behaviour 
such as contagious yawning (Wendy’s “light blinked and gave such a yawn that 
the other two yawned also”), to the important role of sleep in consolidating 
and rationalising memory, which Barrie compares to “tidying drawers”: “When you 
wake in the morning, the naughtiness and evil passions with which you went to 
bed have been folded up small and placed at the bottom of your mind; and on 
top, beautifully aired, are spread out your prettier thoughts, ready for you to 
put on.”

As a modern psychologist, I could see things that I knew hadn’t been 
‘discovered’ until the 1980s. It was remarkable
Dr Rosalind Ridley 
Ridley told the Guardian that, on reading Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens as 
an adult and applying her academic experience as a neuroscientist, she found 
Barrie’s prescience “quite extraordinary”.

“As a modern psychologist, I could see things in it that I knew hadn’t been 
‘discovered’ until I was a student, or in the 1980s. It was quite remarkable,” 
she said. “I read up about it, and although there was a lot about Peter Pan, 
who’s an iconic figure, and people talked about Barrie’s interest in children, 
I really found very little about cognitive psychology.”

She concluded that the work of Charles Darwin had been a pivotal influence on 
Barrie’s work. “At that time, animals were thought of as beasts, there was a 
big gap between humans and animals. And then along came Darwin, showing us that 
we were animals mentally as well as physically. I think Barrie is completely 
suffused with this,” she said. “I’ve thought a great deal about what his 
motivation was, and I’m convinced he was doing it on purpose. Some of the 
quirky whimsicalities appear more than once: he seems to be making a point. A 
little version of [the girl with the handkerchief story] appears two to three 
times. He must have known it was weird, and interesting, and that it meant 
something. He wasn’t being trivial.”

The stories of Peter Pan were created by Barrie between 1897 and 1902, to 
amuse the boys of the Llewelyn Davies family, whom Barrie had met while walking 
in Kensington Gardens, and whose guardian he later became when their parents 
died. Ridley said that the tale of a boy who never grows up is also linked to 
Barrie’s tragic childhood: the author’s elder brother died in a skating 
accident when he was a child.

“A lot of it is to do with reshaping his childhood. So he’s personally 
motivated, but is also scientifically motivated. In those days, they thought of 
children as being tiny people with no knowledge, that all you had to do was 
educate them. Barrie is making out that tiny children are more animal-like,” 
she told the Guardian.

‘We longed for Peter Pan to come for us: what could be more exciting?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/27/peter-pan-jm-barrie-house> 
In her book, she shows how the narrative of Peter Pan works on different 
levels. It is a coming-of-age story, a fantasy for children and adults, and the 
myth of a golden age, but was also invented by the author “essentially for 
himself in order to explore and perhaps make some sense of his own emotional 
difficulties, to investigate the interplay of the world of facts and the world 
of the imagination and to rediscover the heightened experiences of infancy”.

“In the process,” she writes, “he created a work of genius.”
 