
In the emergent world of television in the 1940s and 50s, Peter Dimmock, who 
has died aged 94, took a leading part as a presence on the screen and a power 
behind it. Everyone knew him as an accomplished and personable sports 
presenter, with trim moustache, brisk voice and the most neatly knotted necktie 
ever beheld.

Less well known was that often he had marshalled the event being televised – 
and not only in the realm of sport. The historic outside broadcast of Queen 
Elizabeth’s coronation in 1953 owed much to his directorial flair, plus a 
little guile. Resistance to the prospect of cameras nosing in on such sacred 
moments as the anointing and the placing of the crown on the monarch’s head 
came from church and state, not to mention the nobs who had invitations to 
Westminster Abbey and resented the idea of any Tom, Dick or Harriet being able 
to share in the spectacle.

It was the young monarch herself who let it be known that she would like to 
have television present. The prime minister, Sir Winston Churchill, had no 
choice but to summon the archbishops and the cabinet to another meeting and 
rescind the total ban. The fear of intrusive close-ups remained, but Dimmock 
used a 2-inch lens to demonstrate a discreet long shot of how the crowning 
ceremony might look, substituting a 12-inch lens to bring it into close focus 
on the day.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1tU5-XCTCUU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1tU5-XCTCUU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1tU5-XCTCUU&media=>
 BBC TV – Queen Elizabeth Coronation 1953 
In 1954 Dimmock set up a regular weekly sports show, Sportsview, with Paul Fox 
as editor. Three years ahead of Tonight – generally held to be the pioneer – 
Sportsview was television’s first really crisp and original magazine programme. 
It ranged over all popular sports, interviewed their stars and even clamped an 
unwieldy newsreel camera of the day to Mike Hawthorn’s D-type Jaguar to capture
a driver’s-eye view of the Le Mans circuit on an early-morning practice run 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqehZeZJY68>.

Dimmock was the anchorman holding together the various items, unmoved by the 
regular mispronunciation of his name immediately before he opened proceedings. 
For some time, Sportsview followed a very popular import from America, thePerry 
Como <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/14/guardianobituaries> Show. 
The singer had been persuaded to record a sign-off especially for the British 
audience, “And now I hand you over to Peter Dimmock.” Alas, he said Dimmick 
instead of Dimmock.

A graver embarrassment stemmed from Dimmock’s habit of hiring a helicopter to 
fly film from Saturday sporting venues back to the BBC’s Lime Grove studios for 
immediate use. Always keen on publicity, he persuaded the operator to emblazon 
the aircraft with big signs each side proclaiming “BBC Sportsview”. This blew 
back in his face when the Daily Mirror chartered the same machine one Sunday to 
take sneak pictures ofPrincess Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/11/guardianobituaries.princessmargaret>
 and Group Captain Peter Townsend meeting in a secluded garden to discuss their 
doomed romance. Unfortunately the Sportsview signs had not been taken off. A 
huge official rebuke was delivered to the director general, while Dimmock 
himself took an irate call from Scotland Yard.

Their explanations were accepted, of course, and from 1963 to 1977 Dimmock was 
entrusted with liaising with the Royal family, and made a CVO, a Commander of 
the Royal Victorian Order (1968), an honour in the personal gift of the 
monarchy. Certainly his BBC career did not suffer. He was made head of outside 
broadcasts in 1954, and in 1960 – the year that Princess Margaret’s wedding 
and, for the first time, the Grand National were televised – elevated to 
general manager, which in theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
hierarchy gave him assistant controller status. In 1961 he was appointed OBE.

He continued to present Sportsview till 1964, and was also sports adviser to 
the European Broadcasting Union from 1959 to 1972. That year he went on to head 
BBC Enterprises, the corporation’s programme-selling arm, and greatly increased 
its turnover.

Dimmock seemed to be on course for still higher office, but after being passed 
over in 1977 for the managing-directorship of Visnews, the BBC’s newsfilm 
agency, he let himself be headhunted by the American Broadcasting Company in 
New York. He became vicepresident of ABC’s international arm, initially devoted 
to the sale and marketing of TV sports, and later embracing a wide range of 
programmes and running cable services for the company. He returned to Britain 
in 1990 and became chairman of Zenith Entertainment (1991-2000), the 
independent production company whose successes included Inspector Morse and 
Byker Grove, and of his own consultancy, Peter Dimmock Enterprises.

Born in London, Peter was the son of Paula (nee Hudd) and Frederick, a radio 
manufacturer who later headed the BBC’s equipment department. He went to 
Dulwich college, south-east London, and when the second world war broke out in 
1939 joined the Territorial Army, transferring two years later to the RAF, 
where he served as a pilot, flying instructor and eventually staff officer in 
the Air Ministry. On demob in 1945, he had a brief spell as a racing 
correspondent for the Press Association, and the following year joined what was 
then the most important television department, Outside Broadcasts, as a 
producer and commentator.

Televising the 1948 London Olympics, the 1949 Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race 
and the first cross-channel relay from Calais in 1950 were among his 
achievements. So too was coverage of the funeral of King George VI in 1952, 
which led to the coronation broadcast that was to transform TV into a mass 
medium.

At the time of his marriage in 1960 to Polly Elwes, she was a reporter on 
Tonight. They had three daughters, Amanda, Christina and Freya, and she died in 
1987. Three years later, he married Christabel Scott; she survives him, along 
with his daughters.
Philip Purser

Michael Carlson writes: Peter Dimmock hired me away from the TV news agency 
UPITN in 1982, when ABC Sports moved its international distribution office from 
New York to London. ABC’sRoone Arledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/dec/11/guardianobituaries.television> 
had added programme acquisition and production supervision to Peter’s brief, 
despite ABC’s already having an office in Paris doing just that. It was a 
classic Arledge management technique to assign people overlapping 
responsibilities and see what emerged; that M Georges Croses in Paris was just 
as much an American’s idea of a quintessential Frenchman as Peter was the 
Englishman made the relationship all the more interesting. When we attended 
meetings of the European Broadcasting Union, sometimes accompanied by our 
Olympic executive,Marvin Bader 
<http://sportsvideo.org/main/blog/2012/01/03/abc-sports-olympic-production-legend-marvin-bader-passes-away-at-85/>
, in cowboy hat and boots, I would wonder who from central casting had made the 
mistake with me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fpeter-dimmock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3be80315b91279a830f03a385f93f76443c64c%2F119_134_1470_884%2F1470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Dimmock%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fpeter-dimmock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Dimmock%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fpeter-dimmock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3be80315b91279a830f03a385f93f76443c64c%2F119_134_1470_884%2F1470.jpg>
 Left to right: Steve Ryder, David Coleman, Peter Dimmock, Des Lynam and Frank 
Bough during a programme to mark the 40th anniversary of Grandstand in 1998. 
Photograph: BBC/PA 
But if Peter were the ultimate old boy, the education I received from him was 
priceless. Not just in business (“You’re looking, or thinking, like a 
journalist again, dear boy,” he would remind me) or in the etiquette of 
manoeuvring one’s way through the commercial quagmire, but also as an 
initiation into the close-knit world of British television, and not just 
television sport. I listened and learned as Peter laughed and did business with 
old colleagues such as Paul Fox orBryan Cowgill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/18/television>. I found myself 
doing business with ITV’sJohn Bromley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/06/guardianobituaries.frankkeating> 
and the BBC’sCliff Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/29/cliff-morgan>, in the days when 
programmes were bought or sold over lunches, or in the bar, deals sealed with 
handshakes, confirmed with brief telexes, without a lawyer or accountant in 
sight. If I was not quite a member of the club, I had come in with Peter, and 
was welcomed as a result.

Not that making deals with Peter was easy; he could be difficult, and his 
instincts for business survival had been honed finely at the BBC, where he had 
learned just how far one could sometimes stretch the limits. What made him so 
adept at this was his unfailing humour, which he could maintain while never 
losing sight of whatever it was that was the bigger picture.

Peter would pop up occasionally on television, giving perspective on how he 
had managed to cover some of the great events that he brought to British TV, 
and the twinkle in his eye, which I saw so often when he had pulled off another 
business coup, still remained. I am grateful for the time I shared an office 
with him, and that I was able to experience what was a far different, and in 
many ways golden, era of television.

•Peter Harold Dimmock, broadcaster and executive, born 6 December 1920; died 
20 November 2015
 