
Anglia Ruskin University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/angliaruskinuniversity>, in Cambridge, 
is to become the latest institution to establish a satellite centre in another 
town to attract more students into higher education.

Working with Peterborough Regional College, Anglia Ruskin announced this week 
that it is to open a university centre inPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/peterborough>, funded by the Higher 
Education Funding Council for England and local development and skills agencies.

Peterborough is one of the largest cities in England without a university. In 
2002, Loughborough University, which ran degree courses at the college, was 
going to create a city campus but decided to drop the idea.

The new university centre will be built on the college campus, and its 
existing 850 students will have access to the university's resources and 
facilities.

The chairman of the college's corporation board, Martin Fisher, said the new 
campus was a "significant development" for the city.

David Tidmarsh, the vice-chancellor of Anglia Ruskin, which has campuses in 
Cambridge and Chelmsford, said: "It is our vision to create a self-sustaining 
university campus for the city around which a reinvigorated business 
infrastructure can thrive."

Establishing offshoot campuses is increasingly being seen as a way of boosting 
local economies and helping to meet the government's widening participation 
target of getting 50% of 18 to 30-year-olds into university by 2010.

Universities hope that, by providing local facilities, students who might not 
have considered going to university will be tempted through the doors.

The idea is still largely the preserve of the new, post-1992 universities, 
which have traditionally attracted a wider social mix of students, but some of 
the older institutions may be tempted to follow suit, as a condition of raising 
tuition fees rests on their ability to widen access.

Last year, Huddersfield University opened centres in Barnsley and Oldham as 
part of its Â£17m, 10-year plan of redevelopment and growth.

Opened in September, the Oldham campus attracted almost 700 students, while 
Barnsley had almost 400 enrol. Students can study foundation and bachelor 
degrees, as well as higher national diplomas and postgraduate certificates in 
education, all accredited by the university.

Huddersfield has not ruled out the possibility of opening more satellite 
centres in other nearby towns in the future.

Further south, the local government minister, David Miliband, will officially 
open a similar outpost in Chatham in a joint enterprise between Greenwich, Kent 
and Canterbury Christ Church Universities.

The universities hope the Medway campus will attract new students from 
Chatham, Gillingham and Rochester.

Discussions are also under way about creating a new university in Milton 
Keynes.

The city's Conservative MP, Mark Lancaster, is to meet the higher education 
minister, Bill Rammell, and local business leaders to discuss such a 
possibility. The government has rejected the idea in the past.

Mr Lancaster said the Open University, which has its headquarters in the city, 
did not fully meet local needs.

Last month, he told parliament: "I think it's absolutely vital that Milton 
Keynes has a dedicated undergraduate university to serve local business and 
community needs."
 