
"Tall, thin and ancient, Pete Seeger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pete-seeger> towers over folk music like a 
giant redwood. Throughout his career, he has embodied a pioneer spirit, 
clearing a path through the cultural landscape that has been followed by 
generations of rock musicians.

"Before Dylan hitchhiked to Greenwich Village, Pete had travelled America with 
Woody Guthrie <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hr9FP93o8Ro>. He was among the 
first to write songs questioning the Vietnam war, only to be banned from 
performing them on TV.

"Long before the Stones were busted for possession, Seeger faced the prospect 
of 10 years in jail forrefusing to answer the prying questions  
<http://www.peteseeger.net/HUAC.htm>of the House Un-American Activities 
Committee.

"He didn't wait for Rock Against Racism to use music in the fight for equal 
rights. He stood beside Paul Robeson when he was attacked by the Klan at 
Peekskill and marched with Martin Luther King from Selma to Montgomery. Five 
years before Greenpeace was founded, Pete launchedhis own environmental campaign
 <http://www.clearwater.org/category/latest-news/>on the Hudson. And who was 
that singing This Land is Your Land with Bruce Springsteenat Obama's 
inauguration <http://www.thenation.com/blogs/actnow/432096>? Pete Seeger, the 
man who,who did so much to popularised the civil rights anthem, We Shall 
Overcome. Sure, he did try to get Dylan to turn down his amplifier at Newport 
in Ô65. But this wasn't because Pete didn't like electric music - he'd 
enthusiastically applauded Muddy Waters when he performed an electric set 
earlier that day. No, he was angry because he couldn't hear the lyrics.

Pete Seeger, who had been told to shut up and sit down for decades by red 
baiters and reactionaries in the USA, put his neck on the line for the words in 
his songs and the message they conveyed. How could he sit silently while Dylan 
drowned his lyrics in a storm of feedback?

Seeger believed – still believes – that songs can lift people up and inspire 
them to take the actions necessary to change the world. his 91st year, 
continues to urge us all to overcome."

Key recording: American Favorite Ballads Vol 1-5 (Folkways, 2009)
 