
Katharine Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/01/guardianobituaries.film>, his 
consort in The Lion in Winter (1968), once told Peter O'Toole that he was 
profligate with his talent as an actor. But perhaps O'Toole's metier was always 
risk. Even in Lawrence of Arabia (1962), when he was not quite 30, he looked 
like an elegant wreck, dipped in suntan, his eyes full of fever. O'Toole, who 
has died aged 81, made his height, his giddy conviction and his theatricality 
hold that epic together. He was a freed bird in white robes, yet he shuddered 
like a schoolboy at the thought of torture.

Was O'Toole a great actor? Some said so – not least those who watched him grow 
up at the Bristol Old Vic in the 1950s. Did he sometimes stray into 
misguidedness or grotesquerie? Did he occasionally seem "unwell"? He is 
remembered for the disaster that was his Macbeth at the London Old Vic in 1980 
– a performance that sold more steadily the more furiously it was debunked. But 
that was half the point to being O'Toole. He was a phenomenon and, night to 
night, moment to moment, you might shift your opinion as he zigzagged in the 
crosswinds of his own turbulent imagination. He coincided with the method, or 
realism in acting, but he ignored it.

O'Toole was plainly fascinated by ham acting and theatrical travesty – in one 
of his most entertaining films, My Favourite Year (1982), he played an actor, 
Alan Swann, a swashbuckler in the tradition of Errol Flynn. It earned him his 
seventh Oscar nomination but he lost to Ben Kingsley for Gandhi. Seven Oscar 
failures was a rueful glory he shared for a while with his old pal, Richard 
Burton. In 2003, he was awarded an honorary Oscar. He accepted but did not 
agree to be finished, There would be an eighth "failure" – his resplendent 
record.

O'Toole was born, he said, in Connemara, western Ireland (others say Leeds, 
where he grew up), the son of a wandering bookmaker. They were apparently 
following the horses at the time, but the family moved about a lot. He went to 
a Catholic school in Leeds and learned to read at an early stage. He was a 
teenage boozer, getting into scrapes and fights; wrapped parcels for a living 
for a while; and tried journalism on the Yorkshire Evening Post. He was told 
his writing was too colourful. After he and a friend hitchhiked to 
Stratford-upon-Avon, where they sawMichael Redgrave in King Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1953/jul/16/1>, he knew acting was 
what he wanted to do.

Having undertaken two years' national service in the navy, in 1954 he entered 
the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, where his fellow students includedAlan Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/dec/29/guardianobituaries.filmnews> and 
Albert Finney. He was a rebel at the acting school, often at odds with his 
teachers, but he stood out at a time when a new provincial realism was creeping 
into British acting. Somehow, he could make Connemara and Leeds sound Athenian. 
After graduating, he got the job at Bristol. In three years there, he played 
more than 50 roles. These included Vladimir in Waiting for Godot (his favourite 
play), Alfred Doolittle in Pygmalion, Jimmy Porter in Look Back in Anger, the 
dame in pantomime, and a Hamlet that drew Peter Hall and Kenneth Tynan down to 
Bristol. He often played men older than he was, and his model at Bristol was 
Eric Porter – "because of his great looseness and power".

He left Bristol in 1958, and did Willis Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/12/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
's The Long and the Short and the Tall in London in 1959 (directed byLindsay 
Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/sep/03/2>, with Terence Stamp 
as his understudy). From there, he went to Stratford for a season, where he 
played Shylock in a 1960 production of The Merchant of Venice. His Portia,
Dorothy Tutin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/aug/07/guardianobituaries.lyngardner>, 
graciously stepped aside at the final curtain to signal the debut of a new 
star. He was also Petruchio, opposite Peggy Ashcroft, in The Taming of the 
Shrew.

By then he was married to the actor Siân Phillips and they had the first of 
two daughters. It was a marriage full of fights and reconciliations, but all 
his friends testified to O'Toole's deep devotion and need for a wife who was 
his equal in most dramatic flights.

The theatre was poised for its great new talent, even if a few critics noted 
his tendency to "bark" out the words, but the movies already had their hooks in 
him. In 1960 he had a small part in Kidnapped, an odd one in Nicholas Ray's The 
Savage Innocents and a much better one in The Day They Robbed the Bank of 
England. He was being talked about.Elizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/23/elizabeth-taylor-obituary> even 
interviewed him for Mark Antony in her forthcoming Cleopatra (1963). They met, 
he whipped her at backgammon, and they agreed to disagree.

It was in 1962 that he was cast by David Lean as a far too tall, much too 
florid, yet riveting TE Lawrence in Lawrence of Arabia. Sam Spiegel, the 
producer, had wanted Finney (andMarlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jul/03/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 before him), and they never got on well. But Spiegel did say O'Toole had 
"probably the most heady blend of sensitivity and vitality I have known in an 
actor". It was a big picture, of course, and O'Toole was often rebellious and 
difficult. In hindsight, the character and the film are not always clear, but 
the faults are more in the screenplay than in the acting. He was nominated for 
an Oscar, and lost toGregory Peck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jun/14/guardianobituaries.film> for To 
Kill a Mockingbird.

He went straight into another movie, Becket (directed by Peter Glenville 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-peter-glenville-1336518.html>
, 1964), with Burton, and he elected to do Brecht's Baal on the London stage as 
it was the kind of rogue play no one else would touch. O'Toole was seldom in 
the mainstream. But since that flopped, Laurence Olivier honoured him by asking 
him to play Hamlet in the National Theatre's London debut at the Old Vic – with 
Olivier directing. Everyone who had seen O'Toole's Bristol Hamlet believed that 
it was more urgent than the London show.

But O'Toole was now an international celebrity – there was another nomination 
for Becket (he and Burton were edged out by Rex Harrison in My Fair Lady). And 
so his movie career took over, producing dismay: Lord Jim (1965), a failure; 
What's New, Pussycat? (1965), an interesting comedy that never lived up to all 
its starry contributors; How to Steal a Million (1966), a dud with Audrey 
Hepburn – viewers asked which star was thinner and more wide-eyed; The Bible: 
In the Beginning (1966) – as several angels – for John Huston; The Night of the 
Generals (1967); Great Catherine (1968); Murphy's War (1971); Under Milk Wood 
(1972) – with Burton and Taylor; Man of La Mancha (1972); Rosebud (1975); Man 
Friday (1975).

It was an utterly unpredictable course for the actor whose Lawrence and Hamlet 
had seemed to command the world. There were silly, big-salary choices, to be 
sure, and the press was full of merry stories about O'Toole's wildness, his 
drinking and his carefree attitude. But he had loved Donald Wolfit's example; 
he was most excited by melodrama and going to the brink. He was already aware 
of another role, himself – O'Toole, in interviews, sitting at a bar, melodious 
and completely drunk. It was a grand part for which he did not have to learn 
lines.

The Lion in Winter was different – though, in truth, not quite as good as it 
is supposed to be. But O'Toole and Hepburn relished the union in which she was 
old enough to be his mother. That was another nomination – bowing toCliff 
Robertson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/11/cliff-robertson-obituary> in 
Charly. O'Toole's schoolteacher in Goodbye, Mr Chips (1969), far too 
sentimental, then lost to John Wayne in True Grit. The film roles that stand 
out are his deranged lord in The Ruling Class (1972) and the monstrous movie 
director Eli Cross in The Stunt Man (1980), two pictures that deliberately 
court extremism, and which might have been written for O'Toole. He was 
outstanding in both, but his bravura left vague the question of just how good 
the films were. He was nominated for both – and he lost to Brando in The 
Godfather and Robert De Niro in Raging Bull. That was a mark of cult work, true 
to his private spirit, but not close to the public pulse.

For several years he was away from the London stage, yet he worked in Dublin 
and in 1973 returned to Bristol for a season – working for next to nothing and 
playing a fine Uncle Vanya. In 1975, he was found to be suffering from 
pancreatitis. He underwent surgery, lost much of his stomach, then came back 
from it all to appear in a good adaptation of Geoffrey Household's novel Rogue 
Male for British television in 1977.

In 1979, his marriage ended. That year he appeared as Tiberius in the Bob 
Guccione <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/21/bob-guccione-obituary>
-sponsored version of Caligula, a fairly sordid movie – and unfortunately 
compared with the BBC's version of I, Claudius (in which his wife had been a 
shining player). Far more controversial was his Macbeth, at the London Old Vic 
in 1980, directed by the film-makerBryan Forbes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/09/bryan-forbes-obituary>, with 
Frances Tomelty as Lady Macbeth. It was not just that critics deplored the 
concept, the stagecraft and O'Toole's own playing (monotony was frequently 
mentioned). Rather, it was the sense that O'Toole had set himself up against 
the world – that he even fed on the rebukes.

He married the actor Karen Brown in 1983; they had a son, Lorcan, but the 
marriage did not last long. The work, meanwhile, was often reckless and 
indifferent. Far from a versatile actor, he had become someone who could play 
only versions of himself. In which case, in 1989, he was blessed by providence. 
It came in the form ofKeith Waterhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/04/keith-waterhouse-obituary>'s 
play Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell. O'Toole took the part of the alcoholic, 
fatalistic and self-destructive Spectator columnist with laconic restraint. It 
played every night to standing ovations and may have been the triumph of 
O'Toole's life. Yet there was also his tactful, delicate portrayal of the 
English tutor in Bernardo Bertolucci's The Last Emperor (1987).

In 1982, he did George Bernard Shaw's Man and Superman in London, and 
sometimes wavered as he strolled across the stage. On screen, he did almost 
anything – Svengali (1983), Supergirl (1984), Club Paradise (1986). Much was 
awful, nothing was dull. And then, in the 1990s, he found another self, the 
literary autobiographer, and published two volumes about his early life, under 
the title Loitering With Intent. More atmospheric than factually helpful, they 
were the works of a real writer and helped alter his public reputation.

With his honorary Oscar, did he think of retiring? Out of the question. He did 
Bright Young Things (2003), directed by Stephen Fry; he played President Paul 
von Hindenburg in Hitler: The Rise of Evil (2003); he was an incredulous Priam 
in Troy (2004) and Casanova as an old man in the 2005 mini-series starring 
David Tennant. Then grace fell upon him, like a fine rain. Hanif Kureishi 
wrote, and Roger Michell directed, Venus (2006), a small story about a 
small-time, dying actor and a young woman. It was as touching as anything 
O'Toole had ever done. He got an eighth nomination, and smiled as the prize 
went to Forest Whitaker for his Idi Amin in The Last King of Scotland. Still he 
worked on, and it was characteristic that his Pope in the TV series The Tudors 
(2008) was as lowdown as his derelict in Venus had seemed aristocratic. In 
Michael Redwood's film Katherine of Alexandria, due for release next year, he 
plays the Emperor Constantine's orator, Cornelius Gallus.

What can one say, in summary, of so many astonishing performances by a man who 
had become a warning figure for young actors? He was one of those who make us 
ponder the terrible stress of the job and its art, its curse and its 
inspiration.

He is survived by his daughters, Kate and Pat, and Lorcan.

• Peter Seamus O'Toole, actor, born 2 August 1932; died 14 December 2013

More on Peter O'Toole

• Peter O'Toole: last of the 60s hellraisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/15/peter-otoole-60s-hellraiser>
• Peter O'Toole: a career in clips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/15/peter-o-toole-dies-81-movies-clips>
 