
Pharmaceutical shares have come under pressure after new comments from US 
presidential candidateHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> about excessive price 
increases.

Specifically referring to Mylan raising the cost of allergy treatment EpiPens, 
she promised a clampdown on excessive charges:

It’s wrong when drug companies put profits ahead of patients, raising prices 
without justifying the value behind them.

 That’s why I’ve put forward a plan..to address exorbitant drug price hikes 
like these. As part of my plan, I’ve made clear that pharmaceutical 
manufacturers should be required to explain significant price increases, and 
prove that any additional costs are linked to additional patient benefits and 
better value. Since there is no apparent justification in this case, I am 
calling on Mylan to immediately reduce the price of EpiPens.
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
EpiPens can be the difference between life and death. There's no justification 
for these price hikes.https://t.co/O6RbVR6Qim <https://t.co/O6RbVR6Qim> -H
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/768508732623970304> August 24, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/768508732623970304> 
The comments prompted fears among investors that companies would face a hit to 
their profits if Clinton became US president, and pushed down share prices of 
US drug companies overnight, with the Nasdaq BioTech Index down 3.37% and 
European shares subsequently following suit.

Hikma is down 110p at £21.18, Shire has dropped 4% to £48.20, AstraZeneca 
losing 146.5p to 4933.5p andGlaxoSmithKline falling 27.5p to £16.31. Jasper 
Lawler, market analyst at CMC Markets, said:.

European healthcare stocks have been caught in the storm of another attack on 
price gouging in the industry from presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton. Shire 
andHikma Pharmaceuticals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hikmapharmaceuticals> are amongst the top 
fallers on the FTSE 100 whilst Qiagen in Germany was a top faller in the Stoxx 
600 Healthcare euro price index.

Hilary Clinton’s attack on the price gauging of an allergy medicine is 
expected to continue to weigh on the healthcare sector. Biotechs especially, 
including the likes of Amgen, Biogen and Celgene can be expected to remain 
under pressure. Her statements reaffirm a fear in the industry that a Clinton 
presidency would see a serious crackdown on pharmaceutical price gouging.

Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:

The healthcare sector is weighing heavily on the FTSE this morning (specialty 
pharma in particular) with the quartet of Astra, Glaxo, Hikma andShire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> making up for over 35% (18pts) of 
the index’s declines, enough to keep it below the key 6800 mark. This comes 
after US peers finished the day on the back foot thanks to fresh political 
disquiet about excessive and potentially unethical pricing of life-saving 
drugs, Democratic presidential candidate Hilary Clinton demanding that generic 
and specialty pharma group Mylan lower the ‘outrageous’ price ($300; +500% over 
6 years) of its allergy injection EpiPen.

This echoes the populist swipe and US congressional challenge of Martin 
Shkreli, founder and former CEO of Turing Pharma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/18/martin-shkreli-resigns-turing-pharmaceuticals-fraud-charges>
 which recently hiked the price of an Aids medicine by 5,000% overnight. It 
also serves to strike fear into the hearts of healthcare groups and their 
investors everywhere. As always, the industry remains between a rock and a hard 
place, treading the fine line between balancing the costs of clinical success 
(and failure) with the economic laws of supply and demand, all the while trying 
(often in vain) to satisfy demanding stakeholders without appearing to view the 
sick as merely a commercial opportunity.
 