
Ali Dizaei, the controversial former senior Scotland Yard officer whose 
conviction for corruption was quashed earlier this month, has been told by 
Metropolitan police detectives that he could have been a victim of phone 
hacking by theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>.

Dizaei was sacked from the force after he was found guilty of corruption and 
served nearly a year in prison, but his conviction was quashed a fortnight ago 
and he was released pending a retrial.He has said he wants to rejoin the Met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/may/16/ali-dizaei-corruption-charges-dismissed?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

It is understood that Dizaei will sue the paper's publisher, News 
International subsidiary News GroupNewspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, if it can be shown his phone 
was hacked. If so he would becoming the latest of more than two dozen public 
figures to do so.

Scotland Yard is currently investigating the full extent of phone hacking at 
the paper after reopening its inquiry at the start of the year.

Detectives are in the process of contacting everyone whose name and contact 
details are listed in the pages of notebooks seized in 2006 in a raid on the 
home of Glenn Mulcaire, the former private investigator who was working for the 
News of the World at the time.

Dizaei said he was "shocked and appalled" after detectives told him his police 
phone may have been hacked.

He said the phone that may have been targeted was used for police business, 
according to a BBC report <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-13598746>
.

The relationship between the police and the News of the World has come under 
intense scrutiny in recent months after it emerged that some of the Met's most 
senior officers have regularly met senior executives at the paper, sometimes 
socially.

An apparent admission by former News of the World editor Rebekah Brooks, who 
told MPs in 2003 the paper had paid police officers for information in the 
past, has also been placed under the spotlight once more as part of an 
investigation by the Commons home affairs select committee into the legal 
ramifications of phone hacking.

Brooks, who is now chief executive of News International, the UK arm of Rupert 
Murdoch's newspaper business, wrote to the committee in March this year 
clarifying her 2003 comment. She said she had been "responding to a specific 
line of questioning on how newspapers get information".

She added: "If, in doing so, I gave the impression that I had knowledge of any 
specific cases, I can assure you that this was not my intention."

The home affairs select committee is expected to publish its report on phone 
hacking early next month.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian> 
 