
Fredrik Broman’s profession as a photographer has taken him around the world, 
but in the end the one place he longed to return to was his home village 
Lassbyn in Swedish Lapland. Having lived in Kenya for several years, he wanted 
to set up a safari at home and today runs theAurora Safari Camp 
<http://www.originaltravel.co.uk/europe/sweden/aurora-safari-camp> in the 
nearby Råne River Valley, while continuing his passion for photography by 
offering courses to guests from all over the world.

“Right now I’m in a boat overlooking whooper swans that are moving south. This 
part of the world has always been my New Zealand, so while travellers go to the 
other side of the world, I returned here,” he says.


The vast landscape, which has a rich wildlife and a strong Sami culture, is a 
popular retreat for people who want to escape the buzz of civilization. The 
site of the camp has no artificial light and makes it a top spot for catching 
the northern lights.


In pictures: The Aurora Safari Camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/visit-swedish-lapland/gallery/2015/nov/17/in-pictures-the-aurora-safari-camp>
“It’s an activity in itself to experience the earth without artificial lights. 
All you hear is the sound of nature – and you get to see the stars. The Milky 
Way is just above you,” Fredrik says, adding that the northern lights, or the 
aurora borealis is a big bonus. “Aurora, meaning the Goddess of the Dawn, is a 
natural phenomenon we can’t rely on,” Fredrik says. “It is a big bonus when it 
appears, and when it does, this is the best spot to see it.”


Despite the rural location, guests sleep in comfortable Lavvu tents with beds, 
wooden floors and wood burners – it is a special sight to see the tents light 
up the camp in the dark. And there are plenty of activities on offer. Fredrik 
offers photographic workshops and expeditions, with some guests choosing a 
two-hour start-up course, while others request coaching throughout their stay.


This time of year Fredrik specialises in winter and low-light photography, as 
taking pictures in the cold climate demands a different kind of exposure. 
Guests follow him on location in the woods, on the frozen river, or on a more 
challenging adventure: to photograph the Siberian husky dogs while on a dog 
sledge.


“It’s amazing to experience the relationship between the dogs and their 
leader. The history around it is very special,” he says, highlighting the 
importance of storytelling in his photography. “Initially I teach people how to 
tell a story through the lens, and then we explore the technical side to 
realise the picture.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvisit-swedish-lapland%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fon-a-picture-safari-in-swedish-lapland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a10a1dbf9eaeae775378a7c4546554202f86a73%2F0_331_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographing%20the%20northern%20lights%20in%20Swedish%20Lapland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvisit-swedish-lapland%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fon-a-picture-safari-in-swedish-lapland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographing%20the%20northern%20lights%20in%20Swedish%20Lapland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvisit-swedish-lapland%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fon-a-picture-safari-in-swedish-lapland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a10a1dbf9eaeae775378a7c4546554202f86a73%2F0_331_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
 Frederik offers tuition in low-light photography. Photograph: Fredrik Broman 
The cold temperature – minus 40c in the winter – means there are plenty of 
winter activities to explore. One of them is making ice sculptures from Råne 
River. “It’s a very therapeutic experience which can last throughout the visit. 
Ice is a great material to work with. People make fantastic sculptures,” 
Fredrik says.


There are also long snowshoe treks to take part in; walking through the 
untouched snow with big snowshoes, while looking at miles of widespread 
landscape, is a unique experience. “The good thing is people won’t get lost 
since we’re in a valley. And luckily, there are no dangerous animals here – 
bears have hibernated at this time of year. Not like in Africa where we had to 
worry about getting killed by an elephant in the woods,” Fredrik recalls.

There is one experience that stands out, he adds. “After getting picked up at 
the airport in the city of Luleå visitors get on a bus, after that you change 
to a snow mobile and enter a road-less landscape. We drive 2 kilometres away 
and suddenly there are no lights – just you and the stars.”





Three days at the Aurora Safari Camp

Day 1
On the day of arrival, Fredrik’s advice is just to stay by the camp and 
unwind. There are plenty of activities right outside the tent. Take a short 
walk on the frozen river or borrow a pair of snowshoes for a trek through the 
forest, up the mountain or by the lake. The food on site is of highest quality, 
so end the day with a relaxing dinner.

Day 2
Fredrik offers tailor-made photographic expeditions. Would you prefer a 
two-hour start-up course to get inspired, or a full-stay guidance? Whatever 
your skills, Fredrik will make sure you get the most out of it. Follow him on a 
dog sledge adventure and try to photograph the Siberian husky dogs swishing 
through the open landscape.

Day 3
If you haven’t tried out a snowmobile, this is your chance. The tour lasts 
half a day and includes a Swedish fika – a traditional break with coffee or tea 
and cake on route. And when returning to the camp, try ice fishing in the 
frozen river.

Original Travel 
<http://www.originaltravel.co.uk/europe/sweden/itinerary/stockholm-arctic-adventure>
 (020 3582 4990) is a creative luxury travel company which takes a thoughtful 
approach to creating tailor-made holidays. Itoffers a four-night trip to 
Stockholm and Swedish Lapland from £1,865pp including 2 nights B&B at the 
Lydmar Hotel in Stockholm and 2 nights half board at the Aurora Safari Camp. 
The price also includes dog sledging and a photography workshop with Fredrik 
Broman at the Aurora Safari Camp, all return flights and transfers to the 
Aurora Safari Camp.
 