
"My dad told me about Pinetop originally so I have a kind of an emotional 
connection to him. My daddy was the same age as he is [Pinetop is now 96] and 
he played boogie-woogie piano back in the early 30s, and Pinetop just reminded 
me of him. Even though he's a black man, he's so much like my daddy.

"We recorded together about five or six years ago. I have this old 
piece-of-shit guitar I play, and he was telling me, 'I started out as a guitar 
player, but something happened to me and I had to play piano.' He didn't tell 
me what happened, but I was down in Helena, Arkansas where he used to stay and 
a fella down there told me he got stabbed in his shoulder by a gal and he 
almost died because they wouldn't let him into the white hospital. So he 
started playing piano because he couldn't lift his arm to play guitar.

"We had real fun recording. We hung out a lot. We had some gals come in to 
bring us some food, and he must have been 91 then but he was like, 'Oh, look at 
that gal there, man! She looking good!' I'd say, 'Ain't you done with that 
shit?', and he said, 'They call me Pinetop, but now I'm pine bottom!' He was 
sitting there smoking a cigarette, howling at these chicks and offering them a 
drink. He's got a club up in Indiana. Dude of 91 got a club! He gave me his 
business card, and it said: 'Available for shows, weddings and funeralsâ€¦' Real 
corny, but great.

"He played pretty good. We recorded six or seven tracks live, old blues songs 
that he knew, things like How Long. He was super nice and kind of ironic. Real 
humble, not quite seeing his place in history,having played with Muddy [Waters] 
<http://www.pinetopperkins.com/pabio.htm> and [Robert] Nighthawk back when he 
was just a tractor driver living in a white man's world. He didn't get how 
heavy that was.

"When I was young these blues guys were all around, and now almost all of them 
are dead. It's like your parents: you think they're going to be around for ever 
and then all of a sudden they're not.". It's the strangest feeling. It's like 
the last of those guys from WWI who died. They've all gone. It's the same with 
these blues guys. We took 'em for granted and there's almost none of them left 
apart from Pinetop."Key recording: After Hours (Blind Pig, 1988)
 