
The head of the BBC Asian Network, Vijay Sharma, is to leave the digital radio 
station that wassaved from the axe last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/14/bbc-asian-network> but is having 
to cut its budget in half.

Sharma has held a senior role at the broadcaster since 1996, when she was 
appointed editor of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Midlands 
Asian Regional Service and oversaw its transformation into a nationwide digital 
network in 2002.

The station was earmarked for closure by BBC director general Mark Thompson in 
2010 along with its sister digital station, BBC Radio 6 Music.

Like 6 Music, the decision was eventually reversed following a protest from 
listeners.

The BBC said Sharma was leaving to "pursue interests in the health, cultural 
and charity sectors".

The Asian Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> has not 
experienced the surge in audience enjoyed by 6 Music when it was threatened 
with closure but has seen its audience rise to a weekly reach of 507,000 
listeners in the third quarter of last year.

The decision to save the station was taken at the cost of cutting back 
substantially on its budget.

BBC management concluded that a cheaper-to-run national digital station was a 
better way to reach Asian listeners than a collection of medium-wave services, 
which was mooted as one possible replacement.

Bob Shennan, the Radio 2 controller who also oversees the Asian Network, said 
Sharma had been a "leading light in the BBC Asian network", adding that he was 
"particularly grateful to her for her inspirational leadership during the last 
turbulent 18 months".

Sharma said it had been "my absolute honour to have held this position and I 
am proud to leave the station in such great shape".

Tim Davie, the BBC's director of audio and music, said: "Vijay has always been 
a formidable champion for the Asian Network, her staff and British Asian 
audiences over the years. 

"She leaves a strong legacy as a creative leader whose team are delivering 
strong results and have proved themselves to be an important part of Audio and 
Music and the BBC."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 