
An interstate gasoline pipeline has ruptured in central Alabama, spilling 
338,000 gallons of fuel in an ecologically sensitive area and threatening fuel 
shortages across the eastern US. So far governors inAlabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, Georgia and North Carolina have 
declared states of emergency.

The line runs from Houston to the New York harbor, and experts say the line’s 
owner, Colonial Pipeline, was extraordinarily lucky: the spill happened 500ft 
from the retention pond for a mining company, and all the fuel flowed into it. 
That spared the Cahaba river system, one of the most biologically diverse spots 
in the country, prized by scientists for its concentration of endangered 
species.

“Yeah,” said James Pinkney, a spokesman for the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA). He gave a wry laugh. “You really couldn’t have planned it any 
better than this. There are no homes nearby, and it’s fully contained. It’s so 
fortunate.”

The fuel could have flowed all the way to Mobile Bay on the gulf coast, 
bringing destruction for hundreds of miles. “Along the way it would have 
impacted all the wildlife living in it and drinking from it,” said Myra 
Crawford, executive director at Cahaba Riverkeeper, an outfit that monitors the 
ecological integrity of the watershed. “And plants like the Cahaba lilies – 
this is one of the only remaining sites where they are found. It could have 
been so destructive.”

Instead, she said, environmental workers have only found a few animals killed 
by exposure to the fuel. “A few raccoons,” she said. “It’s absolutely minimal. 
A miracle.”


The greatest danger from the spill, and what led to the declarations of 
emergency, is the likelihood that fuel shortages will affect states across the 
eastern US, starting in the southeast. The executive orders will loosen 
restrictions on fuel trucks, allowing them to supply gasoline where the pipe 
would have normally. Truck drivers will be able to work longer shifts than 
usually allowed by the US Department of Transportation.

Meanwhile the tanker ship Ohio is on its way from Texas to New York with a 
freight of fuel to slake the need in northeastern states. By Friday afternoon 
it had rounded Florida and wasoff the coast 
<http://www.marinetraffic.com/en/ais/home/centerx:-81/centery:32/zoom:7> near 
Savannah, Georgia.

North Carolina governor Pat McCrory wrote in his emergency declaration 
<https://ncgovernor.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/documents/files/Executive%20Order%20100_0.pdf>
 that “t￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼he uninterrupted supply of fuel oil, diesel oil, and 
gasoline, is essential for the health￼￼￼, safety, or economic well-being of 
persons or property in North Carolina, and any interruption of those fuels 
threatens the public welfare.”

Colonial also has opened up a second pipeline, called Line 2, that runs 
parallel to the burst line. It normally carries diesel and other petrol 
chemicals, but has now shifted to gasoline.

Even if all those measures are able to meet the need along the eastern 
seaboard, drivers could create shortages by making runs on gas stations. And 
station owners, in turn, could gouge drivers. Alabama governor Robert Bentley
included a warning 
<http://governor.alabama.gov/newsroom/2016/09/governor-bentley-declares-state-emergency-facilitate-granting-usdot-waiver/>
in his declaration: “It is unlawful for any person within the State of Alabama 
to impose unconscionable prices for the sale of any commodity during the period 
of a declared State of Emergency.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Falabama-gasoline-pipeline-spill-fuel-shortages-emergency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ee426a13fa0cb2e6a3fe4d712271ecd1c485d43%2F0_29_3743_2247%2F3743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pipeline%20rupture%20in%20Alabama%20threatens%20fuel%20shortages%20across%20eastern%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Falabama-gasoline-pipeline-spill-fuel-shortages-emergency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pipeline%20rupture%20in%20Alabama%20threatens%20fuel%20shortages%20across%20eastern%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Falabama-gasoline-pipeline-spill-fuel-shortages-emergency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ee426a13fa0cb2e6a3fe4d712271ecd1c485d43%2F0_29_3743_2247%2F3743.jpg>
 Alabama governor Robert Bentley said it was ‘unlawful to impose unconscionable 
prices’ for gas during the emergency. Photograph: Julie Bennett/AP 
The fuel that spilled may be useable, once it is drawn from the retention 
pond. On Friday Colonial had more than 500 workers at the site, trying to 
unearth the pipe and repair it.

“They have been amazingly transparent,” said Crawford, of Cahaba Riverkeepers. 
“We actually hope their response will serve as a model for future incidents.”

The job is only just beginning, though, and it is dangerous. The fumes from 
the spill are so volatile, Crawford said, that airspace above it has been 
closed, and roads in every direction are blocked.

Pinkney, the EPA spokesman, said that temporary dams have been installed 
downstream of the retention pond, so that if any gasoline leaks from the 
retention pond it can be stopped before it reaches the Cahaba river.

 * This article was amended on 16 September to update the estimate of the oil 
spill to 338,000 gallons.  