
Google has just launched a new smartphone, the Pixel, and for the first time 
this isn’t just anotherAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> 
smartphone – it’s a Google phone. The company is finally launching a direct 
assault on its biggest rival: Apple.


For years Google has been involved in a proxy war with the iPhone maker. It 
makes a rival operating system, Android, itbuys up patents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/29/google-motorola-lenovo-sale>
 and itgoes to court to protect them 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-apple-google-settlement-idUSBREA4F0S020140517>
.

But until now it hasn’t truly engaged in hardware itself. It licenses Android 
for others to use – and while that has made the operating system the world’s 
most popular on mobile, ahead of iOS, with over 1.4bn devices active a month, 
it’s not without downsides.

While there is a strength in the sheer number of different manufacturers using 
Android, filling almost any market niche, that multi-manufacturer strategy has 
also caused problems for the state of Android.

Unlike iOS devices, most Android phones do not receive updates for much longer 
than a year. Some do get monthly security updates, but others get Android 
version updates sometimes years afterGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> releases new versions, creating 
so-called fragmentation that makes it harder to develop apps and services.

This fragmentation is a problem. Francisco Jeronimo, market research firm 
IDC’s research director for European mobile devices, says: “Many people care 
about updates. They recognise that getting the latest update is about getting 
something better, unless they’ve got an old phone. But it’s about how easy it 
is to do. Going online and finding an update is something most will not do. If 
you present it as a notification, asApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> does, then most will jump on 
board.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgoogle-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac1c4e4307bc6c113d9f2ce464f4e6f5c1cc03f%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixel%20is%20a%20direct%20challenge%20to%20Apple%20%E2%80%93%20and%20a%20referendum%20on%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgoogle-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixel%20is%20a%20direct%20challenge%20to%20Apple%20%E2%80%93%20and%20a%20referendum%20on%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgoogle-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac1c4e4307bc6c113d9f2ce464f4e6f5c1cc03f%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Google’s last attempt at a smartphone, the Nexus. Photograph: Google 
The only Android devices to get similar updates to Apple’s worldwide pushing 
out of iOS updates are Google’s Nexus devices, which until now have been made 
in partnership with a big smartphone manufacturer. LG, Huawei,Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> and HTC have all made Nexus 
devices with Google, but these differ from the Pixel phones – they haven’t been 
sold as the flagship Android device, but more as developer curiosities, selling 
on average around 3m devices each time.

According to data from IDC, Google and its Nexus partners have only sold 
around 23m in total since 2010, making them only 0.2% of the total shipments of 
smartphones in that period. A curio, more than a mainstream smartphone. 
Samsung, on the other hand, has sold a total of 520m Samsung S models over the 
years, while Apple has sold 1bn iPhones.

Samsung has therefore been left as the premium Android champion, particularly 
as smaller players including HTC, Sony and LG have struggled. Samsung and Apple 
are currently locked in awar for the so-called floating voter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/17/samsung-apple-smartphone-ios-android>
: the 20% of users that ever actually switch platforms.

Now Google has decided to enter that battle and compete with Apple directly. 
No more proxies, no more relying on others to champion its mobile operating 
system or to make them in a partnership, and it will provide direct updates to 
devices in the same way Apple does. ThePixel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pixel> is a Google phone, and a 
statement of intent.

This moment will reveal a lot about the strength of Google’s brand. Marc 
Allera, chief executive of EE, Google’s exclusive network partner in the UK, 
says: “Google has long been known as an innovative tech brand and consumers can 
expect it to now become a new and exciting player within mobile following this 
move.”

For Google, the Pixel is about putting its brand and services – the Google 
Assistant – front and centre. Jeronimo says: “With the Nexus, Google attempted 
to bring the best device running the latest version of Android, but couldn’t 
give priority to one of the tier two manufacturers that were interested in 
making it when you have companies like Samsung andHuawei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/huawei> leading the market. It meant 
Google struggled to differentiate with its own device when its partners were 
already making very good devices that were good value.”

The benefits of having one company design hardware and software cannot be 
overlooked. That may also have an impact on other Android manufacturers who 
rely on Google for software.

Despite Google making an explicit play for iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> users with a data import tool 
available for first time to switchers, the likelihood of Google enticing a 
serious number of users to move over immediately is small. In reality, the 
Pixel’s first users are likely to be current Android users, those with phones 
from HTC, Sony, LG, Samsung and Huawei.

Google’s vice president of global operations and the Google Store, Ana 
Corrales says the Pixel is a continuation of Google giving customers and users 
choice. “We’re not necessarily trying to compete against Apple. We’re just 
trying to provide choice at every level and continue our Android strategy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgoogle-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c689db24a257cfa0822211483fb17e8ff2a2017%2F0_86_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixel%20is%20a%20direct%20challenge%20to%20Apple%20%E2%80%93%20and%20a%20referendum%20on%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgoogle-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixel%20is%20a%20direct%20challenge%20to%20Apple%20%E2%80%93%20and%20a%20referendum%20on%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgoogle-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c689db24a257cfa0822211483fb17e8ff2a2017%2F0_86_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 If users buy into the idea of a Google phone, then Google knows that its brand 
and services are a key attractor in a out in a competitive market. Photograph: 
Eric Risberg/AP 
How third-party manufacturers react will be interesting. Samsung has been 
developing its own Tizen operating system for several years, and has both 
smartphones and smartwatches running it currently in the market. It’s unlikely 
Samsung will simply ditch Android in the near term, but should it decide to 
divert resources to alternative operation systems, Android’s marketshare could 
fall.

Jeronimo says: “Now is the time for Google to reset, start from scratch and 
deliver on the promise of the Nexus, which it never did. It needs to show the 
market what can be done with Android, not just with hardware but with software, 
so that third-party manufactures can take those features and adapt them, 
generating a stronger relationship with Google.”

So the Pixel phone becomes a referendum on Google: If users buy into the idea 
of a Google phone, then Google knows that its brand and its services are a key 
attractor in a like-for-like shoot out in a high competitive market. Should it 
fail to sell, Google could end up with a crisis over brand and users that 
affects more than simply a smartphone.

Either way, Google launching a smartphone is seen as a good thing by industry 
watchers, regardless of how Google’s sales battle with Apple goes.

“It keeps people interested in Android and it raises awareness that Google is 
not just developing one version of Android after the other without trying to be 
innovative,” says Jeronimo. “An announcement like this is important to the 
market if it brings something different and innovative, something users can 
expect to use over the next year.”
 