
Given the headline above you'd be forgiven for not jumping out of your seat to 
get your hands on a copy of our latest report,Planning sustainable cities for 
community food growing <http://www.sustainweb.org/publications/?id=295>. 
Perhaps even less so when you learn that it is aimed primarily at planners, to 
help them build on the government's National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). 
Still with me in the back row?

But widespread interest our recommendations is a testament to the rapid growth 
of the local food movement. Through theCapital Growth initiative 
<http://www.capitalgrowth.org>, more than 2,000 new community food gardens have 
been created in London alone. Blossoming on housing estates and in schools, on 
rooftops and disused car parks, the secret to their success is in the benefits 
they offer and the mix of people who get involved.

Growing food in community gardens may seem a small measure, but for people 
living near these spaces, it can make a huge difference – improving health, 
regenerating local areas, providing green space and areas for biodiversity. It 
is also relatively cheap and empowering for local residents.

Already, there are signs that local government is starting to recognise the 
important role that community food growing can play, particularly when put in 
the wider context of local food systems.

The Sustainable Food Cities network <http://sustainablefoodcities.org/> now 
includes more than 30 cities, towns, boroughs and counties across the UK that 
have formed local food partnerships – bringing together the public sector, 
businesses and community groups to look at how to improve the local food 
system. This ranges from reducing food waste and tackling obesity rates to 
helping independent food enterprises thrive and making sure public procurement 
supports all of these issues.

Though many of the partnerships are short on funding, they can (and do) 
influence local policy. With rising public interest in space for people to grow 
their own food, this has come out as a priority in many council plans.

The food groups forming around these spaces have also evolved. What started as 
simply planting potatoes has grown to questioning where our food comes from and 
how it is produced, and influencing government policy on food and farming. For 
some younger growers, getting involved in local food gardens provides their 
first education about how food grows at all.

When you put all that effort into growing a bunch of carrots, it gives you a 
new-found respect for farmers. It can also stimulate demand for locally 
produced fresh food, which leads some to set up their own co-operatives or box 
schemes and also provides new markets for local farmers. Though most of the 
gardeners are growing for their own consumption, more and more are putting 
aside a bit of their harvest to sell locally to help pay for ongoing running 
costs; some are even starting up small enterprises.

During last autumn's Urban Food Fortnight 
<http://www.sustainweb.org/ethicaleats/urban_food_fortnight_2013/> more than 
100 events were held across London showcasing wares from local gardens, with 
chefs putting on pop-up dinners in the community gardens. As well as raising 
the profile of the gardens, it demonstrated the demand for locally grown food 
in restaurants and shops – parsnips with provenance, salad with a story.

Whether local growers are looking to save money, make money, meet their 
neighbours or revitalise an unloved space, the community food movement should 
be supported to flourish.

Ben Reynolds is deputy coordinator for Sustain <http://www.sustainweb.org/>, 
the alliance for better food and farming

The supply chain hub is funded by the Fairtrade Foundation. All content is 
editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find 
out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member <https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 