
Pupils in England will have to choose between academic or vocational 
qualifications after the age of 16 under plans unveiled by the government – 
although some business leaders are sceptical about whether the change will go 
ahead.

The government’s new skills plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/technical-education-overhaul-unveiled-by-skills-minister>
, launched by the education minister Nick Boles, comes alongside a detailed
report into technical education 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/536046/Report_of_the_Independent_Panel_on_Technical_Education.pdf>
 headed by Lord Sainsbury, which calls for the thousands of vocational and 
technical qualifications to be stripped away in favour of 15 “pathways”.

The government’s recent track record in educational reform has been bumpy, 
however, with legislation for its higher education reforms still not visible 
and the schools white paper appearing to be mired in post-Brexit turmoil.

The plan appears to offer little extra funding for the new system starting 
from 2019, which would see those wanting to go into apprenticeships or 
vocational training choosing one of the 15 broad skills pathways such as 
construction, social care or engineering after taking their GCSEs.

The division between vocation pathways and academic qualifications raised 
fears of an education dividing wall at the age of 16, according to the Social 
Market Foundation. “There is a risk that these reforms could reverse the trend 
of pupils taking a combination of courses rather than choosing a solely 
academic or technical route, with only less able pupils choosing technical 
courses in future,” the foundation’s director, Emran Mian, said.

Social mobility hindered by ‘culture of inequality’ in school system – peers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/08/social-mobility-hindered-culture-of-inequality-school-system-university-work>
The last Labour government created a new diploma in 2008 to bridge the 
academic-vocational divide, with the aim of it eventually replacing GCSEs and 
A-levels. But the qualificationsuffered difficulties from the beginning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/oct/14/1419education-furthereducation1>
 and attracted few takers, before beingaxed by Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jun/07/primary-curriculum-academic-diplomas-axed>
 in 2010.

Gordon Marsden, the shadow minister for further education and skills, said the 
Sainsbury report was detailed and thoughtful, but the 2019 timetable was 
“wildly optimistic”.

“The government’s get-out clause – that they will only be able to implement 
all proposals unequivocally, [and] only where that is possible within current 
budget restraints – must raise questions about whether they will be unable to 
honour the thrust of the Sainsbury review,” Marsden said.

Neil Carberry, the CBI’s director for employment and skills, said the 
proposals would mean making changes to the employers’ apprenticeship levy, the 
0.5% tax on company payrolls announced by George Osborne last year.

“Real progress on this agenda will also require an effective apprenticeship 
system,” Carberry said. “The design of the proposed levy system needs a radical 
rethink as business concern and uncertainty around the policy grows with each 
passing week.”

To cut back on the estimated 20,000 technical qualifications currently 
operating – thousands of which are dormant – only one provider will be licensed 
to offer qualifications in each of the pathways.

The routes are to include a two-year “common core” of courses, including 
English and maths, although the Sainsbury report wants to end the government’s 
compulsory resitting of those subjects for students who failed them at GCSE 
level.

The skills plan will require legislation to establish a new, more powerful 
Institute forApprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/apprenticeships> and Technical Education 
as the sole body responsible for approving apprenticeships from 2018.

The British Chambers of Commerce said the streamlined routes would bring 
clarity to a system that often confused both employers and students. “However, 
previous reforms have often been hampered by continuous revolution and change, 
rather than allowing policies time to take hold,” Marcus Mason, the BCC’s head 
of education and skills, said.
 