
Genetically modified (GM) plants designed to use light more efficiently 
produced a 20% greater yield in a study that could have significant 
implications for global food supplies.

The field trial, which used tobacco plants, is the first to show that GM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gm> techniques can be used to boost 
the basic efficiency of photosynthesis, potentially offering substantial gains 
across almost all food crops in the future. Until now many scientists had 
doubted this would be possible.

The scientists believe the finding could help meet the global demand for food, 
which is projected by the UN to rise by 70% by 2050.

Professor Stephen Long, who led the work at the University of Illinois, said: 
“We don’t know for certain this approach will work in other crops, but because 
we’re targeting a universal process that is the same in all crops, we’re pretty 
sure it will.”

Previously, GM techniques have been used to produce crops that are 
pest-resistant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/25/gm-wheat-no-more-pest-resistant-than-ordinary-crops-trial-shows>
,disease-resistant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/apr/02/gm-potato-blight-ireland-famine>
 orless sensitive to herbicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/jul/25/gm.food>, but this is one of 
the first demonstrations of a crop’s basic efficiency being improved.

Professor Jonathan Jones, who works on GM crops at the Sainsbury Laboratory in 
Norwich and was not involved in the latest study, said the size of the gains 
reported were impressive. “That’s not the kind of thing you normally see,” he 
said.

Long’s team started out by simulating the entire process of photosynthesis, 
the process that converts sunlight into chemical energy, to identify where 
potential gains could be made.

They decided to target a process that plants use to shield themselves from 
bright sunlight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fplants-genetically-modified-to-boost-photosynthesis-produce-greater-yields-study-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb9600493b68979cf359c8822e1d58ec09ce9d72%2F30_30_946_568%2F946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plants%20modified%20to%20boost%20photosynthesis%20produce%20greater%20yields%2C%20study%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fplants-genetically-modified-to-boost-photosynthesis-produce-greater-yields-study-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plants%20modified%20to%20boost%20photosynthesis%20produce%20greater%20yields%2C%20study%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fplants-genetically-modified-to-boost-photosynthesis-produce-greater-yields-study-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb9600493b68979cf359c8822e1d58ec09ce9d72%2F30_30_946_568%2F946.jpg>
 Genetically modified plants are better able to make use of the limited 
sunlight available when their leaves go into the shade, researchers report. 
Photograph: Graphic by Julie McMahon 
“Crop leaves exposed to full sunlight absorb more light than they can use,” 
Long said. “If they can’t get rid of this extra energy, it will actually bleach 
the leaf.”

Chemical changes within the leaf allow the excess energy to be dissipated as 
heat, in a process called nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ). While plants switch 
on the quenching mechanism almost instantaneously – similar to the way in which 
the pupil in the human eye contracts in bright light – it takes much longer for 
it to switch off again.

“When a cloud crosses the sun, or a leaf goes into the shade of another, it 
can take up to half an hour for that NPQ process to relax,” Long said. “In the 
shade, the lack of light limits photosynthesis, and NPQ is also wasting light 
as heat.”

Computer simulations suggested that the energy wasted after quenching reduces 
overall crop productivity drastically, by 7.5 to 30%, depending on the plant 
type and sunlight conditions.

The scientists modified three genes with the aim of increasing the levels of 
three proteins that could help ramp up the efficiency of photosynthesis more 
quickly after exposure to bright sunlight.


They grew seedlings from multiple experiments and selected the three best 
strains, based on how they responded to changes in light conditions. These were 
then grown in several field plots alongside standard tobacco plants.

Two of the GM strains consistently showed 20% higher yields and the third was 
14% higher, in terms of the weight of dry leaves harvested. The plants also had 
bigger leaves, were taller and had heavier roots.

The team have now been funded by the Gates Foundation to introduce similar 
modifications in major food crops, starting with rice, soya bean and cassava.

If a relatively simple gene modification can improve the efficiency of 
photosynthesis, it might appear surprising that plants have not just evolved 
this genetic trait by themselves. However, outside agricultural settings, 
photosynthesis is not the factor that limits plants growth, according to Jones. 
“Most plants grew in an environment where the limiting factor was nitrogen 
available, not photosynthesis,” he said.

The findings are published in the journal Science 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aai8878>.
 