
Hundreds of writers including children's laureate and Gruffalo author Julia 
Donaldson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/julia-donaldson>, Philip Pullman 
and Anne Fine are protesting the government's plans to amend educational 
copyright, with many saying they will be forced to stop writing for schools if 
the changes go ahead.

Schools currently pay an annual license fee for permission to copy and reuse 
hundreds of thousands of published works. Agovernment consultation on changing 
the UK's copyright system <http://www.ipo.gov.uk/consult-2011-copyright> 
proposes amending this arrangement"so that copyright does not unduly restrict 
education and teaching" <http://www.ipo.gov.uk/consult-ia-bis0317.pdf> [PDF], 
but this would mean that the authors whose work is photocopied and reused in 
schools would see their income "seriously reduce[d] or even eradicate[d]", 
according to the Authors' Licensing and Collecting Society, which currently 
collects the fees. Last year 18,500 authors were paid for educational use of 
their work, with many professional education writers earning more than Â£10,000 
in income.

The ALCS has been contacted by "hundreds" of writers condemning the proposal 
to widen the field for copyright exceptions, it said, with many authors saying 
they would not be able to afford to continue writing for the educational sector 
under the potential new rules.

"These changes would be a blow to many writers who don't make much money from 
royalties and rely on income from photocopying. As someone who has written a 
hundred books for schools, I don't regard educational books as being less 
creative than any others," said Donaldson.

Pullman insisted that "it's essential that the originators of such material 
should be fairly paid for it", while former children's laureateAnne Fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-fine> said that money from the ALCS 
formed a "significant" part of her income. "If this source of income is 
removed, I would be in a position where I would have to concentrate on areas of 
writing in which I felt I would get a fairer return for the hours worked," she 
said. "It will be a particular and ongoing personal and educational loss if 
writers whose work inspires children feel compelled to absent themselves from 
the field in order to make a living elsewhere."

Fine was not the only author to say she would be unlikely to continue writing 
for schools if the changes go ahead. Educational writer Clare West said she 
used her copying fees to live on while she writes her next book. "If I don't 
receive them in future, I may not be able to continue my writing career," she 
said. "What will happen if educational writers can no longer afford to spend 
time creating books that schools desperately need?" ELT writer Michael Vince 
called allowing textbooks to be copied for nothing "professional suicide".

"Should I lose the copyright licensing income from ALCS, I must say that the 
50% or more cut in my income would be highly demotivating to me continuing to 
produce new editions, with subsequent loss of benefits to student learning," 
added former sociology lecturer and textbook author Ken Browne.

While the consultation paper says that "restricting or removing this ability 
to license could ... deliver significant financial benefits to educational 
establishments and free up their use of copyright works", it also admits "there 
is a danger that going too far will undermine the financial incentives that 
encourage the creation of new educational works". Closing in March, it is 
currently asking for further evidence of the costs, benefits and implications 
of the proposed changes.
 