
If there's one thing we've learned in the last few weeks, it's that there's 
nothing quite so gripping as a political scandal involving a secret lover. As 
the French presidentFrançois Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> is finding out, our 
enduring fascination with a man and his mistress is as strong as ever. Which is 
promising, then, for two very different portrayals of mistresses coming up.

The link between the two is the writer Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>. She adapted Claire Tomalin's 
fascinating book about the life of Nelly Ternan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/charles-dickens-life-tomalin-review>
, Charles Dickens's secret mistress, for the new filmThe Invisible Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156899/invisible-woman>; and she has 
writtenThe Mistress Contract 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/the-mistress-contract?gclid=CO6SsLvfoLwCFQKD2wodvEUALg>
, her debut play, which will be performed at the Royal Court in London. "They 
function very differently as mistresses," says Morgan. With The Invisible 
Woman, she says, part of the attraction was the fact that Nelly was much 
younger than Dickens – when they met, she was 18 and he 45 – and she loved 
Tomalin's examination of a woman's place in Victorian Britain.

"As a feminist tract, it is interesting – because it's about the vulnerability 
of women and what makes them fall into an economic affair. That was a big 
element: it wasn't purely desire or love, certainly on Nelly's part. I think 
there was admiration and respect for this man. From the book, you get the sense 
that he's a charismatic, entertaining maverick, but what's interesting is what 
drew him to her, because she seems quite modest. Maybe that's the point – she 
is an invisible companion."

Morgan couldn't, she says, apply to Nelly "all those cliches of what a 
mistress was". Although pretty, she wasn't a sophisticated femme fatale, nor a 
schemer out for luxuries and material gain: "She was a gentle observer of her 
own destiny." Morgan also doesn't view it as a great tragedy of forbidden love, 
at least not on Nelly's part. "I don't think it's a love affair. When I 
started, I thought I was going to write this wonderful romantic story, but I 
don't think it's that – it's about a woman who has to accept that position at 
that time in her life. So she's a very sad mistress, really."
 Playwright Abi Morgan. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
For Dickens, however, it was about love. In her book, Tomalin mentions the 
writerWilkie Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wilkiecollins>, who 
merrily gets himself a second mistress and houses her around the corner from 
his first. Does she think Nelly was different from those women? "Yes, I think 
Wilkie Collins was a realist and Dickens was a romantic. If you look at 
Dickens's early letters to women friends he trusted, he doesn't name Nelly, but 
he is wildly romantic. I think he would have considered her the woman he 
loved." And, as Morgan points out, Dickens "had become very isolated from 
Catherine [his wife]. They had 11 children. The poor woman had been pregnant 
over many years, and I feel like he was always punishing her. I think Nelly was 
without baggage. Compared to the marriage he was in, it was carefree."

Carefree, but not sexual – or at least not for a long time, says Tomalin: 
"As the film rightly suggests, she was extremely reluctant." Although Nelly 
came from an acting family, which at the time was not considered a respectable 
profession, "Mrs Ternan had brought up her three daughters to think of 
themselves as ladies. So I think it was a very difficult step. Also, Nelly 
supposedly said afterwards [to the Rev William Benham, her parish priest and 
confidant] that she had loathed the physical side of the relationship. She was 
certainly in love with Dickens at the beginning. Here was this wonderful man 
who could offer her and her family all the things she needed. He was also 
charming, famous, and had written these wonderful books. But over the years – 
12 years is a long time – I think it must have become increasingly difficult 
for her. Although she lived like a lady, went riding and learned French, 
nevertheless she led a hidden life. She must have felt sad and resentful at not 
being able to really share his life."

The woman at the centre of The Mistress Contract doesn't share her lover's 
life either, but this appears to suit her, at least on the surface.The book on 
which the play is based 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/31/mistress-contract-she-he-review> 
– published here last year and spanning more than three decades – centres 
on transcripts of conversations between an anonymous (but supposedly real) 
couple, called simply She and He. Both married, they had started an affair and, 
in 1981, She presented He with a contract – that he would provide her with an 
income and a house, and she would provide him with "mistress services", which 
included housekeeping and "all sexual acts engaged in when requested".

"She's a woman who I think has been quite brutalised and battered emotionally 
by men," says Morgan. "I think she's looking for financial security and she 
draws up this contract." She has come out of the 1960s and 70s feminist 
movement "and considers herself a feminist, yet is effectively using sex as a 
commodity. I think it does work for her, but what's complicated about the book 
is you never really know. She talks about the thrill of calling herself a 
mistress. Being a mistress, for her, feels very empowering – although you get 
the sense she doesn't enjoy a lot of the sex, or elements of it. What thrills 
her is the thought that somehow, in being paid for it, she is regaining some 
power. The premise we have for the play is a woman who has to confront the idea 
that this contract has become another kind of marriage – and when does it end?" 
(By all accounts, it hasn't: now in their 80s and 90s, the two still live 
in the same US city, though separately, and speak to each other every day.)

Does Morgan think the woman wants something more romantic? "I think she gets 
it in some ways. That's what is complex about it, because they seem like 
lovers. It's not like the typical prostitute and punter relationship. 
Mistresses have always had a higher status – the notion of a mistress as some 
other place where you take yourself, sexually and emotionally. I think she has 
quite a romantic view of what being a mistress is. There's a great line in the 
book where He asks why she has done this and She says, 'I wanted to like you 
more, I wanted to like men.' I think it's about a woman who feels oppressed 
by men, trying to regain the balance, which is the opposite of what you feel 
the word mistress means."

Today, the role of the mistress in an artist's life seems to have become 
synonymous with that of a muse – and certainly many mistresses were muses. 
Historically, says Morgan, "there were more male novelists, painters – men have 
colonised a lot of creative pursuits. So the notion of having your muse was not 
something that was built for women originally. That's not to say women 
don't have muses. I get muses in terms of actors or writers who inspire me, so 
I understand the concept. What is interesting is the fusion of the muse 
as someone who is the creative inspiration for your work, but somehow also 
bound to sexual inspiration."
 Felicity Jones in The Invisible Woman. Photograph: David Appleby 
Think of Pablo Picasso's relationship with one of his mistresses, 
Marie-Thérèse Walter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/apr/27/picasso-painting-lover-auction>
, who both fuelled and featured in some of his best work. Or Rodin's work 
inspired by his mistress, muse and fellow sculptorCamille Claudel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/mar/23/arts.artsnews>; or the works 
Rossetti made based on his model and mistress Fanny Cornforth.

Was Nelly Dickens's muse? "It's very difficult to know what a muse is," says 
Tomalin. "I think she was extremely important in his life. He showed her his 
work and valued her opinion. He cared about her response to his work."

Other Dickens scholars have tried to shoehorn echoes of Nelly into his 
characters, most notably in the beautiful, remote Estella in Great 
Expectations. Tomalin rejects the notion. Nelly doesn't appear in his fiction, 
she writes, because he seemed unable to be humorous about her, which was the 
starting point for his other characters: "Perhaps there was always too much raw 
feeling surrounding Nelly for him to begin mythologising her." It's more likely 
that aspects of her life were picked for characters, such as Bella Wilfer inOur 
Mutual Friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-mutual-friend>
. "A girl living in a poor north London house," says Tomalin. "She's very 
high-spirited, she has sisters. She has this relationship with her father that 
is described almost as erotic. I think that may well have some allusion to 
Dickens's relationship with Nelly."

What are we to think of mistresses today? Women are not financially dependent 
on men, or at least not in nearly the same way; nor forced, as Nelly was, into 
a mistress role. And the life of She in the Mistress Contract doesn't look all 
that empowering from here. Why does a mistress have to be a woman anyway?

The language around the idea of a mistress hasn't changed to reflect women's 
growing power, says Morgan. A married (female) friend had an affair, she says, 
and the man "to a certain degree was like her mistress, but there isn't even an 
equivalent word. It feels like the mistress can be imbued with great power, but 
it's only power that's been given to her, and allowed, by a man. Her whole 
being is based upon serving a man and probably being paid for it, or being 
supported. Traditionally, women didn't have that position of power. It may 
change now."

• The Mistress Contract 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/the-mistress-contract> is at the 
Royal Court, London SW1, tomorrow to 22 March.The Invisible Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156899/invisible-woman> is out on 7 
February.

• Buy top price tickets for The Mistress Contract for just £27. For more, go to
theguardian.com/extra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/extra/2014/feb/03/extra-the-mistress-contract-offer-pfp>
 