 His cult debut novel took the publishing world by storm and became a Hollywood 
blockbuster starring Leonardo DiCaprio. But Alex Garland, the author of The 
Beach, has fallen victim to the condition dreaded by authors everywhere: he has 
writer's block.
Garland, 31, one of the wealthiest and most successful of the current 
generation of British writers, has been forced to halt work on his latest book 
and is not planning to return to the novel form in the foreseeable future.

'As far as I am concerned he still has a two-book deal with Penguin,' said 
Andrew Nurnberg, Garland's literary agent. 'But the delivery of the first book 
has been indefinitely delayed. Alex felt it was not going to be good enough.'

Writer's block has plagued many successful writers, including William Golding, 
Douglas Adams and Ian Rankin. Tom Wolfe said recently he was only inspired to 
write again after a stroke brought him close to a terminal writer's block.

Garland, son of the cartoonist Nicholas Garland, won international acclaim and 
huge sales after the publication of The Beach. The book, part thriller, part 
travelogue, told the story of a young British traveller in Thailand who became 
obsessed with the search for the perfect island paradise.

It was reprinted 25 times in less than a year and the film rights were quickly 
snapped up. After the initial flurry of publicity, Garland shied away from the 
media circus and worked on a more demanding follow-up novel. The Tesseract, 
published in 1998, when he was 27, was set in Manila. It was hailed by critics 
but sold fewer copies than The Beach.

After executives at Penguin Viking signed him up, the publishers eagerly 
anticipated the next book.

Now they will have to wait a lot longer. 'Alex's deal with his publishers was 
commercially competitive,' said Nurnberg. 'But he has not been paid fortunes. 
The full advance was to come online further along, with delivery.'

Despite completing some chapters of his third book, writer's block forced 
Garland to stop. 'It was Alex's decision,' said Nurnberg. 'I thought it was a 
good book, full of Garlandesque suspense.'

Nurnberg said Penguin Viking remained 'relaxed' about the delay. 

A spokesman for Penguin said there was no pressure on Garland to produce the 
work to a timetable. But he would not confirm suggestions that Garland had 
returned some of his advance.

Nurnberg said he saw Garland's hiatus as a temporary hold-up and a sign of his 
sensitivity and talent. 'There is a sense of responsibility to the publishers,' 
he said. 'We have explained to Penguin that he has been diverted.'

Garland is working on a film with the team who brought The Beach to the 
screen. Called 28 Days Later, it follows the survivors of a deadly virus which 
sweeps Earth. Friends say he has turned to film as a way out of his writing 
block.

Writer's block: the bonfire of an author's vanity


 Douglas Adams 

Adams suffered writer's block for a decade. The author of The Hitch-Hiker's 
Guide to the Galaxy was cowed by the pressure to justify a Â£2m advance for his 
final novel.

Nine years past his deadline he'd written only eight pages of publishable 
text. To ease the process, he took one bath after another or pedalled furiously 
on his exercise bike.

 Ian Rankin 

The Scottish detective-fiction writer won the Gold Dagger in 1997. 'When it 
was announced... a sudden chill went through me: from now on, people would have 
preconceptions, they'd have expectations of my work. I'd written the best crime 
novel published in the United Kingdom... how could I possibly top that?'

 Tom Sharpe 

Two years ago the author of Porterhouse Blue, Wilt and Blott on the Landscape 
admitted he had succumbed to a bout of creative impotence. 'I've been working 
on something for four years. I've written over half a million words and it's 
dead.'

 Tom Wolfe 

The author of Bonfire of the Vanities had almost a decade of writer's block. 
Then in 1996 the 66-year-old suffered a stroke and had a quintuple bypass 
operation. The experience released his creative muse. 'I guess I was happy to 
be alive.'
 