
There have been a number of books in recent years in which old men look back 
from literary eminence to the sexual excitements of their youth –Gabriel García 
Márquez <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gabrielgarciamarquez> with Memories 
of my Melancholy Whores, Philip Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth> with just about everything – but 
the 81-year old Swedish writer Per Olov Enquist’s most recent novelThe Parable 
Book, translated by Deborah Bragan-Turner, is about love rather than sex, and 
death rather than regret. It is also in passages blindingly funny.

Enquist is seen as one of Sweden’s greatest living authors: he has won the 
Nordic Council’s literary prize and the the Swedish Academy’s Nordic prize, 
among others, and his work has been tranlsated into more than 20 languages. He 
has lived in Germany, Denmark and the US, but has since returned to Stockholm, 
where we meet at his publisher’s office, a glorious stone building in the old 
town. He still reads four Swedish newspapers a day, the London and New York 
Reviews of books, British and German papers on the web and watches CNN. He has 
been greatly concerned about the EU referendum. “Sweden has always been 
Anglophile. There is a very strong feeling of bonds with England. Our welfare 
states are built up on the same lines even if they differ in execution. That’s 
not sentimentality: there is a very strong sense of interconnection with you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fupbringing-like-mine-marks-you-like-branding-iron-per-olov-enquist-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cc66c89f215b1992cb9c1eb992271d46336007%2F0_128_1370_1543%2F1370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PO%20Enquist%3A%20%E2%80%98An%20upbringing%20like%20mine%20marks%20you%20like%20a%20branding%20iron%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fupbringing-like-mine-marks-you-like-branding-iron-per-olov-enquist-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PO%20Enquist%3A%20%E2%80%98An%20upbringing%20like%20mine%20marks%20you%20like%20a%20branding%20iron%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fupbringing-like-mine-marks-you-like-branding-iron-per-olov-enquist-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cc66c89f215b1992cb9c1eb992271d46336007%2F0_128_1370_1543%2F1370.jpg>
 Hermes watches over the Gulf of Bothnia from the cliffs of Kokar in Aland, 
Finland. Photograph: Berit Berg/AP 
None the less, his two most recent books deal with an upbringing very remote 
indeed from English concerns. In part this is a matter of geography. He was 
born and brought up in a scattered settlement near the coast of the Gulf of 
Bothnia, a couple of hundred miles south of the Arctic Circle. The piss bucket 
in the hallway froze to a solid lump of ice on winter nights, and his mother, a 
teacher, would ski the 3km to her school every day. His father, a lumberjack, 
had died when he was six months old so he was raised in fervent piety and 
profound isolation from anything that might be ungodly.

“The Bible is a very strange and repellent text when you read it as an adult. 
Then you have to find the passages which point inwards, not forwards. But if 
you have had an upbringing like mine you never get away from it. You get to be 
80 and read the Bible again. It’s an upbringing that marks you like a branding 
iron, but I wouldn’t want to change it if I could. The children who were raised 
in secular families could go to the theatre or the cinema. I couldn’t.”

Martin Luther was a great comic. There’s lots of that in the evangelical 
revival movement. It’s never entirely serious

Enquist has an extraordinarily direct and persistent gaze of the kind you 
never meet in cities, even Swedish ones, where anyone who looked at you that 
long would be suspected of some predatory act. He did not, he says, even know 
what a cinema was until he was 16; the books he read were almost all religious: 
his mother removedRudyard Kipling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rudyard-kipling>’s Kim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/12/100-best-novels-kim-rudyard-kipling>
 from the bookshelf once she had established that it had a Buddhist as a hero. 
Yet she loved him deeply and he loved her and writes about her with great 
respect. It was, he says, a very fine upbringing if you were going to become a 
writer, because it saved you from distractions and taught close attention to 
the world. In fact one of the village children he knew grew up to become the 
father ofStieg Larsson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stieg-larsson>, who 
wrote the Millennium trilogy, so perhaps there is something in the water of 
Hjoggböle lake.

Some of the family stories read like Stella Gibbons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/27/cold-comfort-farm-stella-gibbons-novels-reading-group>
’sCold Comfort Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/20/100-best-novels-cold-comfort-farm-stella-gibbons>
 – when one of his relatives wanted to kill himself in winter he had to spend 
hours whacking the ice of the lake with a crowbar in the dark until he had made 
a hole big enough to admit him along with the rucksack full of potatoes he’d 
strapped on to weigh himself down.

But there is also a current of humour in Enquist’s books that is part of the 
northern character. “Martin Luther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/26/martin-luther-renegade-prophet-lyndal-roper-review>
 was a great comic,” he says. “Rude, funny and crude. There’s lots of that 
still in the evangelical revival movement. It’s effective, and very practical, 
but never entirely serious.”

Although many of his works have been fictional, or at least reworkings of 
known history, such asThe Book About Blanche and Marie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
 andThe Visit of the Royal Physician, the two most recent are reworkings of his 
own life. The spine of his latest,The Parable Book, is the story of his 
encounter, at 15, with a 51-year-old woman visiting from a suburb of Stockholm, 
identified for the most part simply as “the woman on the smooth pine floor”. 
It’s an extraordinary piece of writing, perfectly paced and anatomically 
precise without being embarrassing or pornographic. When it is over, she says 
they must never meet again, but this is not to heighten the mystery. It is 
simply that in her life in the south she is a virtuous woman, active in her 
parish council. It would disrupt her life to continue.

Review: The Story of Blanche and Marie by Per Olov Enquist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
The two of them, however ill matched, manage to recognise one another’s 
dignity despite being drawn together only by lust. Of course, this leads them 
both to long for more. Eventually he does see her again, once, on a platform at 
the station in her home town. By this time he has moved south himself, to study 
at university. He was the first boy in the village to do that, and indeed the 
first to continue school after the age of 15. She tells him they can’t meet 
again. She quotes to him a fragment of the poem “Autumn Song” byTove Jansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tove-jansson>:

Now the storm is blowing out there and shuts the summer’s door; 
It’s too late to wander and to search. Perhaps I love you less than I did 
before,
But more than you will ever know.


Many years later, he is sent, through his publisher, a notice of her funeral. 
Sixteen people attend in a Stockholm graveyard. A teenage girl sings a cappella 
the whole of the Jansson poem the dead woman had quoted at him, a song in which 
transience and longing thicken together to something that bites the throat like 
smoke.

Afterwards the girl approaches him: “I recognised you from the TV,” she says. 
She is the woman’s niece. She is 15 herself now, as he had been when he met her 
aunt. The woman on the smooth pine floor had had two requests for her funeral: 
to ask Enquist to attend and that her neice should sing the song she had quoted 
to him. She had also, says the niece, kept a number of his books.

Remembering this scene now, he says with sudden heat that if the woman had 
liked his books, “she could have bloody well said so earlier”.

This is authorial vanity, of course, but it is also a pressing sense of all 
that is lost with a death.The Parable Book is told in parable partly because 
death can only be approached through parable and simile. It can’t be grasped. 
In this book and its immediate predecessor, published in English asThe 
Wandering Pineand also translated by Bragan-Turner, Enquist turns his own life 
into a parable – a story whose moral eludes us, even while it is obviously 
there.

His literary success in Sweden came fairly early and overwhelmed him. He had 
plays produced in numerous European countries and even, briefly, on Broadway. 
His account of the progress of a Broadway flop is a deadly funny section ofThe 
Wandering Pine. By the mid-70s he was a colossus of Swedish literature, a 
friend ofIngmar Bergman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ingmarbergman> and of 
the Social Democratic leadership, whose party had run the country for 40 years 
of peace and increasing prosperity.

But since everything in Sweden was settled, it was necessary to have opinions 
about south-east Asia if you wanted arguments. It was obligatory for Swedish 
intellectuals to be on the side of the Viet Cong and opposed to American power 
if they wanted to be regarded as morally serious, a process that reached its 
culmination when theKhmer Rouge <https://www.theguardian.com/world/khmer-rouge> 
captured Phnom Penh and drove out all the inhabitants they did not kill. 
Enquist wrote a column defending their actions. At the time he had never even 
heard the namePol Pot <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pol-pot>, but in the 
context of Swedish debate that was a mere detail. What mattered was to be 
righteous rather than factually right.

Enquist left his first wife and family for a Danish theatre director, and when 
he got a job as a cultural ambassador in Paris, lived with her in a seven-room 
flat on the Champs-Élysées. There he wrote just one play, after, he says, a 
conversation with his cat.

“The cat said to me, ‘You have to start writing now,’ but I couldn’t. So the 
cat finally said to me, ‘What was your first telephone number?’ And I wrote my 
first phone number: Sjön 3, Hjoggböle. And then I went on and wrote the play. 
That was the real beginning. I have written a lot about my upbringing since.”

I spend half my life bouncing around between hospitals or measuring the decay 
within me. But I've retired from all cares

Otherwise he did almost nothing in Paris except try to drink himself to death. 
He very nearly succeeded. He brings to his account inThe Wandering Pine of the 
humiliations of alcoholism the same precision of observation and of language 
that he deploys in the account of his first love. In both cases, he is striving 
for redemption without understanding what it is or even why.

He writes he says, quite freely: not without a plan, but allowing the text to 
develop as he types, confident that he can always throw it away in the morning. 
“No one can read it, and that’s a good feeling.” So one morning he found in the 
previous day’s pages the sentence, “When he wrote he was never afraid, but only 
when he wrote.” This was all he kept from those pages, but he couldn’t explain 
why. “I understood that I had written it, but I didn’t understand it.”

He describes his wandering technique of writing as being like entering a 
forest. “For the first month you don’t know where the paths go, but after three 
months you realise that you can’t get lost. That’s the feeling: that the forest 
has many alternatives, but you can’t take the wrong path.”

At least he is still writing, he says. “I spend half my life bouncing around 
between hospitals or measuring the decay within me. I had a little problem last 
spring: the tips of my fingers grew too big. I hit two keys at once. It took me 
about a month to get over it. There was nothing wrong with the words I wrote, 
but I was terrified.” Otherwise, he says, he’s in pretty good shape. 
“Considering my health problems, I feel young. I have retired from all cares, 
you might say.”

• To order The Parable Book, published by MacLehose Press, for £14.75 (RRP 
£17.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/parable-book-402282.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 