
The annual Ted Hughes Festival , organised by the Elmet trust  
<http://www.theelmettrust.co.uk>whose patron is Simon Armitage, takes place 
this weekend, 21-23 October, when the upper Calder Valley village of 
Mytholmroyd honours its most famous son.

The late Poet Laureate spent his boyhood here, and many local features play a 
central role in his poetry – the moors, the woods, the canal, and the dark 
cliff ofScout Rock 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/features/the_remains_of_a_magical_childhood_1_2291863>
 – "A wall of rock and steep woods half way up to the sky" - which continues to 
give this part of the valley a sombre aspect.

Inevitably, several other landmarks, such as the Zion Chapel 
<http://www.worldcat.org/wcpa/servlet/DCARead?standardNo=0393049671&standardNoType=1&excerpt=true>
, which was just across the road from Hughes' home, and many of the mills he 
passed on his way to school have long since been demolished. But there are 
still people living in Mytholmroyd who can recall attendingBurnley Road Primary 
School <http://www.burnleyroadschool.org.uk/homedir/school.htm> with Ted in the 
1930s.

Mytholmroyd railway station has been decorated with illustrated panels in his 
memory, too, depicting extracts from his classic children's story, "the Iron 
Man". But plans to convert the old station building into aTed Hughes Centre  
<http://www.mytholmroyd.net/tedhughes/index.html>appear to have foundered for 
the time being.

I first came across Ted Hughes' poetry as a schoolgirl in Devon, studying 
modern poetry for O level English Literature in the late 1960s, unaware that he 
was by that timeliving elsewhere 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/devon/content/articles/2006/05/03/ted_hughes_poetry_trail_feature.shtml>
 in my then county. I had not heard of Mytholmroyd, and never dreamed that I 
would eventually come to live in the shadow of Scout Rock. When reading the 
moving poem"Six Young Men" <http://www.hebdenbridge.co.uk/news/news07/102.html>
, I little imagined that I would years later walk to Lumb Falls, where the 
photograph of the men was taken; six months after the picture, all six of its 
subjects had been killed in the Great War.
 Northern star Anne Fine; one of those taking part 
This weekend's celebrations 
<http://www.theelmettrust.co.uk/whats-happening/elmet-trust-events.htm> 
encompass a wide variety of activities, including story -telling, talks, guided 
walks, readings, discussions, children's events, a poetry and music concert, a 
documentary film, and a poetry slam to be held in Ted's childhood home at 
Aspinall Street, which is now available to rent for short breaks and writers' 
retreats. Well-known names appearing include Liz Lochead and Anne Fine.

Many of the events will take place in the theatre at Calder High School 
<http://www.calderhigh.org.uk>, named in honour of Ted Hughes; although 
appropriately for a poet who loved to be out of doors, several are being held 
in the open air, including an afternoon ofGnoming in Nutclough Woods 
<http://www.theelmettrust.co.uk/calendar/41/43-An-Afternoon-of-Gnoming-in-Nutclough.htm>
. Poetry lovers can also spend the whole day at Hebden Bridge Library on 
Sunday, attending workshops and readings by contemporary poets.
 