
The European Film Academy has joined protests 
<https://www.europeanfilmacademy.org/News-detail.155.0.html?&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=397&cHash=d260398e4f76d93a40e5d82b038358ec>
 against the Polish national broadcaster TVP’s treatment of the Oscar-winning 
filmIda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/25/ida-pawel-pawlikowski-nun-road-movie>
, directed by Paweł Pawlikowski, when its broadcast on 25 February was preceded 
by a heavily critical introduction. It follows acomplaint by the Guild of 
Polish Directors 
<http://www.filmneweurope.com/press-releases/item/112261-open-letter-to-tvp-president-jacek-kurski-and-tvp2-director-maciej-chmiel>
, expressing its “outrage” over the incident.

The EFA, which gave Ida <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ida> multiple awards 
at its 2014 ceremony, including best film, best director and the people’s 
choice award, objected strongly to the 12-minute introduction for “claiming the 
film to be inaccurate, alleging that it won an Oscar only because of its 
pro-Jewish point of view, and adding title cards in such a way that they could 
have been thought to be part of the film itself”.

Ida director Pawel Pawlikowski stands ground against complaints of historical 
inaccuracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/30/pawel-pawlikowski-ida-criticism-film>
The EFA added: “While the board of the European Film Academy defends the 
plurality of opinions about films, and the right for open discussions about 
them, it cannot accept the manipulation of such a discussion by a one-sided 
judgment preceding its screening.”

The Guild of Polish Directors had earlier accused TVP of “gross manipulation” 
and of “presenting [Ida’s] content untruthfully” in an open letter signed by a 
number of notable Polish film-makers, including Agnieszka Holland, Małgorzata 
Szumowska,Andrzej Wajda <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/may/02/1> and 
Pawlikowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/18/pawel-pawlikowski-ida-warsaw-lost-guy-weird-city>
 himself.

Ida, which deals with the experience of a Polish novitiate nun who discovers 
that her parents were Jewish and had been murdered during the second world war, 
became the first Polish film to win the best foreign film Oscar, at the 2015 
ceremony. Ida also won best film and director at the Polish film awards in 2014.

Pawlikowski told Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/global/polish-directors-guild-outrage-attack-ida-1201718107/>
: “When [Ida] reached a worldwide audience, started winning awards and 
threatened to win an Oscar, [nationalists] used its growing exposure to their 
own advantage, as part of an election campaign based on fear, a sense of siege 
and crisis, saying that it’s anti-Polish and part of a sinister worldwide 
conspiracy by murky forces against the good image of Poland.”

Paweł Pawlikowski on Ida’s journey from script to film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/pawel-pawlikowski-making-of-ida-polish-film>
“These nationalists don’t deal with the actual film at all. Most of them 
haven’t actually seen it. They use the film as a mere pretext to rouse 
patriotic sentiment and give vent to their neverending obsession with a 
supposed worldwide Jewish-German-leftwing-liberal-Russian [sic] conspiracy 
againstPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>. It’s their outrageous 
xenophobic statements that do damage to our reputation abroad — not my film.”

TVP’s introduction included contributions from historian Piotr Gursztyn and 
film critic Krzysztof Kłopotowski, who, according to Variety, said: “If this 
film did not contribute to the defence of Jews in the Polish-Jewish conflict, 
then it would not get an Oscar.” It also featured Maciej Świrski of the Polish 
Anti-Defamation League, whohas attacked the film in the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/30/pawel-pawlikowski-ida-criticism-film>
 for supposed historical insensitivities.
 