
One of my favourite foreign politicians when I started out working with Tony 
Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> was the then Australian 
prime ministerPaul Keating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/paul-keating2>. Clever, funny, 
tough, with a desire to batter the Tories that was closer to my own approach to 
politics than that of my more big-tented boss.

With Keating, though he was cute enough at internal politics and became PM 
after oustingBob Hawke <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-hawke> 
at the second time of trying, once in the job, you always had the sense that 
his real enemies were on the benches opposite, not sitting all around him on 
his own side. He was never happier than when punching his Liberal opponents 
when they were down, and he saw off a few of them before finally being seen off 
himself, by general election defeat toJohn Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard> in 1996.

Would that the same could be said of two of his successors as Labor leader and 
PM,Kevin Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/kevin-rudd> and Julia 
Gillard <https://www.theguardian.com/world/julia-gillard>. No doubt there have 
been times in their careers when the closeness between them was genuine. But 
one of the worst things about the brilliant ABC TV series about their rises and 
falls is the contrast between what they said in public about each other when 
working together and what they say now. Shots of mwah mwah air kissing and warm 
words about their respective talents are woven in with their own retrospective 
accounts of tensions that develop into what is clearly now a mutual loathing 
that led to mutual destruction and the election of LiberalTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> as PM.

The series is called The Killing Season 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/programs/killing-season/>. You get the idea. It is 
great TV and terrible for politics.

In terms of where blame or sympathy lie, it is a bit like watching a tennis 
match where the momentum swings first one way and then the other. At times Rudd 
comes over as something of a narcissist but then a section on climate change or 
the global financial crisis will give a sense of the political qualities and 
the acute intelligence that got him to the top. Gillard will in one episode 
appear as the epitome of the get-things-done, get-on-with-anyone loyal deputy, 
the next as a political killer to match the hardest and the toughest.

This is not just the Rudd-Gillard show. Most of the players around them have 
given long interviews and one ministerial colleague, asked to make sense of the 
fact that she could one day see Rudd as rude and difficult with colleagues and 
staff, the next brilliant in comforting kids driven from their homes by fire, 
observes: “We’re all complicated.”

One of the most interesting subplots – and sorry if I use the language of soap 
opera but at times that is what it feels like – is Rudd’s relationship with 
longtime friend, colleague and godfather to his son,Wayne Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/wayne-swan>. The conversation when Swan 
told him he was joining the Gillard camp, to force Rudd out, was, says his 
former best mate in politics, the last time they spoke.

By a total coincidence I was in Canberra seeing Gillard on the very day Rudd 
finally made his move after months of intrigue and undermining, paving the way 
for her departure and his resumption of prime ministerial office. It did feel 
like being in the middle of some kind of psychodrama that had ceased to be 
about real political differences and was all about the personalities of the 
main characters. At the time, getting everything through the Gillard lens, I 
was seeing and hearing all that was “wrong with Kevin”. The series takes a 
broader view of course but, on the question “Who comes out best?”, I would say 
pretty much none of them, though with Gillard perhaps ahead on points.

Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> is 
interviewed, speaks glowingly of Rudd, especially his role in theGFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/aug/07/global-financial-crisis-key-stages>
. GB and Rudd did play significant roles in the shaping of aG20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> response and the warmth between them 
seems genuine enough. And of course watching the series did bring back memories 
– which frankly are never far away – of the TBGBs, as the often troubled 
relationship between Tony and Gordon became known.

That in turn brought front of mind once more the question I have asked in 
Winners and How They Succeed 
<http://www.randomhouse.com.au/books/alastair-campbell/winners-and-how-they-succeed-9780091958862.aspx>
 about why politics seems to be so bad at teamship compared with sport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fpolitics-as-blood-sport-the-killing-season-makes-the-blair-brown-rift-look-tame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435107389725%2F2cfc9eb8-45ac-4a84-a5f2-08fe37eee8cc-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Politics%20as%20blood%20sport%3A%20The%20Killing%20Season%20makes%20the%20Blair-Brown%20rift%20look%20tame&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fpolitics-as-blood-sport-the-killing-season-makes-the-blair-brown-rift-look-tame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Politics%20as%20blood%20sport%3A%20The%20Killing%20Season%20makes%20the%20Blair-Brown%20rift%20look%20tame&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fpolitics-as-blood-sport-the-killing-season-makes-the-blair-brown-rift-look-tame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435107389725%2F2cfc9eb8-45ac-4a84-a5f2-08fe37eee8cc-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Julia Gillard comes across as marginally more sympathetic in The Killing 
Season, says Alastair Campbell. Photograph: Rex/Newspix 
I have a chapter in the book titled The Winning Spirit of Australia, which 
salutes the very special winning mindset that has made Australia one of the 
disproportionately most successful sporting nations in the world. It draws on 
interviews with the likes ofShane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, Aussie rules player of the 
centuryLeigh Matthews <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leigh_Matthews>, athlete 
turned politicianNova Peris <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nova_Peris>, seven 
times world champion surferLayne Beachley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Layne_Beachley> and rugby league star Johnathan 
Thurston <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnathan_Thurston>. They all have very 
different stories to tell but they all draw in different ways on the importance 
of mateship.

There are said to be examples of Australians forgetting their closest friend’s 
names due to knowing them for decades simply as “mate”. It is an Australian 
cultural idiom, a remnant from an age of convict culture and class rejection, 
strengthened on the fields of Gallipoli and continuing to this day.

The word “mate” comes up often enough in The Killing Season interviews as 
friends recall how they fell out. “The thing that is most painful through it 
all is the active sense of betrayal,” Rudd says in the opening titles of 
episode two. “Betrayal by people close to you, betrayal by the people you 
thought you could trust.” Asked what he would say if he did have a conversation 
with Wayne Swan, Rudd says simply, “Betrayal hurts, mate.”

Character assassinations, assaults on reputations, betrayal of the deepest 
form, set amid national and global crises: it’s Machiavellian, Shakespearean 
and feels completely un-Australian, but maybe my love for the Aussie sporting 
mindset has made me naive and romantic about the country as a whole.

But what is it about politics, to quote the Bard, “that it should come to 
this”? How can politics be exempt from such a strong national identity? How can 
politics ignore a fundamental element of success in business and in sport – 
that of being able to work as a team?

When in pursuit of an objective as clear as winning an election, particularly 
if that election is winnable, then there is likely to be solidarity. “It adds 
something by being together,” says theArsenal manager, Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger>. “Suddenly it is about 
‘us’ and not ‘me’.” As early as the 1890s people were agreeing with the 
importance of this: one of the forefathers of modern sports psychology was an 
American,Norman Triplett <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Triplett>, who 
calculated that people rode their bikes faster if they were with other people.

It was possibly of little surprise then that on the night of their election 
win in the year “Kevin 2007”, Rudd was open in his admiration for Gillard, 
declaring she was a “fantastic” deputy leader of theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> and would be a 
“fantastic” deputy PM. Gillard reciprocated: “He has done a remarkable job in 
the less than 12 months he has been leader, and a remarkable job during the 
campaign: he is just amazing … You couldn’t possibly ask for better.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fkilling-season-gillard-ditch-the-witch-abbott-rudd-abc-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435016659426%2FGillard-Killing-Season-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sexist%20%E2%80%98ditch%20the%20witch%E2%80%99%20posters%20should%20have%20ended%20Abbott%E2%80%99s%20career%2C%20Julia%20Gillard%20says%20in%20Killing%20Season%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fkilling-season-gillard-ditch-the-witch-abbott-rudd-abc-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sexist%20%E2%80%98ditch%20the%20witch%E2%80%99%20posters%20should%20have%20ended%20Abbott%E2%80%99s%20career%2C%20Julia%20Gillard%20says%20in%20Killing%20Season%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fkilling-season-gillard-ditch-the-witch-abbott-rudd-abc-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435016659426%2FGillard-Killing-Season-001.jpg>
 Clips from the third episode of The Killing Season. The series was filled with 
revelatory claims.Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/23/killing-season-gillard-ditch-the-witch-abbott-rudd-abc-video>
Yet as Henry T Ford put it: “Coming together is the beginning, staying 
together is progress, working together is success.” Watching The Killing 
Season, you are left reflecting that though both Rudd and Gillard have the 
highest job in the land on their CVs, because they only really managed the 
first of those three, ultimately they are closer to Enoch Powell’s “all 
political lives … end in failure” than Ford’s vision of how people can come 
together to do great things that endure.

And here we come to the only conclusion I reach on this subject in Winners – 
that sportsmen and women find their talent young enough to be shaped by others, 
and in any event the concept of the team is drummed into us the moment we kick 
a ball in anger. In business, the hierarchy is clearer and more fixed than in 
the ever fluid world of politics where the ambition of the individual is always 
mixing in with the goals of the team. In politics, even if a politician is 
joining a team – the party or the campaign – actually going into politics is an 
acutely individual decision, and perhaps that never leaves them, which is why 
ultimately the real team players are outnumbered.

The Killing Season is extraordinary TV but sad to watch

The Killing Season is extraordinary TV but sad to watch. Because ultimately it 
is a story of bad politics that failed because people simply could not work 
together in a way that made the team greater than the sum of the egos of the 
individuals.

The final word of the final episode goes to the former UK Labour minister Alan 
Milburn, who has advised the ALP, who reflects as follows: “The hard question 
that the Australian Labor party has to ask itself is this: how is it possible 
that you win an election in November 2007, on the scale that you do, with the 
goodwill that you have, with the permission that you are gifted by the public, 
and you manage to lose all that goodwill, to trash the permission and to find 
yourself out of office within just six years? I have never seen anything quite 
like it in any country, anywhere, anytime in any part of the world. No one can 
escape blame for that, in my view.” He is right.

And the quote about not seeing anything like it in any other country in the 
world is instructive, given that he was a key figure in the UK Labour election 
campaign of 2005, when the TBGBs were kind of rampant. The Killing Season makes 
our problems then look tame by comparison. And we did, for all the problems at 
the top, win three successive full terms.

Alastair Campbell was Tony Blair’s spokesman, press secretary and director of 
communications.www.alastaircampbell.org <http://www.alastaircampbell.org/>
 