
Why is every single woman wearing a bobble hat topped with a fake-fur pom-pom? 
Did I miss a memo?

Barbara, email

Yes. Did it really not turn up, Barbara? It was sent registered post to every 
female in the US and the UK all the way back in November by the Council of 
Fashion Trends. What, you’ve never heard of the COFT? Well, for heavens sake, 
Barbara, where on earth did you think fashion trends come from?

Surely you never believed that guff designers love to say about how they 
“sense a feeling in the air and translate it into clothes”? Please. Five 
designers doing “nautical librarian” or “military sideboob” doesn’t just happen 
spontaneously, you know. No, these things are strictly controlled by The Firm, 
which is how designers and fashion journalists nervously refer to the COFT. 
You’ve read 1984, right? Think of it as Big Brother, but even scarier. Run by 
the terrifying Fashion Gods (Anna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>, obviously; Alexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> even more obviously), the 
COFT meets biannually to decide what every woman (and some men) must wear and 
they issue their edicts accordingly. These are then sent out to designers and 
retailers on golden scrolls, hand delivered around the world by terrified 
work-experience kids.

Occasionally, an edict is more specific than “preppy camel toe” and will 
instead single out a specific item for promotion. A few years ago – when 
Wintour was away on her once-a-century vacation – The Firm endorsed those 
ghastly animal hats, a subject this column hasno wish to return to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/feb/04/cute-animal-hat-grow-up> due 
to the PTSD. This winter, it was fake-fox-fur bobble hats. Now these, clearly, 
are preferable to the dreaded animal hats. In fact, the first dozen or so times 
I saw them I thought them rather fetching. But now it is March and I have seen 
at least 20 a day since December and I feel I must speak out.

Ladies, I understand. It’s a cold Saturday afternoon, you’re out shopping and 
you need a hat. Oh, look! Here’s an Accessorise, and here’s a wall of hats with 
fake-fox-fur bobbles. Rather nice, aren’t they? Bit different, right? No, 
they’re not. Look around! Literally everyone on the street is wearing your hat 
– you’ve all been sucked in by The Firm. Fight back, ladies, fight back! Do not 
let your lives be controlled by these shadowy forces. If you see everybody 
wearing something, wear something else – stand out! Rebel! I am theGeorge Orwell
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell> of the fashion world. Wait a 
minute, who let rats in here? Helllllllllllp!!!!!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fpom-pom-bobble-hats-fake-fox-fur-social-media-celebrity-comments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F785db110722d8b79c5f4d54d7ffc92053a9d9d3b%2F460_1409_2848_1710%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pom-pom%20bobble%20hats%20are%20a%20bit%20different%2C%20right%3F%20Nope%20%E2%80%93%20everyone%20is%20wearing%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fpom-pom-bobble-hats-fake-fox-fur-social-media-celebrity-comments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pom-pom%20bobble%20hats%20are%20a%20bit%20different%2C%20right%3F%20Nope%20%E2%80%93%20everyone%20is%20wearing%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fpom-pom-bobble-hats-fake-fox-fur-social-media-celebrity-comments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F785db110722d8b79c5f4d54d7ffc92053a9d9d3b%2F460_1409_2848_1710%2F2848.jpg>
 Joan Bakewell. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
I’ve just read an interview with a famous person in which they’ve said 
something that is clearly ridiculous. What should I do?

The World Wide Web

To social media, my good friend, you must hie thee hence! Ah, progress: how 
exciting the modern world is. Yay the web! Why, whenever I fancy, I can look up 
what Rosie Perez is up to and read a blog about “10 celebrities you thought 
were alive – but aren’t!” Truly, who needs robot maids and flying machines, as
the Jetsons <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0055683/> promised, when we can read 
Katie Hopkins’ tweets 
<https://twitter.com/KTHopkins?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 in real time?

Anyway, a new twist to this has arisen, which is tweeting, Facebooking, and 
whatever it is people do on Tumblr, to convey one’s rage about something 
someone has said in an interview.

A week and a half ago, Joan Bakewell said something a bit daft about the 
causes of anorexia in a broadsheet interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/13/joan-bakwell-criticised-eating-disorders-narcissism>
, suggesting that the disease was caused by excessive narcissism. Well, I swear 
to God, I could actually feel a frisson of national pleasure as certain people 
in this country woke up and realised they could spend their day revelling in 
what Philip Roth described as “the ecstasy of sanctimony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jan/04/philiproth>” by bitching about 
an 82-year-old woman online. The only thing to say, really, about Bakewell’s 
take on anorexia is that she made the common error of confusing the symptoms 
(obsession with thinness) with the cause (extreme unhappiness). Of the general 
trend of getting hysterical over a stupid quote someone somewhere said, I could 
say quite a lot.

Look, I like social media as much as the next bored person desperately looking 
for procrastination, but people, please. Social media, and Twitter especially, 
is powered by two specific human emotions: narcissism and shame. Thenarcissism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/02/narcissism-epidemic-self-obsession-attention-seeking-oversharing>
 is obvious, and not entirely a bad thing (a subject for another day), but this 
constant search to shame someone is just getting tiresome.

No longer can one see these flurries – whether they’re against Chrissie Hynde 
about her views on rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/30/chrissie-hynde-rape-comments> 
or Bakewell on anorexia – as a heartening fightback against anachronistic 
views. Rather, it looks increasingly like self-righteous bullying. I do wonder 
what these people do at Christmas when a grandparent says something a bit off. 
Do they run down the street screaming that their grandmother is “a racist old 
bag”, as happens on social media, or do they try to talk them like a human 
being? Because social media does allow for calm, mature direct interaction, you 
know, as opposed to just bullying and bitching. Welcome to the future, people.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <mailto:Post your 
questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York 
Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.>.
 