
What got you started?

Like so many little girls, I started dancing with ballet, and then moved into 
modern dance and improvisation. I was small during the glory years of 
20th-century dance; I had a very inspiring teacher, and she took us to a lot of 
performances.

What was your big breakthrough?

Being accepted into Mudra, the school of [choreographer] Maurice Béjart 
<http://www.bejart.ch/fr/tournee-asiatique-2011/maurice-bejart-english/>, in 
Brussels in 1980. It was quite an exceptional place at that time: an artistic 
project for young people from all over the world. After that, I went to study 
in New York; when I returned in 1982, I made my work Fase to the music ofSteve 
Reich <https://www.theguardian.com/music/steve-reich>. That was the beginning 
of a life in choreography.

You created something of a storm last week by accusing Beyoncé of plagiarising 
your work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/10/beyonce-dance-moves-new-video> 
forthe video to her new single, Countdown 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XY3AvVgDns&ob=av3n>. Do you stand by that 
accusation?

Beyoncé is not the worst copycat: she's a good dancer, a very good singer, she 
has good taste. But you can't just steal intellectual property. Might we work 
together in the future? I have never met Beyoncé, so I can't possibly say. I 
never had the ambition to have a career on MTV, that's for sure.

What have you sacrificed for your art?

I don't feel I've sacrificed anything: I've lived the life I want to live. But 
it is challenging, as a woman, to combine a career as a choreographer, dancer 
and director of a school with raising children.

Which other artists do you most admire?

William Shakespeare <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare> and JS 
Bach <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jsbach>. They're unique for the way 
they were able to speak about something that goes beyond our humanity, 
while being anchored in the human experience.

Should dance-makers be working to bring a wider audience to the art form?

You should always include your audience in your working process and in the 
performance, but that doesn't mean making compromises or concessions. A lot of 
the most interesting dance work these days is for smaller audiences. It's very 
challenging to create beauty on a large scale. That goes against the 
stra-tegies of the mainstream entertainment industry, which is concerned with 
numbers and transient experiences.

What work of art would you most like to own?

A Brancusi sculpture <http://www.tate.org.uk/modern/exhibitions/brancusi/>. I 
love the refinement and elegance of his work. I find it very noble.

What one song would work as the soundtrack to your life?

The sound of the wind. It can be both gentle and intense. And it's relentless.

In short

Born: Mechelen, Belgium; 1960.

Career: Works include Fase (1982), Rosas danst Rosas (1983), and Rain (2001). 
Her new work 3Abschied, a collaboration with choreographer Jérôme Bel, is at 
Sadler's Wells, London EC1 (0844 412 4300), on 21 and 22 November.

High point: "Last summer at the Avignon festival: my piece Cesena had 2,000 
people at 5am listening to the sound of a foot sliding in the sand."
 