
We live in a mad, mad world. If you don’t believe me, just watch the news 
tonight to see the full gamut of insanity on display. From low tragedy to high 
farce, politics, economics and celebrity culture all seem to be locked in a 
downward spiral of lunatic proportions. It’s enough to drive a poet to despair.

Mind you, this is no new thing. In the 18th century, a poet like Christopher 
Smart could be driven to the asylum by virtue of religious experiences that 
were at odds with the dictates of the rational fashion of the time. His 
contemporaries considered that, by virtue of their resistance to reason, the 
insane were a danger to society and should be held in isolation – so it was 
with Smart. During the six years he spent in mental health asylums, he wrote 
most of his very best poetry, including the wonderfulJubilate Agno 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/45173>, which 
sees the poet turn inwards for his inspiration, ignoring the bedlam of his 
surroundings and making poetry of Orphic power.

Allen Ginsberg’s Howl 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/49303> famously 
begins: “I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness” and was 
dedicated to Carl Solomon, a writer Ginsberg met and befriended in a mental 
asylum. In the litany that opens the poem, these “best minds” are the 
outsiders, those that society considers mentally ill (echoing Smart’s 
experience), but who for the poet represent the vital creative force in 
America. It’s not the people who are mad – it’s the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fposter-poems-madness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0623d1e51f2f116e2534cd0c63a111ea9fa1898%2F0_231_1805_1083%2F1805.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poster%20poems%3A%20madness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fposter-poems-madness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poster%20poems%3A%20madness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fposter-poems-madness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0623d1e51f2f116e2534cd0c63a111ea9fa1898%2F0_231_1805_1083%2F1805.jpg>
 The pure products of America / Go crazy,’ wrote William Carlos Williams. 
Photograph: Lisa Larsen/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
Writing 30 years before Howl, Ginsberg’s mentor William Carlos Williams 
reached a similar conclusion inTo Elsie 
<http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88v/to-elsie.html>, a poem that opens: 
“The pure products of America / Go crazy”. However, Williams’s outsiders are 
not the artists and dreamers that Ginsberg celebrates but “ordinary” Americans 
– the rootless who lack a sustaining culture and hold cheap aspirations. It is 
these factors that drive them mad, their displaced materialism the root of 
their illness.

Unlike Ginsberg, Williams’s experience of mental illness was very much second 
hand. Other poets had a much more direct involvement to draw on in their work. 
One such was Anne Sexton, who had serious depression for most of her life. In
Flee on Your Donkey 
<http://www.poetrysoup.com/famous/poem/7247/flee_on_your_donkey>, Sexton turns 
voluntarily to hospital as a place of refuge, a place where “everyone talks to 
his own mouth / That’s what it means to be crazy”. But she is not content to be 
a victim of her condition and prefers to question it, to try to understand what 
she is going through.

Rosemary Tonks’s mental and physical health problems ultimately let her to 
abandon literature for fundamentalist Christianity and a life of isolation. In
The Sofas, Fogs, and Cinemas 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/57641>, she 
shows early signs of that disillusionment and captures beautifully what used to 
be called “nerves”, the result of extreme sensory overload:

I have lived it, and I know too much.
My café-nerves are breaking me
With black, exhausting information.

In Northumberland House 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poems/detail/55634>, Stevie 
Smith’s chance encounter with a nice old lady on a bus becomes a study in 
difference; the sensitive child, withdrawn, just a bit too good, becomes the 
confused resident of a mental hospital in old age. Smith adds to the confusion 
by conflating the 19th-century institution with the Jacobean London home of the 
Percy family, which also went by the name Northumberland House. You can’t help 
but wonder if she knew that the hospital’s most famous patient was TS Eliot’s 
first wife, Vivienne Haigh-Wood.

I am also tempted to believe that Smith would have agreed with Emily 
Dickinson’s sentiments inMuch Madness is Divinest Sense 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/51612>. 
Dickinson points out that so much of what we consider normal is quite mad, and 
vice versa. The difference between the two is just a social construct, the 
consensus opinion of our society. This, in turn, may explain why it is we agree 
to live in a world gone mad; we simply fail to realise it.

Poetry expresses what it is to be human – it’s therapy for the soul | Adam 
O’Riordan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/17/poetry-human-therapy-mental-health>
And so, this month you are invited to contribute poems on the subject of 
madness in all its guises. Whether you write from personal experience or from 
observation, it’s an issue that has touched most of us in one way or another. 
Please share your poems here.
 