
The best city stories from around the web this week consider the UK’s housing 
crisis, explore a local democracy movement inPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>, meet teenagers learning an unusual 
skill in Tacoma and capture the increasing privatisation of London expressed 
through architecture.

We’d love to hear your responses to these stories and any others you’ve read 
recently, both at Guardian Cities and elsewhere: share your thoughts in the 
comments below.

Posters for homes


Colourful new posters installed in Westminster tube station are highlighting 
the absurdities of the UK’s housing crisis – and hopefully the many politicians 
passing on their daily commute will take keen note. Land the size of an 
escalator step,The Independent explains 
<http://i100.independent.co.uk/article/these-posters-are-a-reminder-of-the-crisis-politicians-cant-ignore--x1JjK9KrTl>
, costs more than £6,000 in central London. The city is in crisis mode, 
crippled by an increasing lack of affordability – but it’s not alone. The 
posters, created by theHomes for Britain campaign 
<http://homesforbritain.org.uk/>, hope to make the case for a commitment to 
building more affordable housing in cities across the UK.

Polish urban activism

Last year, the Polish urban movement – established in 2011 and known as Ruchy 
Miejskie – ran in local elections for the first time as a national coalition of 
city activists; it won the mayor’s seat in the city of Gorzów Wielkopolski and 
a number of city council seats in Warsaw, Poznań and Toruń.


Uncube magazine <http://www.uncubemagazine.com/magazine-15285563.html#!/page34>
 charts the rise of this civic engagement and grassroots activism movement, 
from campaigns in Poznań to shape neighbourhood planning, to calls for 
participatory budgeting in Sopot. In Warsaw, activists organised demonstrations 
for the preservation of urban green space as well as against rises in public 
transport fares and the privatisation of municipal buildings.

Ruchy Miejskie – which hopes to influence policy in order to reduce social 
inequality and exclusion, increase sustainable urban development and enhance 
local democracy – has seen noticeable victories, including participatory 
budgeting in Łódź and a public referendum in Kraków rejecting the city’s 
candidacy to host the 2022 Winter Olympic Games. “The urban movement has a long 
way to go in order to occupy a permanent place on Poland’s political map,” 
writes Igor Stokfiszewski. “But its public presence, successful campaigns and 
increasing social support show that there is a definite shift in Polish 
people’s socio-political attitudes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fposters-westminster-affordable-housing-homes-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425572542338%2F0e8ecd57-556b-4c11-a498-e4fe6f162a14-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Posters%20in%20Westminster%20call%20for%20more%20affordable%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fposters-westminster-affordable-housing-homes-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Posters%20in%20Westminster%20call%20for%20more%20affordable%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fposters-westminster-affordable-housing-homes-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425572542338%2F0e8ecd57-556b-4c11-a498-e4fe6f162a14-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Glassblowing: helping kids stay out of trouble? Photograph: Nicola Tree/Getty 
Images 
Glassblowing in Tacoma

Last month, the BBC Pop Up mobile bureau – who are travelling across towns and 
cities in the US – were in Tacoma, Washington, to find out local city stories.
Their new video <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-31654233> takes a look at 
an unlikely youth initiative to combat gang culture in the Hilltop 
neighbourhood: glassblowing. The programme brings local young people together 
to learn the art of creating glass objects. “It’s not just an arts programme,” 
one of the teenage participants explains. “It’s way more.”

The dark heart of London

Lewis Bush’s dramatic and hypnotic photographs of London’s built environment 
in Failed Architecture 
<http://www.failedarchitecture.com/photo-essay-metropole/> portray the 
capitalist forces at play in the city, at a time when the issues of exclusivity 
these structures represent arewidely condemned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/24/the-city-that-privatised-itself-to-death-london-is-now-a-set-of-improbable-sex-toys-poking-gormlessly-into-the-air>
.

As Mark Minkjan writes, the photographs are “an ominous representation of 
viagra urbanism, privatisation and the restructuring of physical and 
socioeconomic fabrics that are reshaping the face ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.”

Austin, city of the dead

How much attention do city authorities give their cemeteries? Next City delves 
into the issue 
<http://nextcity.org/features/view/how-to-live-in-the-city-of-the-dead>, 
suggesting that as a reminder of death, cemeteries are easy for cities to 
ignore. But they are also vital representations of our urban societies. “Crime, 
environmental problems, historic preservation, social class, religious 
traditions, and the thorny legacy of who is included in cities, and who is not, 
all come crashing together in urban cemeteries,” writes Anna Clark.

The city of Austin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, Texas, is 
creating its first masterplan for five municipal cemeteries, which aims to 
protect their character through repairs and planting, visitor services, and 
interpretive programming to reinstate the cemeteries as original public parks. 
“If successful, “ Clark explains, “the project will have environmental, 
architectural and cultural benefits that could change the way the city relates 
not only to its past, but to its present.”

For those interested in all things death in the city, take a look at our 
recent series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jan/21/death-in-the-city-what-happens-cemeteries-full-cost-dying>
.

Regentrification

And finally, a look at something a bit ... different. The Regendegen blog 
<http://regendegen.tumblr.com/> is posting a video every 10 days until the UK’s 
general election, which critically reflect (albeit in a trippy manner) on the 
issues of gentrification and regeneration in our cities. I’m not quite sure how 
I can sum them up, so you better take a look. There’s a unicorn. There’s a Star 
Wars-esque opening crawl in textspeak. What more could you want?
 