
I’ve been reading Peter Riley’s recent pamphlet Pennine Tales 
<https://caldervalleypoetry.com/authors/peter-riley-2/>, and the first thing to 
really strike me about it (apart from the quality of the writing) is the 
ubiquity of buses and bus trips through the poems. These are short, local 
journeys in and around Riley’s adopted home of Hebden Bridge, the kind of trip 
that makes life possible for the carless local or for anyone who fancies an 
evening in a local pub. Reading the poems made me think of the way bus journeys 
have formed part of the fabric of so many poems in the last century or so.

On National Poetry Day we should be championing the artform’s diversity | 
Bridget Minamore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/national-poetry-day-diversity>
Buses are a unique mode of transport. Unlike cars, they are shared public 
spaces, full of strangers. Unlike trains and their exclusive track system, 
buses interact with other vehicles and road users. As a result, they are the 
most social way of getting around. They also tend to be cheap, opening up new 
horizons to travellers – poets included. Indeed, forAndrei Codrescu 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/54936>, the 
Greyhound bus defines the very geography of US poetry, a geography where the 
idea of a “local” poet is almost extinct, as writers criss-cross the continent 
courtesy of General Motors.

The American fascination with long-distance bus journeys lies behind Elizabeth 
Bishop’s The Moose 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/resources/learning/core-poems/detail/48288>. 
As might be expected, it’s a journey westward, but this is New England, not the 
Great Plains, and the sights out the window are either of the sea or domestic 
scenes: gardens, women at work. And these are accompanied by the sound of 
soothing, local conversation of the kind that triggers memories. This is what 
bus travel is like, you think. Then the moose appears, a harbinger of another 
order, the world of wild nature interrupting the mobile domesticity of the 
coach with a sudden, unexpected, inexplicable “sweet sensation of joy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fposter-poems-bus-journeys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb644e84afa49f3b3dde85b8287d1be755b2c3228%2F0_407_1508_1214%2F1508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poster%20poems%3A%20bus%20journeys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fposter-poems-bus-journeys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poster%20poems%3A%20bus%20journeys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fposter-poems-bus-journeys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb644e84afa49f3b3dde85b8287d1be755b2c3228%2F0_407_1508_1214%2F1508.jpg>
 Poetry in motion … a Greyhound bus on the road. Photograph: Allan Grant/Time & 
Life Pictures/Getty Image 
Philip Levine’s trip By Bus to Fresno 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/browse?volume=174&issue=1&page=25>
 is more the material for the great American road poem, but like so many 
similar journeys it comes down to the small matter of a child asking the 
perennial question “Are we there yet?” In Levine’s case, the question evokes a 
world of memory. It is the dual memory of his own childhood and of the child on 
the bus that illuminates the poem.

The journeys in both these poems are interrupted, one by an animal, the other 
by a petrol stop.In the Baggage Room at Greyhound by Allen Ginsberg 
<http://www.poetrysoup.com/famous/poem/in_the_baggage_room_at_greyhound_3637> 
reminds us of the work that goes into a bus trip before it even starts. It’s a 
glimpse behind the scenes of the well-oiled machine, and what is shown might 
well rob the odyssey of at least some of its romance. As with so many of life’s 
pleasures, the foundation on which 1950s Greyhound journeys rested consisted of 
underpaid and overworked staff in the background. It’s an uncharacteristically 
direct political statement for a Beat, but when Ginsberg writes “I am a 
communist” near the end of the poem, it makes perfect sense in light of all 
that has gone before.

In the UK, bus journeys are, perforce, shorter and less epic. Take, for 
example, Ellen Acton’sBus Trip in Cornwall 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/browse?contentId=22291>, with 
its canvas-topped bus and shilling cream teas, and the wonderful word 
“jounced”, an amalgam of “jolted” and “bounced” that captures just the feeling 
of being in an old coach on bad roads. It’s only when you remember that the 
poem was written in the run-up to the second world war that you realise that 
this is more than just an outing – it’s a celebration of a world that’s about 
to disappear in the cataclysm that lies ahead.

You don’t get much more ordinary than a commuter trip on a London bus, but 
when Ezra Pound took just such a journey in 1912, the eyes of a young woman 
fellow-passenger summoned up memories of Paris and of a lost love. 
Interestingly,the resulting poem is in French 
<http://www.bartleby.com/300/777.html>, a neat counterbalance to the 
better-known In a Station of the Metro, in which a Parisian experience is 
recounted in English. For Pound and his audience, buses and metros were new, 
modern and exciting, not least for the opportunities they presented for close 
scrutiny of total strangers. In that, they have not changed much in the 
intervening century or so.

This month’s challenge is to post poems about buses. Whether your experience 
is of a trans-continental voyage of discovery, a modest trip around some local 
beauty spots or the daily commute, buses are excellent places to find 
inspiration. Why not share the results here?
 