
If playlists on streaming services are the future of music discovery, then why 
shouldn’t the president of the United States get in on the action? On Friday the
White House’s newly refreshed Spotify account 
<https://open.spotify.com/user/thewhitehouse> gave listeners the opportunity to 
get a glimpse of Barack Obama’s musical tastes with a pair of newly refreshed 
summer playlists –one for daytime listening 
<https://open.spotify.com/user/thewhitehouse/playlist/4RGLH5YuS6ldp7aCKaTWas>, 
the other more evening-appropriate 
<https://open.spotify.com/user/thewhitehouse/playlist/3fAriv8eMWELCwbWrhMKy2>. 

Taken together, the brightly hued daytime playlist and its more subdued 
evening counterpart offer what could be viewed as coalition-building. The 
playlists are dominated, probably rightly, by the American-bred genre known 
colloquially as soul – the daytime playlist opens with The Temptations’ 
wrenching Ain’t Too Proud To Beg, while Erykah Badu’s winding Woo closes the 
nighttime offering, and titans like Al Green,Aretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin>, Beyoncé, John Legend and 
Stevie Wonder dot the playlists as well.

Classic rock staples like the Rolling Stones (represented by the foreboding 
Gimme Shelter) andBob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> (whose 
Tombstone Blues is sandwiched between Talib Kweli’s project Reflection Eternal 
and Bob Marley’s So Much Trouble in the World) appear, as do new-millennium 
rock outfits like the brainy Brooklyn outfit Okkervil River and the strum-happy 
Colorado outfit The Lumineers. Jazz is also represented; John Coltrane’s 
expansive rework of the Rodgers & Hammerstein classic My Favorite Things opens 
the evening playlist, while Miles Davis’s meditative Flamenco Sketches is its 
penultimate track. And there’s even a shout-out to Frank Sinatra, whose 
signature tune The Best is Yet to Come could be seen as an optimistic look 
forward to the Obama’s post-White House life.

Those who have put together mix tapes or playlists know that any collection is 
going to have a couple of “gimmes” – obvious tracks that speak directly to the 
playlist’s themes and that might have been a bit overplayed thanks to their 
being added to somebody’s canon in the recent past. Obama’s playlists have a 
handful of these, most of them pretty excusable. Sly & The Family Stone’s Hot 
Fun in the Summertime, which appears on the daytime playlist, might seem a bit 
cruel to cubicle-dwellers, though, since that song conjures a deep yearning to 
flee the indoors. Van Morrison’s Moondance, despite being constantly wrung out 
by classic-rock radio and adult-contemporary stations alike, still evokes the 
possibility offered by summertime’s shorter, sultrier nights. Meanwhile, Nina 
Simone’s slow-burn Feelin’ Good retains its power even after being endlessly 
mined by pop acts and American Idol hopefuls.

And there are even a couple of opportunities for discovery inside, songs that 
might surprise even the deepest crate (or search function) diggers. The 
Philadelphia outfit Low Cut Connie’s rollicking, Chicago-saluting Boozophilia 
has a loose end-of-summer feeling, its rolling piano riff and yell-along chorus 
sounding like a party’s about to break out. The glowing, barely there Is Your 
Love Big Enough? by thePrince-approved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/31/lianne-la-havas-interview-prince>
 British growler Lianne La Havas is a highlight of the nighttime playlist, and 
it flows perfectly into Al Green’s whispered, skeletal How Can You Mend A 
Broken Heart.

In a time when “rock and roll” is in enough flux to be in somewhat desperate 
need of some new canon-building – bringing in hip-hop’s insistent lyricism, 
soul’s emotional resonance, jazz’s constant reinvention of musical form, pop’s 
punch and even those newer acts who fashion themselves after Dylan and Jagger, 
Obama’s playlist offers a different take on American music, one that evokes the 
spirit of the country in a way that’s inclusive of without feeling tokenistic 
while also being full of ear worms from all over the postwar era. Maybe when 
he’s done in the Oval Office, he can start working to fix classic rock.
 