
Between December 2007 and June 2009, our country went through its longest, and 
by most measures, worst economic recession since the Depression more than 75 
years ago. In coping with the human impact, our food bank based here inAustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, Texas, has seen the food lines 
grow longer. We have distributed more food in the past three years than the 
first 20 years of the organizations existence.

According to census data released Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/20/us-census-data-recovery-poverty>
, nationwide the number of people in poverty has grown to 48.5 million, or 
almost 16% of the population, the highest poverty number in the more than 50 
years that it has been recorded. And while the data, although grim, appears to 
indicate the economy is slowly rebounding, it also provides some insight into 
what's working in our fight to feed the hungry, and what to expect in the 
coming months and years.

Food stamps work. According to the latest figures 
<http://www.cbpp.org/research/index.cfm?fa=topic&id=36>, food stamps lifted 3.9 
million individuals out of poverty, including 1.7 million children, keeping 
food on the table for many families. Food stamps are working exactly as they 
should – effectively responding to the economic realities of the time. Without 
them, the emergency hunger relief network in this country could not cope.

The slowly rising tide of economic recovery is not lifting all boats. Working 
poor and middle-income families continue to be disproportionately impacted by 
the recession. Unless you were very near the top, incomes have declined for 
most Americans: the median is down. This meanslow- and middle-income families 
will take longer to recover from the economic downturn 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/09/13/us/13census-doc.html?ref=us>, 
and we expect our food bank will continue to see long lines for quite some time.

Texas, where I work, has a long history with high poverty – which needs to 
end. Texas has the sixth highest rate of poverty in the nation, nearly 3% 
higher than the national rate. One in four Texas children live in poverty, and 
even here in Austin – a city often touted as a thriving national success – one 
in five Austinites lived in poverty last year.According to research by the 
Center for Public Policy Priorities (pdf) 
<http://cppp.org/files/2/EO_2012_09_ST_CPSrelease.pdf>, Texas has owned the 
title for having a poverty rate higher than the national average for 30 years 
running.

Central Texas has an even longer road ahead. Austin is the third fastest 
growing largest city 
<http://www.statesman.com/news/local/austin-round-rock-among-nations-fastest-growing-cities-2405620.html>
 in the nation. Disproportionately poor populations, includingminority children 
<http://www.statesman.com/news/local/austin-area-census-figures-reflect-hispanic-youth-trend-2186913.html?cxtype=rss_ece_frontpage>
 andolder adults 
<http://www.statesman.com/news/local/austin-aging-latest-census-data-show-1498635.html>
 also happen to be some of the fastest growing populations in Central Texas: 
41% of the clients of our food bank are children. That's 20,000 kids every 
week. And last year, our food program for older adults served 20% more seniors 
over the year before.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Texas is third in the nation of 
states with the largest share of its hourly workforce earning minimum wage or 
less. The City of Austin demographerRyan Robinson recently said 
<http://www.statesman.com/news/local/in-texas-working-poor-families-struggle-to-get-2400676.html>
:

"We've got two rapidly diverging communities on our hands. One community where 
life is great, where really, really good jobs are being created. Others have an 
extremely different experience in Austin."

This is a real tale of two cities – and of poverty and hunger in America. The 
harsh reality for millions of low wage-earning Americans is that even with a 
job, or two, they struggle to put food on the table and make ends meet. Here at 
the food bank, we expect to be busy for some time.
 