
Welcome to theguardian.com review of the 2014-15 Premier League season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/premier-league-2014-15-review-of-the-season>
. Now that the campaign has ended we would like you to help us choose your 
favourite goal, the best referee and the best manager, and other winners in a 
total of 10 categories.

We have nominated some contenders, but this is just to get the discussion 
going: we would like your suggestions so that we can compile the best into 
final polls that you can vote on. The polls will be published at midday on 
Tuesday 26 May, so please tell us what you think. Thanks

Liverpool 

There is a case for saying that Liverpool would have been better off sticking 
the Luis Suárez swag on a random selection in the 3.10 at Aintree than in 
splurging it on the likes of Dejan Lovren and Mario Balotelli, who, it is fair 
to say, have endured difficult debut seasons at Anfield after big transfers.
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were dire in the 
first third of the season as Brendan Rodgers grappled for a new method and 
then, just as it seemed they had got their act together and could challenge for 
a return to the Champions League (in which they were terrible this term), they 
fell apart again, leading to suggestions that they need more major surgery in 
the summer.

Newcastle United

You could spend all day ticking off the symptoms of Newcastle’s regression 
this season – such as, say, their manager accusing one of their players of 
getting sent off on purpose; the awfulness of the 4-0 defeat at Southampton 
even before the awfulness of most of their performances under John Carver; Mike 
Ashley; or the drop in quality of their French imports, as personified by 
Emmanuel Riviére, whose fall when clean through against Leicester was a telling 
snapshot of his campaign, though, in fairness, he kept plugging away and scored 
his first goals two weeks later, on his 22nd league appearance.

Queens Park Rangers

Where to pin the blame? On Harry Redknapp for failing to glean a single point 
away from Loftus Road before leaving mid-season? On a squad containing, 
according to Joey Barton, “bad eggs” and some players who too often seemed out 
of their depth and/or too entrenched in their comfort zone? Or on a chairman 
who insisted he had learned from past mistakes but saw his team ignominiously 
relegated from the top flight for the second successive time? This season has 
truly been a collective flop atQPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr>.

Ángel Di María

Perhaps you can cut Radamel Falcao a little slack – he has not quite been the 
same since suffering serious knee ligament damage last year – but what is Ángel 
Di María’s excuse? The most expensive signing in Premier League history made a 
terrific start to his career at Manchester United but faded so badly that he 
can no longer even get a starting place ahead of the reborn Ashley Young and 
there is talk that the club want to offload him this summer.

Paul Lambert 

Aston Villa began the season brightly and the club’s owners were so enthused 
that they handed the manager a new contract. Villa then embarked on a wretched 
run of two wins in 21 matches, plummeting down the table and stinking the place 
out with a strain of football that yielded an average of less than half a goal 
per Premier League game. His assistant, Roy Keane, quit in November and Lambert 
was put out of his misery in February, after which Tim Sherwood arrived and 
showed that getting the team to play enterprising football was not impossible, 
after all.

• Check out the other categories

Pundit of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-pundit-of-season>

Match of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-match-of-season>

Signing of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-signing-of-season>

Manager of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-manager-of-season>

Innovations for the future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-innovations-future>

Player of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-player-of-season>

Goal of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-goal-of-season>

Gripe of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-gripe-of-season>

Referee of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-referee-of-season>
 