
Welcome to theguardian.com review of the 2014-15 Premier League season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/premier-league-2014-15-review-of-the-season>
. Now that the campaign has ended we would like you to help us choose your 
favourite goal, the best referee and the best manager, and other winners in a 
total of 10 categories.

We have nominated some contenders, but this is just to get the discussion 
going: we would like your suggestions so that we can compile the best into 
final polls that you can vote on. The polls will be published at midday on 
Tuesday 26 May, so please tell us what you think. Thanks

Philippe Coutinho v Southampton 

In teeming rain, three minutes into Liverpool’s 2-0 win over Southampton at St 
Mary’s in February, Philippe Coutinho ran on to a pass from Lazar Markovic, 
took the ball in his stride and with a minimum of back-lift, pulled the trigger 
from 30 yards with his right foot. Despite making a valiant effort to get 
across his goal, Fraser Forster was powerless to stop this surface-to-air 
screamer as it curled beyond his fingertips towards the top left-hand corner 
and cannoned in off the underside of the cross-bar.

Ángel Di María v Leicester

During a season in which little went right for British football’s record 
signing, this was one of few personal highlights. Running on to a Wayne Rooney 
through ball to the edge of the Leicester City penalty area, Di María eschewed 
the option of attempting to take on defender Wes Morgan, choosing instead to 
pull off the far more difficult option of putting his head over the ball and 
bamboozling the helpless Kasper Schmeichel with the kind of flop shot any 
golfer would be proud to have in his repertoire. As a piece of improvisational 
genius it was second to very little, even ifManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> did go on to lose one 
of the more surreal games of the season 5-3.

Bobby Zamora v West Bromwich Albion

Having lost nine of their previous 10 Premier League matches, Queens Park 
Rangers went into their match against West Bromwich Albion at the Hawthorns 
with confidence and expectations snake-belly low. You wouldn’t have known it 
from their performance, mind. Having roared into a 2-0 lead courtesy of goals 
from Eduardo Vargas and Charlie Austin, Bobby Zamora all but sealed victory 
just before half-time with a volley of such nonchalance that spectators could 
have been forgiven for they were watching an exhibition match. Running on to a 
Matt Phillips pass down the right channel, the 34-year-old out-paced Joleon 
Lescott and then, without so much as breaking stride, lobbed the ball over Boaz 
Myhill with a glorious flick off the outside of his left foot. “Bobby Zamora 
probably hasn’t scored a better goal his entire career,” said Matt Le Tissier, 
who was watching the game for Sky Sports. “It was brilliant, and that was game 
over.”

Charlie Adam v Chelsea

Have that, Thibaut! Inside his own half, Stoke midfielder Charlie Adam picked 
up the ball, advanced a couple of steps towards the edge of the centre-circle 
and unleashed a murderous and spectacular left-footed drive, chopping across 
the ball with extreme prejudice after spotting Chelsea goalkeeper Thibaut 
Courtois off his line. Back-pedalling more furiously than a Ukip parliamentary 
candidate who’s been caught making off-colour remarks at a rally, the Belgian 
managed to get a hand to the ball but was powerless to stop it sailing into his 
goal at the end of its 66-yard odyssey. “I didn’t enjoy it, but it was a goal 
that every top player in the world would love to score,” said José Mourinho 
after the game.

Jason Puncheon v Liverpool

Every list of goal of the season contenders worth its salt needs a decent 
free-kick or two in it and few players can strike a dead ball as well as Jason 
Puncheon. With his team at Anfield to rain on Steven Gerrard’s farewell parade, 
the Crystal Palace midfielder stole the Liverpool captain’s thunder with a 
curling left-footed effort that left Simon Mignolet rooted to the spot as it 
curled away from Alberto Moreno’s leap in the Liverpool defensive wall. 
Perfectly struck to the point of being unstoppable, the ball ended in repose in 
the bottom right-hand corner via the side-netting. It was Puncheon’s third goal 
from four direct free-kicks he’d taken this season, proving the Palace man is 
no one-hit wonder.

• Check out the other categories:

Pundit of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-pundit-of-season>

Match of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-match-of-season>

Signing of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-signing-of-season>

Manager of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-manager-of-season>

Innovations for the future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-innovations-future>

Player of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-player-of-season>

Flop of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-flop-of-season>

Gripe of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-gripe-of-season>

Referee of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/premier-league-2014-15-referee-of-season>
 