
Pressure is mounting within the BBC to negotiate the exit of one of its most 
senior executives Alan Yentob within the coming months as the fallout from the
Kids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> scandal 
continued to grow.

Kids Company has also come under pressure from a new report from Southwark 
Council that is highly critical of the charity and some of its actions that 
were defended by Yentob in parliament on Thursday.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> publicly defended its creative 
director on Friday, a day after his appearance before MPs, but sources say that 
internally it is viewed that Yentob’s position is becoming increasingly 
“untenable”.

Kids Company chief accused by MPs of ‘non-stop spiel of psychobabble’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/15/kids-company-chiefs-deny-cash-willy-nilly-camila-batmanghelidjh>
One source said that the direction of travel within the corporation was that 
bosses and Yentob, 68, would seek some form of “way out” for him next year.

“It is not for the BBC to make judgments about what did or did not happen at 
Kids Company,” said a BBC spokesman. “Our job is to report the story which is 
what we have been doing. Alan has made, and continues to make, a valuable 
contribution as creative director and a programme maker at the BBC.”

Yentob told the Times that that any suggestion he was leaving the BBC was 
“ridiculous and completely untrue”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbatmanghelidjh-accused-of-torrent-of-verbal-ectoplasm-by-mp-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444909211549%2FKP_545381_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batmanghelidjh%20accused%20of%20'torrent%20of%20verbal%20ectoplasm'%20by%20MP%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbatmanghelidjh-accused-of-torrent-of-verbal-ectoplasm-by-mp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batmanghelidjh%20accused%20of%20%27torrent%20of%20verbal%20ectoplasm%27%20by%20MP%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbatmanghelidjh-accused-of-torrent-of-verbal-ectoplasm-by-mp-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444909211549%2FKP_545381_crop_640x360.jpg>
Alan Yentob and Camila Batmanghelidjh face questions on Thursday from MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/oct/15/batmanghelidjh-accused-of-torrent-of-verbal-ectoplasm-by-mp-video>
However, his comments in front of MPs about the Kids Company scandal, 
alongside charity founderCamila Batmanghelidjh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>, on Thursday 
continue to fuel accusations of abuse of position and negative publicity for 
the BBC.

Yentob admitted that he had stood beside a Radio 4 producer while 
Batmanghelidjih was interviewed on the Today programme in July. “If it was 
intimidating I regret it,” he told MPs.

He also admitted to MPs that he had telephoned a staff member at Newsnight, to 
ask him to delay a report critical of financial management at Kids Company.


Yentob has previously denied he tried to influence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/05/bbc-denies-alan-yentob-influenced-newsnight-kids-company-report>
 the programme.

Further pressure has come in a highly critical report from the director of 
social services in Southwark Council which has just been released. David 
Quirke-Thornton, strategic director for children and adults, accused Kids 
Company of repeatedly refusing to hand over details of their clients for 
safeguarding by the council after the charity’s closure. He highlighted as an 
“excuse” the use of data protection which Yentob said on Wednesday was the 
reason thousands of files on clients were not handed to Southwark Council. 
Quirke-Thornton said the failure to hand over the files to the local authority 
could put young people at risk.

“Data protection must never be used as an excuse in such circumstances,” he 
said. Thornton also condemned a worst case scenario of the charity’s closure 
which was defended by Yentob at the select committee which claimed the local 
area would “descend into savagery” rioting and arson without Kids Company.

Quirke-Thornton said – in a report to be discussed by the council next week – 
the language was “unjustifiable and offensive.” He criticised Kids Company 
leaders for withholding information from the local authority. “It is essential 
... that such organisations cooperate fully with local authorities and assist 
them rather than hinder them...impediments such as failure to provide client 
details potentially puts at risk the safety and welfare of children, young 
people and vulnerable adults.”


Yentob has been at the BBC since 1968, been creative director for a decade and 
presented almost two dozen seasons of BBC1’s Imagine, building up a £6m-plus 
pension pot.


Sources speculate whether Yentob may transition away from his £183,000-a-year 
executive role and be left with his presenting duties, for which he is 
reportedly paid a further six-figure salary.

Known as “Mr Fixit”, he has helped steer the BBC through crises such as the 
Lord McAlpine scandal, but has increasingly come under fire himself.

In an interview last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/16/alan-yentob-bbc-compete-google-apps>
 he referred to veterans such as himself and 64-year-old BBC director general 
Tony Hall as “the oldies”.

“Tony and I are very close – I don’t feel there’s any topic we can’t raise 
with each other,” he said.


Yentob is proving a PR disaster for the corporation at a time when it is 
facing tough negotiations with government over a renewal of its royal charter.

However, with the announcement of the sudden departure of Danny Cohen, the 
BBC’s director of television, the corporation can ill afford to lose another 
top executive from its TV operation.

 