
Children of all backgrounds who receive a preschool education are almost twice 
as likely to go on to sitAS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels>, according to a study by 
Oxford University.

The research, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/pre-school-and-early-home-learning-effects-on-a-level-outcomes>
 funded by the government’s department for education, also found that children 
who go to preschool were significantly more likely to take four or more 
AS-levels, suggesting that far more preschoolers end up taking an academic 
route into university than those who do not have the same educational start.

Preschool, also known as nursery school, refers to an educational 
establishment that offers early education to under-fives prior to the start of 
primary school.

Children who experience stimulated learning activities at home – such as 
singing and nursery rhymes, learning the alphabet, reading, playing with 
numbers and letters, or going on visits to the library – when they are under 
five are also more likely to achieve better A-level grades, researchers found.

The study is the latest report to be published as part of the EPPSE (effective 
preschool, primary and secondary education) project, launched in 1997. It 
followed 3,000 children from the age of three to 18 to identify the factors 
that can predict a child’s academic success, particularly the effects of a 
preschool education and a child’s early years home environment.

Pamela Sammons, principal investigator at Oxford’s education department, said: 
“Our findings reveal that preschool boosts a child’s chances of doing well at 
school and going on to take advanced level examinations. This is important 
because AS- andA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> are a 
prerequisite for most university and college courses.


“Our research also shows that a child’s educational experience at home when 
they are under five really matters to their later academic success. 
Unfortunately, not all children get the same support from their parents and for 
these pupils, preschool is especially important. Our findings prove that an 
investment in preschools pays off, with particular benefits for children from 
disadvantaged backgrounds.”

Kathy Sylva, professor of educational psychology at Oxford, who also worked on 
the research, added: “We think that high-quality early education makes the 
child a more effective learner – not just better at letters and numbers. 
High-quality education turns the child on to learning.”

The findings come after an influential Conservative pressure group said 
parents should be denied child benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/18/no-pre-school-no-child-benefit-tory-thinktank-says-in-report-on-poverty>
 if they did not send their children to pre-school education from the age of 
three.

Bright Blue said its proposals were designed to ensure disadvantaged children 
received pre-school education to prepare them for school. It argued that just 
as the government was planning to withdraw child benefit from parents of 
truanting children, the same disincentives should apply to parents who did not 
take up the opportunity of free pre-school education.

Ministers said they were doubling free preschool childcare or education to 30 
hours a week. A survey last year by a children’s charity found thatmany Sure 
Start centres face closure because of budget cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/12/sure-start-childrens-centres-face-worst-year-of-budget-cuts>
, with £830m less being spent on them in the three years from 2011-12.
 