
A group that campaigns for press freedom has become the latest organisation to 
condemn WikiLeaks for publication ofthe leaked Afghanistan war logs <http:>.

In an open letter to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange 
<http://en.rsf.org/united-states-open-letter-to-wikileaks-founder-12-08-2010,38130.html>
, Reporters Without Borders accused him of "incredible irresponsibility" for 
publishing the tens of thousands of documents "indiscriminately". WikiLeaks 
initially withheld around 15,000 of more than 92,000 reports to protect 
informants but Assange revealed yesterday it is preparing to publish them, once 
the organisation has finished checking them all.

The letter from Reporters Without Borders' secretary-general, Jean-François 
Julliard, and the organisation's Washington representative, Clothilde Le Coz, 
acknowledged that WikiLeaks had played a "useful role" in the past, citing its 
publication of a video of the killing of two employees of the Reuters news 
agency and other civilians byUS military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> personnel in Baghdad in July 
2007. But it criticised Assange for putting the lives of people who had 
collaborated with US and Nato forces at risk and providing ammunition for 
governments to put the internet under surveillance.

"Revealing the identity of hundreds of people who collaborated with the 
coalition inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is 
highly dangerous," they wrote. "It would not be hard for the Taliban and other 
armed groups to use these documents to draw up a list of people for targeting 
in deadly revenge attacks."

They said that the publication of the documents "reflects a real problem of 
methodology and, therefore, of credibility".

On Twitter, WikiLeaks responded by deriding Reporters Without Borders as 
"Reporters San Fact" <http://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/21002667193>, 
accusing the organisation of issuing "some idiot statement, based on a bunch of 
quotes we never made".

Assange said yesterday WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> 
was about halfway through reviewing the remaining 15,000 documents but gave no 
timeframe for their publication.

The Pentagon, which has demanded that WikiLeaks delete the cache of secret US 
military files, reacted with anger to the prospect of further documents being 
published. Pentagon press secretary Geoff Morrell said: "It would compound a 
mistake that has already put far too many lives at risk," he said. The Pentagon 
believes it has identified the documents in question and Morrelltold the 
Washington Post 
<http://voices.washingtonpost.com/checkpoint-washington/2010/08/pentagon_undisclosed_wikileak.html>
 they were "potentially more explosive, more sensitive".

Reporters Without Borders' criticism follows a letter sent to WikiLeaks by 
five human rights organisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/10/afghanistan-war-logs-wikileaks-human-rights-groups>
, including Amnesty International and the Open Society Institute, expressing 
their concerns about the biggest leak in US military history.

Assange, replied to the letter by asking the groups concerned to help 
WikiLeaks redact the names. He also threatened to expose Amnesty if it refused 
to provide staff to help with the task,according to the Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703428604575419580947722558.html?mod=WSJEUROPE_hpp_MIDDLESecondNews>
.

The initial documents were shown to the Guardian, the New York Times and the 
German weekly Der Spiegel and they published edited extracts with details of 
the individuals removed.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 