
Kids Company let down by its trustees | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/11/kids-company-let-down-by-its-trustees>
He began the week looking forward to a break in Tuscany and ended it barely 
containing his emotions as he jabbed a finger at the Channel 4 presenter Matt 
Frei andrefused to resign his position at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/07/bbc-alan-yentob-kids-company>. 
For Alan Yentob, the creative director of the BBC and chair of trustees for the 
charity Kids Company for 18 years – a man who in a long career at the 
corporation has remained determinedly unruffled – it has been a long seven days.

As chair of the charity at the centre of a media storm for weeks, he has come 
under growing pressure to explain howKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> came grinding to a halt this 
week, leaving thousands of children in a vacuum of care.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjESzCHdWoAU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjESzCHdWoAU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjESzCHdWoAU&media=>
 The chairman of embattled charity Kids Company has spoken out for the first 
time, telling Channel 4 News that he denies there was financial mismanagement 
at the charity and saying that he hasn’t abused his BBC position. 
And it has begun to show. Yentob lost his cool during an interview on Channel 4
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> News on Thursday night, raising 
his voice to Frei and pointing a finger at the presenter as he spoke.

BBC's Alan Yentob 'not considering' resigning over Kids Company claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/07/bbc-alan-yentob-kids-company> 
Yentob has stood alongside the chief executive, Camila Batmanghelidjh, at Kids 
Company almost from the beginning. He has seen it grow from its original London 
base in Southwark into a huge organisation with 36,000 children on its books 
and bases in Liverpool and Bristol.

 In the last few days he has consistently denied any financial mismanagement 
of the charity, insisting that auditors always passed its accounts. He has not 
addressed why the advice of the charity’s own financial directors to build up 
some financial reserves was not heeded, or why civil servants latterly felt 
giving more millions of pounds of public funds to the charity was not value for 
money. “There’s no financial mismanagement,” he said on Channel 4 News 
repeatedly. “Am I allowed to say that?”

When challenged about whether there was a conflict of interest in his role as 
the BBC’s creative director and the way he contacted the team at Newsnight to 
challenge them on their planned story about Kids Company, he denied any such 
conflict. When pressed, he apologised for becoming emotional and said: “I have 
had to watch what has happened to hundreds of thousands of children. I will 
answer your question in due course.”

Emotions – and perhaps regrets – are certainly running high. Yentob last month 
told the Evening Standard, with whom Kids Company had a close relationship, 
that he was sorry as chair of trustees that the charity had not built up a 
financial reserve to fall back on, saying it was “probably a mistake to operate 
hand tomouth with no reserves”, and admitting that the charity would need 
reserves of at least £3m in the future.

David Cameron defends government decision to give Kids Company £3m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/07/kids-company-david-cameron-defends-government-decision-3m>
At one point early in the week he was interrupted as he sat drinking coffee 
near theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and chased by at least one 
reporter. Since the Kids Company crisis escalated a few weeks ago, his phone 
number has been given, friends say, to “everyone”, and he has become a big part 
of the story.


In the interview with Frei on Thursday, his first since the charity closed on 
Wednesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/kids-company-closure-6000-children-have-lost-support>
, Yentob said he saw no reason to resign from the BBC. He will stay in his post 
there, and as for Kids Company, he said he will work to make sure the young 
people find alternative support, which he believes is the priority now.

There have not been any apologies this week or admissions of mistakes in the 
handling of a charity that was in the top 5% nationwide in terms of income, had 
a 77% increase in funding over five years, and could call on a wide range of 
high-profile politicians and celebrities to back it.

Many much smaller charities engaging in similar work with marginalised young 
men and women would have given anything for a slice of Kids Company’s funding. 
Many on a fraction of the income are still struggling on.
 