
“I don’t want to scene-steal,” Felicity Montagu tells me. But perhaps she just 
can’t help herself, given the whirlwind of accents – Aussie, northern, estuary, 
RP – that she uses to animate her anecdotes in our hour together. Certainly, 
she has pinched scenes from some of comedy’s biggest names – whether as Lynn, 
the tight-lipped, long-suffering PA to Alan Partridge, or as Sue, the 
voluptuous, cake-scoffing vicar’s wife inNighty Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oLfzskRj5Yo>. Then there’s that hugely 
satisfying scene <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xfwBwk7k3Gs> in the first 
Bridget Jones film, where Montagu’s sloaney Perpetua – all Alice band, pearls 
and raised eyebrows – rises sharply from her swivel chair to witness Bridget 
quit her job. “Because if she gives one inch,” snarls Perpetua, “I’m going to 
fire her bony little bottom anyway for being totally spineless!”

We meet in a south London rehearsal room where Montagu is preparing to appear 
on stage in a new adaptation of the book that inspired Bridget Jones:Pride and 
Prejudice <https://openairtheatre.com/production/pride-and-prejudice-2016>. She 
plays – who else? – Mrs Bennet, joining the roll-call of character actors from 
Alison Steadman to Brenda Blethyn who have brought those infamous Longbourn 
nerves to life. The danger, Montagu says, “is overplaying the comedy. Mrs 
Bennet is a woman who is just ferociously in a hurry to get her five daughters 
married because of the poorhouse. If her husband dies, she knows she could be 
out on her arse.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkmpwe80FFsU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkmpwe80FFsU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkmpwe80FFsU&media=>
 Watch Felicity Montagu in I’m Alan Partridge 
From Armando Iannucci to Julia Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/06/julia-davis-i-like-that-really-repressed-stuff-you-can-kick-against>
, Montagu has worked with some of the best comedy writers in the business – and 
Jane Austen is no different. That is to say, she’s brutally honest, sometimes 
to the point of cruelty. But Montagu balks in rehearsals when people say how 
awful her character is. “No! Mrs Bennet just comes from her own perspective. 
She’s really only herself at three in the morning when she’s pacing the bedroom 
or the parlour, worrying about stuff. She wants to make things happen, but she 
gets things wrong. She’s headstrong and temperamental. And she’s very 
attention-seeking because, socially, she’s feels quite inadequate.”


As for Austen, Montagu thinks she was “a very profound writer, but I don’t 
think I’d have liked her as a person. She had a very cruel eye on women. And 
some of her characters are so sententious, like Elizabeth Bennet. She’s not 
funny, she’s serious. She’s a good girl but I do think: lighten up, love! 
People take themselves so seriously, people who are control freaks, people who 
are narcissists. Life is too short – I lost my mother, just like that. I was 
lucky I was 29. I wasn’t 13, I wasn’t eight. But you have to treasure what you 
have and be joyful, as much as you can. And when terrible things happen to you, 
you have to say, well, just let’s move on and shut the doors on it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33a03c7fa6713e42591f688258a700699ccc957d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pride%20and%20Partridge%3A%20Felicity%20Montagu's%20comedy%20gold%20with%20Coogan%20and%20Austen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pride%20and%20Partridge%3A%20Felicity%20Montagu%27s%20comedy%20gold%20with%20Coogan%20and%20Austen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33a03c7fa6713e42591f688258a700699ccc957d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Felicity Montagu (centre) in rehearsal for Pride and Prejudice at Regent’s 
Park theatre in London. Photograph: Johan Persson 
The youngest of five children, Montagu grew up in Yorkshire, her mother a 
beguiling, intellectual woman from Brisbane, her British father an army man 
from a long line of army men, who served in Burma and India before going into 
industry. The pair met on a blind date at a party. “She stood at the top of the 
steps and he knew she was the one,” says Montagu. “Even if they fought like 
buggery sometimes.” Three months after her mother died of cancer, Montagu gave 
birth to a daughter, Olivia. A son, Luke, followed. She is divorced from their 
father, TV and radio producer Alan Nixon, but “we’re still a team” she says. 
“My children make me laugh a lot.”

She and Olivia recently teamed up for a BBC Radio 4 series, Guilt Trip 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07mhzqx>, in which they played a fictional 
mother and daughter on a two-week sponsored walk along the Thames Path. The 
show was inspired by a package holiday they had taken to Fuerteventura in the 
Canary Islands. “We’ve always had a rough and tumble relationship,” says 
Montagu. “Forever catching up with each other because I was grieving when I 
gave birth and then I got very ill and was in hospital for weeks.” A pre-fame
Gina Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/jan/29/familyandrelationships.healthandwellbeing>
, the childcare guru, was Olivia’s baby nurse. “She was whipped away and taken 
home because I couldn’t breastfeed her. It was a strange beginning.”

Montagu had an easier start. Her mother sent her to dance lessons from an 
early age – “she didn’t want me to get fat” – while her father marched her to 
the bank manager when, at 18, she announced she wanted to act. Despite his 
reservations, he agreed to be her guarantor and Montagu made good on the loan. 
After drama school, she was cast in Terry Johnson’s Unsuitable for Adults at 
the Bush in London. Roles at the Royal Court and the National followed before 
the first of many television credits, on Victoria Wood Presents. “Bless her 
cotton socks,” she says of the late comedian. “She’s a terrible loss for my 
generation. As a woman, she made an enormous impact. She got out there and 
really did it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bf32c0f3b34fe6bef7986f23dfe9226a53868ea%2F153_349_3242_2483%2F3242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pride%20and%20Partridge%3A%20Felicity%20Montagu's%20comedy%20gold%20with%20Coogan%20and%20Austen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pride%20and%20Partridge%3A%20Felicity%20Montagu%27s%20comedy%20gold%20with%20Coogan%20and%20Austen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bf32c0f3b34fe6bef7986f23dfe9226a53868ea%2F153_349_3242_2483%2F3242.jpg>
 Rowan Atkinson as St John Quartermaine and Felicity Montagu as Melanie Garth 
in Quartermaine’s Terms, directed by Richard Eyre, in 2013. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Montagu’s CV is also characterised by women-led casts and companies – from the 
black TV comedy Suburban Shootout to the recentAnn Summers drama, Brief 
Encounters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/05/brief-encounters-review-forces-of-nature-with-brian-cox>
 – but she’ll always be recognised for Alan Partridge. Thinking she was up for 
a bit part, she went to the audition just to meet Iannucci and Steve Coogan. To 
her disappointment, neither turned up. Instead, she was asked to improvise a 
spiel about Lynn’s home life and, on the spot, concocted a whole backstory 
about her mum not approving of her boss. Improvisation, she says, comes easily. 
“I just lie against a tree and start fantasising because it’s fun. It doesn’t 
seem like work to me.”

Coogan is a “pixie” – her word – but a great teacher. “Not that I’m going to 
talk much about him,” she says, a tad defensively of hermuch scrutinised co-star
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2015/oct/02/steve-coogan-interview-memoir-easily-distracted-drugs-and-strippers-video>
, “but I learned a lot. Steve talks about stakes and intentions and objectives 
– there’s an underbelly that needs to be there. If the comedy is going to work 
you have to play the subtext; the fears and the follies. Even Tom and Jerry – 
it’s fantastically funny, but it starts from the truth.”


The Partridge team were “pushing the limits all the time”, she says. “They 
take it deadly seriously because it’s a deadly serious business. But I would 
always give them something if they wanted it.” She cites an example she’s 
particularly proud of: “I nicked some of those little blue plastic shoe covers 
you get at the swimming pool. I thought it would be funny if Lynn walked on to 
Alan’s building site wearing them. I kept waiting and waiting for my chance. 
Armando said: ‘In!’ And I walked in with those on my feet and the whole floor 
just fell apart.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedbe8a209d85347151b839bb522f6c04fffbc7cd%2F0_0_6144_4096%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pride%20and%20Partridge%3A%20Felicity%20Montagu's%20comedy%20gold%20with%20Coogan%20and%20Austen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pride%20and%20Partridge%3A%20Felicity%20Montagu%27s%20comedy%20gold%20with%20Coogan%20and%20Austen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpride-partridge-felicity-montagu-coogan-austen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedbe8a209d85347151b839bb522f6c04fffbc7cd%2F0_0_6144_4096%2F6144.jpg>
 ‘If the comedy is going to work you have to play the subtext’ … Felicity 
Montagu. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
Thanks to her screen success, Montagu had a long hiatus from the stage until, 
three years ago, Richard Eyre wrote to her asking her to be in his revival of 
Simon Gray’sQuartermaine’s Terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/30/quartermaines-terms-wyndhams-london-review>
 opposite Rowan Atkinson in the West End. She hid the note. “My agent called 
and said: ‘Fliss, have you had a letter?” I said: ‘I get a lot of letters.’ He 
said: ‘Don’t fuck about with me, Felicity!’ Montagu cackles. “I knew I had to 
do it. My father said: ‘You must!’ Even my father had heard of Richard Eyre!”

Eyre gave her a pep talk in the green room on press night. “I said: ‘Richard, 
this is the moment I’ve been absolutely dreading. Give me my notes.’ He said: 
‘I have no notes. Go fuck ’em.’ So I did.” She and a fellow cast-member 
accidentally tripped over each other one night to huge laughter from the 
audience. “I thought: thank God Richard isn’t in. But at the end of the night, 
there he was with his little notebook and pencil. He went: ‘Fall good. Keep it 
in.’ I said: ‘But it was a mistake.’ He said: ‘IN, Felicity. In.’”

Making a fool of herself is a pre-requisite for Pride and Prejudice, but she 
has a great partner in crime in Matthew Kelly as her stage husband. How did Mr 
and Mrs Bennet ever end up together? “Well, she used to be very pretty,” says 
Montagu. “There was definitely sex. But as my dear, beloved father used to say: 
‘It’s only once you get through the sex and find other things in common that 
you’re on safe lines.”

• Pride and Prejudice 
<https://openairtheatre.com/production/pride-and-prejudice-2016> is at Regent’s 
Park theatre, London, until 17 September,then touring 
<https://openairtheatre.com/production/pride-and-prejudice-tour> until 25 
February.
 