
"You'll need your bib. It's going to get messy." A white plastic apron is 
rolled neatly beside my chopsticks and ceramic bowl. Laid on the linen, 
gleaming surgically, are a set of chrome instruments - serrated edges, clamping 
grips and probing forks. Across the laminated menu a rolling red script reads 
"Harry's Singapore Chilli Crab Restaurant (Same Gurus Since 1982)". A tower of 
flimsy wooden bowls clatters on to the table. "That's for the debris. There'll 
be a lot of that."

I'm eating with the band and some Australian friends. We've been let in on 
Sydney's secret - primal eating at its best. Entering the restaurant, we pass a 
stack of plastic crates containing the huge green monsters we are about to 
devour - freshwater mud crabs from the river estuaries of the Northern 
Territories near Darwin. I bend over for a closer look and their eyes flick 
violently as they rear, straining heavy claws against thick blue twine, 
desperate to rip my nosey nose off. Ten minutes later, their magnificence is 
shattered, and they're coated in barbecue sauce, a jumble of legs and claws 
roasted red. I grab a set of glistening tarantuline legs and set to with the 
implements. The flesh is sweet - sweeter than their salty pals from the ocean. 
With each course comes another nest of limbs in a different sauce: pepper and 
salt, chilli, ginger and shallot, oyster, black bean.

It's very tasty. It's also fun. The best of eating is the best of social 
activity. Crunching, cracking, sucking, slurping and laughter surround me. The 
Aussies babble about barbecues. "I've just got a Beefmaster." "Is that the one 
with the rotisserie?" "No, but it has a wok burner!" "Yeah, but it's all about 
the implements." "Have you got a Wiltshire Bar-B-Mate?" "Too right! Slicing 
edge, spatula, fork, bottle-opener and sausage-pricker - all on one tool!" My 
belly's stretched, my taste buds have been entertained, and I'm surrounded by 
people I want to be surrounded by. Outside, a green neon sign flashes "Good 
Vibe". I silently agree.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 