
Prince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> has proposed a 
solution to the growing crisis of antibiotic over-use in animals and humans, 
telling an international gathering of scientists and government officials in 
London that he treats his own cows and sheep with homeopathy.

In front of the government’s chief medical officer, Dame Sally Davies, who 
once told a parliamentary committee thathomeopathy in humans was “rubbish” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/08/jeremy-hunt-homeopathy-studies-chief-medical-officer>
 and that she was “perpetually surprised that homeopathy is available on the 
NHS”, the prince explained to delegates from 20 nations and organisations why 
he had turned to homeopathic remedies for animals.

“It was one of the reasons I converted my farming operation to an organic – or 
agro-ecological – system over 30 years ago and why we have been successfully 
using homeopathic – yes, homeopathic – treatments for my cattle and sheep as 
part of a programme to reduce the use of antibiotics,” he said.

The prince did not give details or stay for questions, but Clarence House 
later said: “Homeopathy is used on a case-by-case basis at Home Farm, in 
combination with more conventional medicine, to minimise dependence on 
antibiotics.”

The prince’s belief in homeopathic medicines for humans has long been known, 
as well as hissupport for homeopathy in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/04/black-spider-memos-prince-charles-lobbied-homeopathy-funding-nhs>
. It has sparked clashes with doctors and scientists who say the remedies, 
which involve a drop of active substance diluted in so much water that only 
“the memory” of the substance remains, are not evidence-based. There have been 
some experts, however, who have conceded that homeopathy could have a placebo 
effect for those who believe it will help them.

Cows and sheep are unlikely to experience this benefit, although a group called
HAWL (Homeopathy at Wellie Level <http://www.hawl.co.uk/>) which trains farmers 
in its use and is funded by the prince, said it can help animals that are 
stressed.

“It is now well accepted that problems come at times of stress (weaning, 
transportation, seperation etc), and giving animals remedies at these times may 
well avoid disease, but it may also improve production,” its website stated. It 
acknowledged, however, that scientific evidence for homeopathic remedies in 
animals is scarce.

'Black spider memos': Prince Charles lobbied over NHS homeopathy funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/04/black-spider-memos-prince-charles-lobbied-homeopathy-funding-nhs>
There are 500 farmers trained in homeopathy and 38 homeopathic vets, according 
to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. A spokesperson for 
Defra said animal remedies “must be registered in accordance with theVeterinary 
Medicines Regulations 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/veterinary-medicines-regulations> to ensure they 
are safe and labelled appropriately before they can be sold in the UK. Animal 
owners should always discuss the best treatment option with their vet and seek 
their professional advice.”

But the British Veterinary Association, the leading representative body for 
vets in the UK, dismissed homeopathy out of hand.

“BVA cannot endorse the use of homeopathic remedies, or indeed any products 
making therapeutic claims, which have no proven efficacy; the consequence could 
be serious animal health and welfare detriment because of the lack of 
therapeutic effect, which would be counterproductive to best animal health and 
welfare,” said John Blackwell, its senior vice president.

The prince’s categoric condemnation of the over-use of antibiotics in farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/11/is-rise-farm-antibiotic-use-threat-humans>
 and in humans, however, will be universally welcomed.

“Given the potentially disastrous scenario we face, I find it difficult to 
understand how we can continue to allow most of the antibiotics used in 
farming, many of which are also used in human medicine, to be administered to 
healthy animals,” he said. “Would we, I wonder, advise adding antibiotics to 
our own food or water on a daily basis, just in case we became ill?”

Antibiotic use in food fuels resistance to vital drugs – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/antibiotic-use-food-fuels-humans-resistance-vital-drugs-report>
Davies, the chief medical officer, who has twice visited the prince’s farm to 
admire its sustainable approach and minimal use of antibiotics, said she was 
delighted that he had agreed to sponsor the London meeting.

“He’s an organic farmer who has cared all his life for animal welfare and he 
hardly uses antibiotics,” she said. “His sponsorship means we have a very 
senior set of people here from around the world.”

Asked what she thought of his use of homeopathy, she answered: “I’m not a vet.”
 