

A cache of secret memos between Prince Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> and senior government ministers 
has been released after a 10-year legal battle, offering the clearest picture 
yet of the breadth and depth of the heir to the throne’s lobbying at the 
highest level of politics.

The 27 memos, sent in 2004 and 2005 and released only after the Guardian won 
its long freedom of information fight with the government, show the Prince of 
Wales making direct and persistent policy demands to thethen prime minister 
Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-black-spider-memos-published-after-10-year-legal-battle>
 and several key figures in his Labour government.

From Blair, Charles demanded everything from urgent action to improve 
equipment fortroops fighting in Iraq  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-warned-blair-army-in-iraq-without-necessary-resources-black-spider>
to the availability ofalternative herbal medicines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-letter-tony-blair-postpone-herbal-medicines-restrictions>
 in the UK, a pet cause of the prince.


Prince warned Blair armed forces were in Iraq 'without necessary resources'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-warned-blair-army-in-iraq-without-necessary-resources-black-spider>
In a single letter in February 2005, he urged a badger cull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-letters-include-strong-backing-for-badger-cull>
 to prevent the spread of bovine tuberculosis – damning its opponents as 
“intellectually dishonest”; lobbied for his preferred person to be appointed to 
crack down on the mistreatment of farmers by supermarkets; proposed his own 
aide to brief Downing Street on the design of new hospitals; and urged Blair to 
tackle a European Union directive limiting the use of herbal alternative 
medicines use in the UK.

The government has spent more than £400,000 on legal costs in its ultimately 
failed attempt to block the original2005 freedom of information request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/prince-charles-letters-email-tussle-judges-rulings-guardian?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 by the Guardian journalist Rob Evans. Thecase was eventually decided at the 
supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/supreme-court-clears-way-release-secret-prince-charles-letters-black-spider-memos>
 and the decade-long saga involved in total 16 different judges.

Prince Charles letters include strong backing for badger cull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-letters-include-strong-backing-for-badger-cull>
David Cameron’s last government attempted to veto the release. In 2012 the 
then attorney general, Dominic Grieve, warned they “would beseriously damaging 
to his role as future monarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/09/prince-charles-letters-mps-private-court>
 because, if he forfeits his position of political neutrality as heir to the 
throne, he cannot easily recover it when he is king”.

But following the release of the “black spider” memos – so-called because of 
the prince’s scrawled handwriting – there were questions on Wednesday about 
whether it was worth the money to try to keep secret details of his lobbying, 
some of which reflects Charles’s very narrow personal interests.

Did Prince Charles's letter lead Tony Blair to postpone herbal medicines law?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-letter-tony-blair-postpone-herbal-medicines-restrictions>
For example, in October 2004 he told the environment minister Elliot Morley he 
hoped “illegal fishing of thePatagonian toothfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-black-spider-memos-stranger-topics-badgers-patagonian-toothfish>
 will be high up on your list of priorities because until that trade is 
stopped, there is little hope for the poor old albatross”.


But they also cover more controversial subjects. In one memo, Charles 
explicitly lobbiedTony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> 
when he was prime minister to replace Lynx military helicopters.

Charles complained that delays in their replacement was “one more example 
where our Armed forces are being asked to do an extremely challenging job 
(particularly in Iraq) without the necessary resources”. Blair responded that 
replacement would be a priority for spending.

He directly urged the health secretary, John Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2015/may/13/publication-of-the-prince-charles-black-spider-letters-live#block-555386f5e4b03e21263ee65f>
, to accelerate redevelopment at a hospital site in Sunderland in which his own 
architecture charity was involved, warning bluntly that “chickens will come 
home to roost” in Reid’s government department if action was not taken.


The letters revealed not only that ministers often responded actively to his 
suggestions but they appeared to hold his interventions in high regard.

Blair replied to him in one letter: “I always value and look forward to your 
views – but perhaps particularly on agricultural topics.”

After Charles Clarke, then education secretary, responded to Charles’ 
complaint about the nutritional content of school meals, he signed off: “I have 
the honour to be, Sir, Your Royal Highness’s most humble and obedient servant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/humble-and-obedient-how-ministers-defied-etiquette-in-replies-to-charles>
.”

The memos also reveal how dogged Charles can be in demanding actions from 
ministers as it emerged that his engagement with key political players has not 
abated. Since the beginning of 2010, the prince held 87 meetings with 
ministers, opposition party leaders and top government officials, new figures 
release by the campaign group Republic showed. This year he has held meetings 
with, among others, David Cameron, the Scottish National party leader, Nicola 
Sturgeon, the education secretary, Nicky Morgan, and Alistair Carmichael, then 
Scotland secretary.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fprince-charles-black-spider-letters-release-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431538631932%2FKP_222581_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Release%20of%20Prince%20Charles%20'black%20spider'%20letters%20-%20Guardian%20reaction&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fprince-charles-black-spider-letters-release-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Release%20of%20Prince%20Charles%20%27black%20spider%27%20letters%20-%20Guardian%20reaction&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fprince-charles-black-spider-letters-release-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431538631932%2FKP_222581_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The Guardian’s Robert Booth sheds light on the contents of the letters.Link to 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/may/13/prince-charles-black-spider-letters-release-video>
The letters emerged amid growing signs that Prince Charles is planning to rule 
in a far more outspoken way than thetaciturn Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/queen-meddling-monarchs-prince-charles>
. Allies told the Guardian last year he planned “heartfelt interventions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/19/becoming-king-not-silence-prince-charles-allies>
” in national life, while in 2013 his friend and biographer Jonathan Dimbleby 
said: “A quiet constitutional revolution is afoot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/13/prince-charles-65-heir-king-revolution>
.”

But this is likely to be the only glimpse the British public gets of Charles’ 
correspondence with ministers. Since the original Guardian request to see the 
letters the government has tightened up the Freedom of Information Act to 
provide an“absolute exemption” on all requests relating to the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/12/prince-charles-black-spider-memos-letters-published>
 and the heir to the throne.

Paul Flynn, a Labour MP and member of the political and constitutional reform 
committee, said the letters lifted the lid on the activity of the “the lobbyist 
supreme in the land”.

Prince keeps his fists in velvet gloves – but does not pull his punches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-keeps-his-fists-in-a-velvet-gloves-but-does-not-pull-his-punches>
“They show he is putting forward a whole variety of views – including many bad 
science views and others that should have no more weight than the man down the 
pub,” he said. “We can see his views were given a seriousness and priority they 
did not deserve.”

Prince Charles was said to be “disappointed” the principle of confidentiality 
had not been maintained, and his spokeswoman said publication “can only inhibit 
his ability to express the concerns and suggestions which have been put to him 
in the course of his travels and meetings”.

Read the Prince Charles 'black spider' memos in full
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ng-interactive/2015/may/13/read-the-prince-charles-black-spider-memos-in-full>
But aides argue the letters do not show the prince engaging in matters of 
party political contention, implying they do not breach the principle of 
political neutrality.

“The letters published by the government show the Prince of Wales expressing 
concern about issues that he has raised in public,” his spokeswoman said. “In 
all these cases, the Prince of Wales is raising issues of public concern, and 
trying to find practical ways to address the issues.”

But the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger>, said: “We fought this case 
because we believed – and the most senior judges in the country agreed – that 
the royal family should operate to the same degrees of transparency as anyone 
else trying to make their influence felt in public life. The attorney general, 
in trying to block the letters, said their contents could ‘seriously damage’ 
perceptions of the prince’s political neutrality.

“Whatever the rights and wrongs of that assessment, it is shocking that the 
government wasted hundreds of thousands of pounds of public money trying to 
prevent their publication. Now, after 10 years, we are pleased to be able to 
share the contents of his correspondence and let people draw their own 
conclusions.”

Graham Smith, chief executive of Republic, which campaigns for an elected head 
of state, said: “These letters are only a small indication of widespread 
lobbying that’s been going on for years. We now need full disclosure and an 
assessment of his impact on government policy.”

Maurice Frankel, director of the UK Campaign for Freedom of Information, said: 
“The release of the Charles memos represents a major victory for the freedom of 
information process, showing that ministers cannot block disclosure simply 
because they don’t like the result.”

Michael Meacher, a former Labour environment secretary who received private 
letters from Charles about policy, called for a new system of transparency 
around his correspondence with ministers when he becomes king to “remove public 
suspicion from the process”.

Charles’s letters and the democratic process | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/commentisfree/2015/may/14/charles-letters-democratic-process>
“A brief statement would be made when the king has written to a minister and 
the subject would be obvious,” he said. “At least we would know he has been 
giving his opinions and, some would say, lobbying ministers.”
 