
Next week the Guardian will welcome the open source platform Ushahidi 
<http://www.ushahidi.com> to its headquarters in North London for a week long 
engagement as part of the Activate Summit's fundraising and tech development 
initiative entitledProject Activate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate/blog/call-to-action>. 

Those familiar with Ushahidi and its work can skip the next couple of 
paragraphs, but for the uninitiated (have you been living under a rock for the 
last four years?!) the Nairobi-based start up takes its name from the Swahili 
for 'testimony' or 'witness' and is a crisis crowdsourcing platform which 
combines social activism, citizen journalism and geospatial information.

Born out of the disputed 2007 presidential elections in Kenya, the website 
enabled the mapping of eyewitness reports of violence sent in by some 45,000 
users through email and text-message in the aftermath of the elections at the 
beginning of 2008. This source of on-the-ground, real-time information enabled 
global reporting and co-ordination of aid and peace efforts at a time when 
international news and aid organisations had been paralysed by a Government-led 
media black out.

It has since been employed as a crisis management and relief tool for a number 
of human and natural disasters including during the fallouts from the 
devastating earthquakes in Haiti and Chile. Under the watchful management of 
co-founders Ory Okolloh,Juliana Rotich 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate/video/activate-2010-juliana-rotich>, Erik 
Hersman and David Kobia, Ushahidi has fast become a darling of the open web 
movement and only last week Okolloh received the prestigiousMonaco Media Prize 
<http://www.beet.tv/2010/11/kenyas-crowd-mapping-start-up-ushahidi-launches-commerical-effort-.html>
, an honour granted in the past to no lesser names than Jimmy Wales and 
Lawrence Lessig.

And so, for four days (and no doubt some late nights) in wintery London 
Ushahidi core developerBrian Herbert 
<http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2009/09/11/welcoming-brian-herbert-to-the-ushahidi-team/>
 andJon Gosier 
<http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2009/12/14/jon-gosier-joins-the-swift-river-initiative/>
, director of Ushahidi'sSwiftRiver <http://swift.ushahidi.com/> platform (which 
helps to filter and validate large amounts of information for use on the main 
platform), will fly out from the US to work alongside the Guardian tech and 
developer team to share ideas, insights and visions for future collaboration.

The aim is to see if we can help streamline and enhance some of Ushahidi's 
capabilities, to better understand the practicalities of application and 
benefits of use of the platforms for media companies such as ours and 
ultimately to find and create the basis for some longer term projects between 
our two organisations. A lot of the conversations have already been happening 
online in the lead up to the end of Nov trip so we're hoping everyone will hit 
the ground running and we'll be able to do some really fantastic work.

This is the second time we've run the Project Activate fundraising and tech 
dev drive off the back of the Summit - the first one came in 2009 when we 
worked with the inspirationalSWRadio Africa <http://www.swradioafrica.com/> 
team under the guidance of directorGerry Jackson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate/video-gerry-jackson-sw-radio-africa>. 

It's no surprise to note the similarities between SWRadio and Ushahidi - both 
have their roots in upholding the principles of democracy and both exhibit an 
unwavering faith in the power of technology and human interconnectedness to 
challenge institutionalised failure and corruption. They are born of an 
emerging system where injustice motivates, technology enables, humans create 
and the internet amplifies and proliferates.

Project Activate is indicative of the Guardian's commitment to empowering 
these kinds of grass root organisations that often spring out of a horrendous 
set of circumstances and yet in spite (or perhaps because of) this, they thrive 
to become bastions of free speech and transparency and to epitomise the notion 
that we are stronger as an open and connected world. They also celebrate 
creativity, adaptability and mutualisation in modern journalism which are key 
tenets of the Guardian canon, as outlined by our editor-in-chief Alan 
Rusbridger in his recentHugh Cudlipp lecture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/jan/25/cudlipp-lecture-alan-rusbridger>. 

So both for Activate and the Guardian Ushahidi are a natural partner and we 
can't wait to see the results of our working together.
 