
The fallout from the Brexit vote reverberated through the markets on Tuesday 
as two more City property funds barred investors from withdrawing their cash 
and theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> warned that risks 
to the financial system had begun to “crystallise”.

City watchers warned that further property funds would be forced to bar 
withdrawals as investors race for the door amid fears of a plunge in the values 
of office blocks and shopping centres in post-Brexit Britain.

Commercial property fund freeze – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/commercial-property-fund-freeze-all-you-need-to-know-standard-life-aviva>
The suspensions came on another day of drama on the financial markets, 11 days 
after the vote to leave the EU wrong-footed investors and sparked political 
turmoil. Developments included:

• The pound plunging to a new 31-year low against the dollar, falling 2% to 
$1.30 at one point.

• A closely watched survey of the services sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/pound-hits-31-year-low-after-service-sector-data>
 coming in worse than expected, indicating a sharp slowdown in the wider 
economy.

• The Bank of England easing regulations on banks to allow them to release up 
to £150bn worth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/bank-of-england-releases-150bn-pounds-risks-financial-stability>
 of loans to households and businesses.

• Chancellor George Osborne held a summit with the heads of the major high 
street banks, who pledged to avoid a new credit crisis by making loans 
available.

The property funds barring withdrawals included M&G Investments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/moneyinvestments>, which runs a £4.4bn 
property fund, and Aviva Investors, whose fund has assets worth £1.8bn.

The moves came one day after Standard Life banned its clients from doing the 
same on its £2.9bn property fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/standard-life-shuts-property-fund-post-brexit-withdrawals>
, with the firms saying they had acted to stop a rush of withdrawals following 
“extraordinary market circumstances”.

Investors have been buying into commercial property funds to try to benefit 
from the 40% rise in commercial property prices since the 2009 crisis. But 
concerns that the market may have peaked before the referendum – plus fears on 
the impact of the Brexit vote on the UK economy – has triggered nervy investors 
to ask for their cash back.

Large-scale outflows cause problems for commercial property funds because they 
are based on assets that are difficult to sell quickly when investors want 
their money back. Restrictions on withdrawals are then put in place to give 
fund managers time to sell their properties. Otherwise, they would be forced to 
sell assets at fire-sale prices to fund the redemption requests. That would 
drive down the fund’s value, encouraging more investors to cash out, creating a 
vicious circle.

The Bank of England said in its half-yearly assessment of risks to the 
financial system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/bank-of-england-releases-150bn-pounds-risks-financial-stability>
 published on Tuesday said that some of the risks to the financial system it 
had warned about in the run-up to the referendum had “begun to crystallise”, 
including the possible downturn in the commercial real estate market.


Around £35bn – or 7% of the total investment in UK commercial property – is 
invested in commercial property funds, which offer private investors a chance 
to gain exposure to huge office block developments and shopping centres. M&G’s 
fund has invested in properties including New Square Park, a 250-acre office 
park near Heathrow airport, and the eight-storey 3 Hardman Square office block 
in Manchester; whileAviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> 
holds sites including 20 Soho Square development in central London and the 
Guildhall shopping centre in Exeter.

Andrew Bailey, the newly installed chief executive of the Financial Conduct 
Authority, the City watchdog, said the current situation “points to issues that 
we need to look at in the design of these things” and insisted there was no 
cause for panic.

Bailey’s comments came as the FTSE 250 index, which contains more UK-focused 
companies compared with the FTSE 100, closed down 382.02 points, or 2.37%, to 
15,734.68. City commentators also queued up to warn of further woe for the 
commercial property sector, predicting that other funds would be compelled to 
temporarily prevent withdrawals.

Simon French, chief economist at stockbroker Panmure Gordon, said: “Commercial 
real estate looked very vulnerable as we entered the referendum with most 
finance directors thinking the stuff was overpriced before Brexit. Add that to 
the fact that material changes to immigration and market access will affect 
prime office space occupants and a financial sector most correlated to GDP 
slowdown, then this looks like a perfect storm.”


Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown, added that 
banning investors from redemptions could happen to any of the funds. “We have 
now had two in very short succession. It suggests that we are on the cusp of 
others.”

Khalaf added that around 10% of a fund’s asset value tended to be held in cash 
and that funds selling off their assets would inevitably put pressure on 
commercial property prices across the UK.

However, Bailey called for calm and said that the suspension of the funds 
should not been seen as a panic measure. “It’s designed into these structures 
to deal precisely with that situation where there’s been some shock to the 
market, if you like, and there’s a presumption of a valuation adjustment which 
is quite hard to capture in illiquid assets at high frequency,” he said. “And 
the purpose of the suspension is to create a pause, if you like, to allow that 
process then to happen. And that’s sensible, it’s absolutely sensible.”

Other analysts played down fears of a rerun of the 2009 crisis when commercial 
property prices plunged and banks were left nursing heavy losses on their loans.

Eduardo Gorab, a property economist at Capital Economics, said: “Clearly, the 
uncertainty kicked up by the referendum’s result has had an adverse impact on 
sentiment, which has been driving outflows over the last week or two.

“However, if we are right in thinking that occupier and investment markets are 
well placed to weather the uncertainty, we suspect that fears of a repeat of 
2009 are overdone.”

The Bank of England has already subjected banks to tests to ensure they can 
sustain a 30% fall in commercial property prices and will impose tests on them 
again this year.

However, the Bank said that there could be wider fallout from declines in 
commercial property prices. This is because 75% of small business loans are 
secured against property while banks also use such loans to count towards their 
capital buffers.

In its biannual assessment of financial risks, the Bank said it was “focused 
on the potential for adjustments in the commercial real estate market to be 
amplified and affect economic activity by reducing the ability of companies 
that use commercial real estate as collateral to access finance. Any adjustment 
could potentially be amplified by the behaviour of leveraged investors and 
investors in open-ended funds.”

Around 45% of commercial property is funded by foreign investment although 
there has been a 50% reduction in such investment in the first quarter of the 
year, the Bank of England said.

Although there is no technical link between commercial property prices and 
residential property, house market experts have warned that Britain’s decision 
to leave the EUwill affect demand and valuations for residential property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/uk-house-price-growth-up-june-pre-eu-referendum-figures>
 in the coming months. Foxtons, the London-focused estate agent,issued a profit 
warning in the wake of the EU poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/foxtons-and-easyjet-issue-profits-warnings-eu-referendum>
 as it predicted that the capital’s property market will remain depressed for 
the rest of the year.


















 