
Prudential <https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential>’s fund management 
arm has lured Anne Richards, the chief investment officer ofAberdeen Asset 
Management <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement>, as 
its new chief executive.


Richards will replace Michael McLintock at M&G Investments later this year 
when he steps down after 19 years at the top of the business.


The electrical engineering graduate joined Aberdeen in 2003 when it bought 
Edinburgh Fund Managers and she has been chief investment officer since. At M&G 
she will be paid a salary of £400,000 but will be able to earn up to six times 
that amount as an annual bonus.

Aberdeen, with £291bn, has more funds under management than M&G which has 
£247bn. However, running thePrudential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> business, with more than 
1,900 employees in Europe and Asia, is regarded as one of the biggest jobs in 
the fund management industry.


Mike Wells, Prudential’s chief executive, said: “I am delighted that a person 
of Anne’s talent is joining the group and I look forward to working with her. 
Anne will be able to deploy her leadership skills and exceptional knowledge of 
the global asset management industry to provide the best possible outcomes for 
our customers, clients and shareholders.”

Prudential’s shares fell 3% on Monday to close at £13.27. 

Richards was an important figure at Aberdeen as it boomed over the previous 
decade by focusing its investments on fast-growing emerging markets. Butthe 
company has suffered large withdrawals of funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/30/aberdeen-asset-management-investors-withdraw-more-than-40bn>
 in the past year as investors grew nervous about the slowdown in the Chinese 
economy and its effects on other developing economies.

Aberdeen has sought to reduce its reliance on emerging markets while telling 
investors those markets will grow in the long run but its reputation has taken 
a knock. Aberdeen said it would not appoint a direct replacement for Richards 
and that her work would be shared between Andrew McCaffery, the head of 
alternative investments, and Hugh Young who heads equities, fixed income and 
property.

Martin Gilbert, Aberdeen’s chief executive, said: “While we are sorry to lose 
Anne, we are also delighted that one of our colleagues should have been 
appointed to such an important role in the industry. Her appointment reflects 
well on Aberdeen and on the wealth of talent we have working at the company.”

 