
Manchester United and Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> are in advanced 
negotiations for Ángel Di María, with the French club having offered €40m 
(£28.5m) to buy the 27-year-old.

The fee is less than half the British record £59.7m United paid Real Madrid 
for Di María 12 months ago. Ed Woodward, the executive vice-chairman, is 
thought to be resisting PSG’s offer as he seeks a higher price. AlthoughLouis 
van Gaal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal> had wanted the 
Argentinian to stay the manager now accepts Di María wishes to leave and so 
there would be some surprise if he were still at the club when the transfer 
window closes on 1 September.

Juan Mata plans another double figures goal haul for Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/juan-mata-double-figures-goals-manchester-united>
Di María’s location continues to be unknown. He was expected to arrive at 
United’s base in San Jose, California, on Saturday afterthe 3-1 tour victory 
against Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/manchester-united-barcelona-match-report-wayne-rooney>
 but failed to do so.

Last season he struggled to establish himself in Van Gaal’s side. After he was 
sent off in United’s2-1 FA Cup quarter-final defeat to Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/09/manchester-united-arsenal-fa-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
 on 9 March the manager did not start him again until the final game of the 
season, at Hull City, more than two months later.

Di María’s compatriot Marcos Rojo also failed to arrive in San Jose. It is 
unclear whether the defender will be fined; he is believed to have now renewed 
his passport though he may also have been unable to enter the United States 
after being arrested last year in his homeland.

Real Madrid tell Sergio Ramos he will not be sold under any circumstances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/real-madrid-sergio-ramos-manchester-united-move>
United are understood to be stepping up the attempt to sign the Barcelona 
forward Pedro, who has a £22m release clause. The 27-year-old is minded to join 
United and if personal terms can be agreed the Spaniard could become Van Gaal’s 
sixth close season signing.

The fifth was Sergio Romero, the Argentina goalkeeper who played for Van Gaal 
at AZ Alkmaar andwhose move from Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/sergio-romero-joins-manchester-united-alkmaar>
 was confirmed by the club on Monday. David de Gea could still leave for Real 
Madrid though United insist this will only occur if Sergio Ramos comes the 
other way. The defender has been told by Real’s president, Florentino Pérez, he 
will not be sold under any circumstance.

Van Gaal said Romero can compete with the Spaniard for the No1 jersey.

The manager said: “I have of course spoken with Sergio and also with David and 
with me always the best shall be in the lineup. So you have to fight.”
 