
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> are 
hopeful of finalising a deal this weekend to buy Ángel Di María from Manchester 
United for around £40m. This would be a significant loss on the £59.7m record 
fee paid by United to Real Madrid last summer, even with the deal potentially 
containing another £5m in add-ons.

Although United would not confirm the deal is close, it is understood that Ed 
Woodward, the executive vice-chairman, is in final negotiations and it would be 
a surprise if the Argentina international did not depart the club. Di María 
failed to join United’s summer tour of the US on Saturday, with the manager, 
Louis van Gaal, sayingafter Wednesday’s 2-0 defeat to PSG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/30/louis-van-gaal-david-de-gea-flux-is-not-favourable-for-all-parties-concerned>
 that he did not know where the player was. “I don’t want to answer that but 
you can keep asking,” said the Dutchman. “Maybe you know where he is. I don’t 
know.”

United’s loss on Di María is less than it appears on the face of it and is 
likely to total around £10m when the changes to the euro exchange rate are 
factored in. They did not pay the €75m fee to Madrid up front and the balance 
owing is less in sterling terms than had been anticipated when was struck.

Laurent Blanc, the PSG coach, added: “You know negotiations are in tandem 
[ongoing] and as Paris Saint-Germain [and United] are both big clubs, that can 
be difficult. But we feel we are close to the end.”

The French champions initially offered £28.5m (€40m) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/psg-bid-angel-di-maria-manchester-united>
 for Di María but that was swiftly rejected by United. The agreement could 
accelerate Van Gaal’s approach to sign Pedro from Barcelona, with reports in 
Spain suggesting the Spain winger will be allowed to leave if a bid of €25m is 
received.
 