
The editor of the Independent has said “every instinct” told him to publish 
the Charlie Hebdo cartoons caricaturing the prophet Muhammad but described it 
as “too much of a risk”.

The newspaper, along with the rest of the UK’s national press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jan/08/what-the-uk-national-newspapers-said-about-the-charlie-hebdo-attack>
, did not reprint any of thesatirical magazine’s caricatures of Muhammad or the 
cartoons from Denmark’s Jyllands-Posten, with which Charlie Hebdo first 
provoked international outrage in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/07/charlie-hebdo-satire-intimidation-analysis>
.

Charlie Hebdo attack: French police descend on town in hunt for gunmen - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/jan/08/charlie-hebdo-shooting-several-arrests-in-manhunt-for-suspects-live-updates>
Amol Rajan instead put a striking cartoon by Dave Brown on his paper’s front 
page on Thursday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/charlie-hebdo-there-can-be-no-negotiation-between-liberal-democracy-and-totalitarian-theocracy-9963334.html>
, showing a hand with the middle finger raised emerging from the cover of 
Charlie Hebdo. But he was “very uncomfortable” with his decision not to reprint 
Charlie Hebdo’s cartoons, which he described as “self-censorship”.

Rajan said he had a duty to his staff and had to “balance principle with 
pragmatism”.

“Every instinct that you have as an editor is to publish and be damned. You 
don’t like the idea of self-censorship, you don’t like the idea that you grant 
a victory to these religious fanatics by not publishing something that 
instinctively you would like to,” Rajantold BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on 
Thursday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04wwkh4>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Fcharlie-hebdo-muhammad-cartoons-independent-amol-rajan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420726071350%2F0e833ca0-cca0-4feb-9e69-fe538e99694a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Publishing%20Muhammad%20cartoons%20would%20have%20been%20too%20risky%2C%20says%20Amol%20Rajan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Fcharlie-hebdo-muhammad-cartoons-independent-amol-rajan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Publishing%20Muhammad%20cartoons%20would%20have%20been%20too%20risky%2C%20says%20Amol%20Rajan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Fcharlie-hebdo-muhammad-cartoons-independent-amol-rajan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420726071350%2F0e833ca0-cca0-4feb-9e69-fe538e99694a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Amol Rajan Photograph: Justin Sutcliffe 
“But the fact is as an editor you have got to balance principle with 
pragmatism, and I felt yesterday evening a few different conflicting 
principles: I felt a duty to readers; a duty to the dead; I felt a duty to 
journalism – and I also felt a duty to my staff.

“I think it would have been too much of a risk to unilaterally decide in 
Britain to be the only newspaper that went ahead and published so in a sense it 
is true one has self-censored in a way I feel very uncomfortable with. It’s an 
incredibly difficult decision to make.”

“What’s happened here is a bunch of religious fanatics have tried to silence 
cartoonists, have tried to silence satire. I think the important thing is not 
just whether you should show the prophet Muhammad, but to say that those 
cartoonists wouldn’t be silenced,” he said.

Rajan added that the decision to put a cartoon on the front page was in part a 
practical decision not “to be overtaken by events”.

Peter Huth, editor of German newspaper BZ, which did publish a series of 
Charlie Hebdo cartoons, said: “I must say we are not so totally different in 
the end because we both published cartoons.”

“We worked with the same tool to express our emotions, we did it in a slightly 
different way,” he told Today.

“We printed 43 covers that Charlie Hebdo printed over the last three or four 
years, not only dealing with Islamic issues but also with French politics … 
because they are a satirical magazine.

“What we wanted to do was honour their bravery, what they showed over all 
those years, and the other point we were thinking about was just journalistic, 
we had to explain to our readers what is Charlie Hebdo.”
 