
What can £9,000 buy you these days? A mid-range hatchback car, two 
business-class flights to Australia or a year of higher education at one of 
England's top universities?

Presented in this way, the fee hike confirmed by four universities last week 
doesn't sound such bad value. The perfect pitch for your university marketing 
department? Perhaps not. However, just as customers buying a car or flight want 
some guarantee that it will get them to their preferred destination, so 
prospective students are increasingly keen to know where they can expect to end 
up after a degree: in employment, in postgraduate study or queuing up at their 
local Jobcentre Plus.

The Destination of Leavers from Higher Education survey 
<https://dlhe.hesa.ac.uk/> (DLHE), collated annually since 2003 by the Higher 
Education Statistics Agency <http://www.hesa.ac.uk> (HESA), exists to provide 
this information. By law, universities must collect data on 80% of UK students. 
Headline figures are published on HESA's website and feed into leagues tables 
including the Guardian University Guide. But when it comes to a detailed 
breakdown, from specific degree course to that all-important first job, some 
universities seem shy about making the data available to the people who need it 
most.

It's a problem recognised by the Higher Education Funding Council for England 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/> (HEFCE), currently midway through an open 
consultation over the future of public information on higher education. The 
working proposals: to make more information available to more people in a more 
consistent (and therefore meaningful) format. And that includes graduate 
destinations.

As William Locke, head of teaching and learning at HEFCE, explains: "We are 
working with universities and colleges to develop a robust and reliable set of 
comparable information about higher education courses. The intention is that 
information will be presented in a standard format on each university and 
college website, looking similar for all courses at all institutions, thus 
making the information potentially more useful, comparable and accessible."

As it stands, data varies hugely, not just from institution to institution, 
but from course to course, some universities publishing little more than a 
basic pie-chart in their prospectus.

There are examples of best practice. The University of Surrey, currently rated 
number one for graduate employability by HESA 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storycode=412571>, lists the 
first destinations of all graduates 
<http://www2.surrey.ac.uk/careers/current/surreygraduates/> and postgraduates 
going back to 2003 on its website. Say you were interested in finding out how 
last year's 23 music and sound recording graduates are doing. Well, 12 are 
working as sound engineers, assistants or technicians (at workplaces ranging 
from Abbey Road Studios to a primary school), two are pursuing a master's in 
engineering acoustics, two are in unrelated employment and one is still 
job-seeking. Destinations of the remaining six are unknown.

Russ Clark, head of careers at Surrey, believes in making DLHE data available 
in full. "We've been doing it for as long as I've been here," he says. "I've 
always maintained that applicants have a right to know. They are investing 
time, energy and money in their education. They should have at least a sense of 
what they are getting out of it." And it's not just prospective students, says 
Clark. Parents, more likely than ever to be underwriting their children's fees, 
are also asking for this information.

Clark directs them to the website, which proudly proclaims Surrey's HESA 
rating on its homepage. But the destinations document is located in the careers 
section, more likely to be checked by current than prospective students. Could 
it be made easier to find? "We've slipped a bit in this respect," Clark 
concedes. "We used to produce these fabulous glossy brochures and made them 
freely available online and at open days. Then we ran out of money. It's a 
marketing thing."

One institution that still does produce a glossy brochure 
<https://www.exeter.ac.uk/media/universityofexeter/webteam/shared/undergraduate/pdfs/Graduate%20Destinations%202009.pdf>
 as well as detailed breakdowns of graduate destinations by department, is the 
University of Exeter. As thefirst university outside the Russell Group to 
confirm maximum fees of £9,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/mar/02/exeter-university-to-charge-top-fees>
, it needs to. "It's imperative we persuade people that employability is our 
number one priority," says Paul Blackmore,recently appointed to head up a new 
university-wide strategy <http://www.exeter.ac.uk/employability/index.html>. 
"Our fees are going to triple for 2012-13. Both parents and students want a 
return on their investment."

Return on investment doesn't just mean a job, but a well-paid job. HESA is 
already pressing universities to source salary information from their 
graduates, while HEFCE lists"graduate salary outcomes" 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/learning/qual/public/infoset.htm> among its proposed 
additions to the key information set (KIS) each course will have to make 
available to prospective students.

This raises a new set of issues, not least data protection. Even without 
names, individual graduates may be identifiable from their degree course, 
graduation year and workplace. Add salaries into the mix and universities could 
be on dodgy legal ground. Future students want to know this information but 
former students don't always want to tell. "It's a very sensitive question," 
says Russ Clark. "People don't even tell friends and colleagues what they earn. 
Should HESA be making us ask them?"

Universities already find it challenging meeting HESA's response quota, 
chasing up with phone calls those alumni who have not completed the four-page 
HESA form on paper or online. "It can be very time consuming," says Paul 
Blackmore at Exeter, one of eight universities piloting new methods to meet 
HEFCE's KIS proposals. "Our academic colleagues in the social sciences are 
astonished we make 80%. In their work, 40% is considered to be an excellent 
return."

Whatever the results of the HEFCE consultation, universities will have to 
implement its recommendations by July 2012. This means getting up to speed, not 
just with data collection and publication, but employability strategy in 
general, from work experience toworkplace skills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jan/02/universities-corporate-workplace-skills-accreditation>
.
It's no coincidence that Surrey and Exeter are ahead of the game: Surrey, with 
its built-in "sandwich year" undertaken by65% of undergraduates 
<http://www.surrey.ac.uk/professionaltraining>; Exeter, with a compulsory first 
year"eX-factor" skills programme 
<http://www.exeter.ac.uk/employability/students/events/exfactor/>.

It's nice branding, but does all this focus on DLHE render students little 
more than passive consumers rather than active participants in their own 
education? With employability the main measure of value, a university degree 
risks being viewed simply as a product or service to get you from A to B, with 
B being a big salary, rather than an enriching experience in and of itself.

"As we move away from free higher education, students are becoming customers," 
acknowledges Clark. "Value equals something I get at the end of my degree, 
whether that's access to a master's or a job. There will still be people 
choosing a subject because it interests them, but principally, let's face it, 
most people will be doing it for employment results."

And in a climate of high unemployment, there can be no guarantees. Even for 
the lucky ones, says Blackmore, employment is not the end of the journey. The 
one question the DLHE form doesn't ask is perhaps the most important of all: 
"Are these graduates actually happy in their jobs?"

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox,become a member of the Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 