
In 1831, staring down the barrel of a publisher’s deadline, Victor Hugo did 
what any sane and responsible writer would do. He stripped off all his clothes 
and ordered his valet to lock them away in a trunk. If the clothes were 
unreachable, he could not go outside. If he could not go outside, then he would 
just have to work. So Hugo sat at his desk, nude but for a shawl; at once a 
pitiful joke and an inspiration to us all. He wrote The Hunchback of Notre Dame 
in a naked, humiliated, self-loathing funk.

It should be stressed, of course, that what worked for Hugo might not work for 
everyone. Specifically, I suspect it would not work forPaterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/paterson-review-adam-drivers-poetic-bus-driver-proves-safe-pair-of-hands>
, the serene, bus-driving hero of Jim Jarmusch’s new film. This is because 
Paterson does not agonise or procrastinate. He merely looks at the world with a 
contemplative half-smile and then writes perfectly clean copy inside his secret 
notebook; a few simple strokes and then the job is complete. I’m guessing most 
authors would regard Paterson with envy. More than a few will wind up actively 
hating his guts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE8_L9kqie7s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE8_L9kqie7s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE8_L9kqie7s&media=>
Before setting out as a film-maker, Jarmusch dreamed of becoming a poet. 
Paterson, then, is his romantic portrait of the road not travelled, in that it 
adopts a loving, almost holistic approach to the artist and his environment. 
Paterson the man (ably played byAdam Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/29/adam-driver-lots-things-said-about-face-interview>
) conveniently lives and works in Paterson, New Jersey, a drowsy 
post-industrial town, best known in literary circles as the home ofWilliam 
Carlos Williams <https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/william-carlos-williams>. 
He rises each morning at 6am, drinks in the same bar every evening and appears 
to pluck his poems, fully formed, from his daily rounds. He is a contented soul 
with much, it transpires, to be content about. All of which makes him a rarity 
among movie artists. Possibly, it makes him a rarity in the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff49b83ba51b244fbfad54c55e80f747ebe0d46%2F0_194_1408_1882%2F1408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punch%20the%20keys%20now!%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punch%20the%20keys%20now%21%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff49b83ba51b244fbfad54c55e80f747ebe0d46%2F0_194_1408_1882%2F1408.jpg>
 Sean Connery in Finding Forrester. Photograph: Colombia Tristar 
When films are made by creative types, it follows that they should be drawn 
towards depicting the life and work of other creative types. But the writer’s 
existence (all inner struggle; no visual drama) presents a unique set of 
hurdles. It’s so much easier to show someone splashing paint on a canvas or 
wringing a song from a guitar – if only because the work can be seen or heard 
in the moment and because the production of the art amounts to performance art 
in itself. The buskers in Once cancook up a song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ae_UcKoljQw> inside a Dublin music shop. Ed 
Harris canlaunch himself towards greatness  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8lvUr5ZtSjM>as tortured Jackson Pollock. Try 
the same tack with a writer and the result risks being ludicrous. In the idiotic
Finding Forrester <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hMMUJ2Gn7Y>, Sean Connery’s 
grizzled novelist urges his young protege to “punch the keys, for God’s sake” 
and roars “You’re the man now, dog!”, as though he’s Burgess Meredith coaching 
Rocky on the speed-bag. As though such behaviour is conducive to a legible, 
literate intro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14af1c74fe9b45a68677b887419b49263612f8d9%2F0_64_2298_1378%2F2298.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punch%20the%20keys%20now!%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punch%20the%20keys%20now%21%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14af1c74fe9b45a68677b887419b49263612f8d9%2F0_64_2298_1378%2F2298.jpg>
 An Angel at My Table. Photograph: Ronald Grant 
In the absence of a mentor bellowing “You’re the man now, dog”, movies about 
writers tend to follow one of two routes. Most conventionally, they can frame 
themselves as biopics, dressing up the often drab reality of their subject’s 
life and times while electing to leave the actual work in the books, presumably 
where it belongs. The Oscar-winningLife of Emile Zola 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Life_of_Emile_Zola> focused on Zola’s heroic 
involvement in the Dreyfus affair, while films such as An Angel at My Table or 
Before Night Falls showed the interface of the young writer with the prosaic 
real world; the process by which the grit makes the pearl.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ef8a9fb61ce76151d64ece78b5c9e82a6153be%2F0_0_2652_1592%2F2652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punch%20the%20keys%20now!%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punch%20the%20keys%20now%21%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ef8a9fb61ce76151d64ece78b5c9e82a6153be%2F0_0_2652_1592%2F2652.jpg>
 The writer’s life as exuberant fantasy: Barton Fink. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/Working Title 
More enjoyable, as a rule, are the films that play up the absurdist nature of 
the writer’s life; the ones that whisk exuberant fantasies out of such a 
sedentary and cerebral vocation. I’m thinking of poorBarton Fink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,558586,00.html>
, climbing the walls inside his run-down Hollywood digs orMisery 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misery_(film)>’s Annie Wilkes, who makes a 
hobbled slave out of her favourite romantic novelist. This inevitably brings us 
to the sight ofThe Shining <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-shining>’s 
desperate Jack Torrance, incessantlytyping 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jeOevu4zC5o> “All work and no play” at the 
Overlook Hotel. And here, at long last, is a movie writer I relate to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16106f114f1935e30726e0864e15c6e0afabde0c%2F0_126_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punch%20the%20keys%20now!%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punch%20the%20keys%20now%21%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16106f114f1935e30726e0864e15c6e0afabde0c%2F0_126_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Kathy Bates and James Caan in Misery. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Is it telling that this – surely the most famous scene of a writer in film – 
is one that shows the writer not writing (or rather, writing in circles; typing 
in torment)? If so, that probably comes down to the logic of drama. Failure is 
more funny or scary than smooth-running success, which may explain why so many 
films have been at pains to depict writing as a kind of horror. The horror of 
being blocked, of not being able to write. The horror of the blank page that is 
both terrifying in its blankness and paralysing in its possibilities. In 
Charlie Kaufman’s sublimeAdaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adaptation>, for instance, Nicolas Cage 
(playing Charlie Kaufman) drives himself to distraction with his fantastical 
efforts to script a film version of a bestselling book. Along the way, Kaufman 
revels in a world of humiliations and false starts. For good measure he also 
manages to effectively rewrite the old Thomas Edison quote. Genius (in this 
case) turns out to be nine-tenths procrastination to one-tenth masturbation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80215ad1fb72dec8a8456706b0bd99ce175aa88e%2F0_66_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punch%20the%20keys%20now!%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punch%20the%20keys%20now%21%20Why%20cinema%20keeps%20churning%20out%20films%20about%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fpaterson-films-about-writers-jim-jarmusch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80215ad1fb72dec8a8456706b0bd99ce175aa88e%2F0_66_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
 Nicolas Cage as Charlie Kaufman in Adaptation. Photograph: AP 
Paterson, bless him, has no such issues to contend with. His life is fine. His 
poems (written by Oklahoma poetRon Padgett 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/ron-padgett>) 
are works of facile beauty. Everything is sunny; almost suspiciously so. If 
Jarmusch’s film contains anything so crass as a message, it’s that the secret 
to complete artistic fulfilment is a modest outlook, a daily routine and a 
simpering wife who reckons you’re amazing. “You are a great, great poet,” she 
assures Paterson at one stage.

All of which appeared to do the trick at this year’s Cannes film festival, 
where Paterson was received by the critics with a rapture that might otherwise 
be reserved for the receipt of a lifetime achievement award. Here, finally, was 
a film that ennobled the business of putting words on a page and insisted that 
great art is great art, whether anybody actually reads it or not. Or to put it 
another way, here was a film that told the writers in the cinema what they have 
always wanted to hear.

Paterson review: Adam Driver's poetic bus driver proves safe pair of hands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/paterson-review-adam-drivers-poetic-bus-driver-proves-safe-pair-of-hands>
None of which is to suggest that Paterson is not sweet-tempered and charming. 
I just wish it had resisted the temptation to lay on the soft-soap. It’s not so 
much that the film presents Paterson as altogether too good to be true, given 
that the man is a great poet and the rest of us aren’t. It’s more that it 
chooses to paint Paterson (the town) in much the same way – as a colourful 
playground full of lovelorn barflies and harmless eccentrics. Maybe Jarmusch is 
presenting the place as an extension of his hero’s psyche? Maybe the poems have 
inspired the town as opposed to the other way round? But this interesting idea 
is never fully developed; the fabulous landscape remains in its shrink-wrap. 
The whole thing is too tidy, too cosy, too abidingly in love with itself. In 
turning its back on the Hollywood cliches, Paterson only risks peddling a new 
line in fiction.

The sad fact, perhaps, is that writers work best when they are kept at arm’s 
length from the camera. Sit these people at a laptop and they can conjure up 
conflict and resolution, comedy and tragedy; all of the elements that a good 
picture requires. But it takes them for ever to file and the business of 
writing is rarely pretty to watch. The late Leonard Cohen reportedly took five 
whole years to write Hallelujah, banging his head on the floor in frustration 
when the words wouldn’t come. That, I suspect, is the true life of the writer. 
The trying and failing and then the trying again. It’s the real humdrum horror 
that the movies won’t show.

Paterson is released in the UK on 25 November.
 