
The "amnesty" for Pussy Riot and the Greenpeace Arctic 30 is a classic PR 
masterstroke. Ordered byVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> – nothing of this nature 
happens without him – it soothes international opinion, while keeping those who 
pose a real threat to his regime firmly behind bars.

Ever since Russia won the right to host the 2014 Winter Olympics, Putin has 
made clear that the Games are his pet project. Back in 2007 he wowed the 
International Olympic Committee in Guatemala with a speech in English and 
French. 
<http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Putin_speech_to_IOC_in_Guatemala_City.ogg>
Some seven years – and $50bn later – the Games are ready. In February the eyes 
of the world will turn to the Black Sea resort of Sochi. It will be a moment of 
triumph for Putin, back in the Kremlin for a third time, unlikely to leave any 
time soon, and a swaggering figure on the world stage.

But in recent months several issues have threatened to take the shine off his 
image-boosting pagaent. There has beengrowing international criticism of 
Putin's post-2012 crackdown on human rights 
<http://www.hrw.org/world-report/2013/country-chapters/russia>, the worst since 
the Soviet era.New Russian laws outlawing "gay propaganda" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/01/russia-rise-homophobic-violence> 
have created negative headlines from Stockholm to Seattle. And the arrest of 30 
Greenpeace campaigners,after they boarded a Russian oil rig to draw attention 
to the plundering of the Arctic, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/08/greenpeace-video-russian-forces-arctic-sunrise>
 has seen protests outside Russian embassies.

The wide-ranging amnesty law passed by the Russian parliament on Wednesday 
defuses some of this. It should see the Arctic 30 home in time for Christmas. 
Their trial on charges of hooliganism is likely to be shelved. Within a matter 
of days they should receive exit visas. The probable release of Pussy Riot's 
Maria Alyokhina and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, towards the end of their two-year 
sentences, will delight their many international fans.
 Members of Greenpeace's Arctic 30 pose for a photograph in Saint Petersburg 
earlier in December. Photograph: Dmitri Sharomov/AFP 
There is no amnesty, however, for Mikhail Khodorkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mikhail-khodorkovsky>, the former Russian 
oligarch in jail since 2003. Nor is there clemency for the "Bolotnaya 27", who 
took part in mass anti-Putin street protests in May 2012. Despite little 
evidence against them,they face up to 13 years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/03/russia-alexei-navalny>. One 
participant has been sent to a psychatric facility. These continued detentions 
send an unambiguous message to those who nurture faint hopes Putin might 
somehow be toppled from power. It reads: protest against the Kremlin and pay a 
heavy price.

Despite talk of a boycott, there will be no repeat of the 1980 Moscow 
Olympics, when the US refused to participate, or the Los Angeles Games four 
years later, the subject of a similar Soviet-led boycott. But at least four 
countries including France, Germany, the US, and Georgia have signalled they 
will not be sending top-level delegations to Sochi – a snub of sorts to Putin, 
and a repudiation of his anti-gay rhetoric.

On Tuesday the White House announced that Barack Obama, vice-president Joe 
Biden, and first lady Michelle Obama will not be attending. 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/12/17/president-obama-announces-presidential-delegations-opening-and-closing-c>
 Nor will any ex-presidents. It is the first time since 2000 senior US leaders 
have been missing from an Olympic event. Instead the tennis great Billie Jean 
King will be one of two openly gay athletes representing the US for the opening 
and closing ceremonies. The other is Caitlin Cahow, a hockey player. The 
delegation "represents the diversity that is the United States".

Obama's move is carefully calibrated. It signals US displeasure but stops 
short of a full-blown boycott that could escalate tensions with the Kremlin, at 
a time when Washington still badly needs Moscow's help on Syria, Iran and other 
thorny international problems.
 After accepting the role of delegate to the Games, Billie Jean King says she 
was 'proud to stand with the members of the LGBT community'. Photograph: Jason 
DeCrow/AP 
France's François Hollande and Germany's president, Joachim Gauck, have also 
announced they will skip Sochi. The French foreign ministry says there is no 
"political significance" to Hollande's decision. "It's a very simple matter. 
Only ministers attend the winter games. This isn't a matter for the president," 
a spokesman said.

Gauck – who visited the London games in 2012 – has not explicitly given his 
reasons and has said he will welcome German athletes on their return from Sochi 
at a reception in Munich 
<http://www.spiegel.de/politik/deutschland/bundespraesident-gauck-boykottiert-olympia-in-sotschi-a-937791.html>
. Chancellor Angela Merkel has not yet said if she will go.

These absences reflect western unease at the human rights situation in Russia 
generally. Since returning to the Kremin in 2012, Putin has presided over the 
worst clampdown on human rights since the Soviet period. The Duma has enacted 
new laws compelling non-governmental organisations that receive foreign funding 
to register as "foreign agents". Opposition demonstrators who took part in 
anti-Putin protests face long stretches in jail. There have been sh ow trials 
against a dead man –the lawyer Sergei Magnitsky who exposed massive official 
corruption, and died in prison in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/sergei-magnitsky-russia-trial-verdict-tax-fraud>
 – and against the opposition leaderAlexei Navalny. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>

Putin's tough stance on gay rights is part of a wider political strategy to 
shore up the Kremlin's conservative base. It follows opposition street protests 
which began in 2011-12, largely centred on Moscow and led by the country's 
restive middle classes.

All of this poses a dilemma for David Cameron, who has not yet said whether he 
will attend the Sochi Olympics. On Wednesday Downing Street said the prime 
minister's travel plans were not usually decided this far in advance. The 
culture secretary Maria Millar will likely travel toRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, together with sports minister Helen 
Grant, and Lord Coe, the chairman of the British Olympic Association. Cameron 
is not a fan of boycotts – viewing them as left-wing posturing – and could be 
expected to attend, given that the UK hosted the last Olympics.

Since taking office, Cameron and foreign secretary William Hague have engaged 
in a pragmatic attempt to "reset" relations with the Kremlin, which have been 
in the diplomatic freezer sincethe 2006 murder of Alexander Litvinenko. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko> Putin and Cameron 
watched the judo together at the London Games, sharing a bonding moment. In May
Cameron held talks with Putin at his summer residence in Sochi. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/10/cameron-talks-putin-syria-purposeful>
 Afterwards the prime minister announced that Britain would resume cooperation 
with Russia's FSB spy agency, over the Winter Olympics. This was remarkable, 
given that British officials believe the FSB played a leading role in 
Litvinenko's death.
 Maria Alyokhina (left) and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, who could be released as 
early as Thursday thanks to the amnesty law. Photograph: Maxim Shipenkov/EPA 
If Cameron does fly to the Black Sea resort he could end up sitting next to 
the presidents of Belarus, Venezeula and Kazakhstan. He is also likely to 
feature in Russian state propaganda.

Denis MacShane, the former Labour Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> minister, said on Wednesday 
that the prime minister should make a principled stand and boycott Sochi. He 
admitted, however: "I'm not holding my breath. We have a foreign policy that 
can be summed up in three words, 'commerce über alles'. Somehow Paris and 
Berlin seem to be able to speak out on human rights in Russia in a way that 
Cameron is frightened of."
 