
 One private misdemeanour gone public too many. Photograph: The Daily Mirror

Last Friday's Have I Got News For You was probably the best of the season so 
far and it's always great to see the show hit top form. Ever since it lost host 
Angus Deayton, it hasn't quite been the same. Deayton left under a cloud of 
coke afteran excruciating public hazing by his co-presenters 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIrAim8cl9Y> following one private misdemeanour 
gone public too many. Plenty of people greeted his fall with glee, but, as I 
think subsequent seasons have shown, Deayton was absolutely crucial to the 
show's dynamic. Ian Hislop and Paul Merton don't know whether to pity or bully 
the guest hosts and it's led to an uncertainty in tone. Not to mention the 
number of perfectly respectable one-liners that have been slaughtered by bad 
delivery from that particular weekend's day-tripper.

But last Friday saw a winning formula emerge. Rather like Steve McLaren 
stumbling into pickinga good team against Russia and Israel 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/sport/2007/09/15/mcclaren_stumbles_on_accidenta.html>
, the show has stumbled upon Jack Dee as a potential replacement. Currently 
enjoying something of a career renaissancewith the excellent Lead Balloon 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6l41gURDz4>, Dee has the big advantage of a 
background in stand-up (so no moments as a rabbit fixed in the autocue's 
glare), a strong comic persona (his assiduously cultivated, clinically 
depressed curmudgeon) and as he leads a famously unglamorous family life with 
his alcohol abuse under control, he's not vulnerable to the cocaine and hookers 
stories that did for Deayton.

Also shining last week were the guests, Charlie Brooker and Russell Brand. 
Brooker's unfailing eye for the absurd was as acute as ever though he was 
eclipsed by Brand's non-stop tangential weirdness. HIGNFY needs guests as 
strong as these for it to be at its best. Too often a stint on the GMTV sofa 
has qualified people for the role - the show format is not so sturdy that it 
can afford dead wood.

Steve McLaren squandered his good fortune by reverting to his old chumpish 
ways. It would be too bad if Have I Got News For You did the same. Some of the 
guests have had their moments (see Boris Johnson 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxYdUWHN844>) but the show really needs to nail 
down a big hitter to be the permanent host. Jack Dee looks as strong a 
candidate as any. You know what they say about changing winning formulas.
 