
The global financial crash of 2008 led to bailouts that are still being borne 
by ordinary people all over the world through higher taxes, higher property 
prices and lower savings rates.

Don't let 'the market' dominate the debate on university teaching
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/09/dont-let-the-market-dominate-the-debate-on-university-teaching>
Adam McKay’s new film The Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/the-big-short-review-ryan-gosling-brad-pitt>
 reveals how a few people made huge amounts of money from the disaster, as 
millions of others went bankrupt through no fault of their own. But amid the 
uproar, few have asked what rolefinance education and research 
<https://theconversation.com/its-time-to-put-social-impact-of-finance-on-the-curriculum-21930>
 played in the crash, and what influence they could have in the future. These 
questions are particularly pertinent now, as the possibility of another global 
financial crisis looms.

The answers are damning. Most finance academics have continued as before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/11/after-crash-need-revolution-in-economics-teaching-chang-aldred>
, spinning theories (which really are ideologies) of the importance of greed, 
profit, wealth maximisation and free markets for efficiency and risk-hedging. 
There is virtually no teaching about history, culture orethics 
<https://theconversation.com/bankers-should-look-eastwards-for-ethical-guidance-27747>
. Accounting and finance are researched and taught as if they are acultural, 
apolitical and ahistorical technical disciplines.

The reasons for this go back to the neo-liberal origins of the discipline, and 
the ways its research is controlled by a conservative elite suite of journals, 
whose ideology is based on extreme capitalism and wealth creation.

The research excellence framework (REF) has put even more pressure on finance 
academics to be conservative and toe the line of these journals, thus making 
students’ experiences even more alienating. We have already seenrebellions in 
economics teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/11/after-crash-need-revolution-in-economics-teaching-chang-aldred>
, and we may soon see similar moves in accounting and finance, as young people 
learn about corporate tax avoidance, financial exploitation and the corruption 
of politics and banking culture. At present, most of this learning is taking 
place on social media and through groups like Occupy, rather than in university 
classrooms or lecture theatres.

Six ways higher education benefits the UK economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/09/six-ways-higher-education-benefits-the-uk-economy>
The complexity of the subject has been used to disguise the underlying ethics 
and values of experts and the academy, and to influence the practice and 
industry of finance. In his book Debt: The First 5,000 Years, Professor David 
Graeber of the London School of Economics explores the human history of finance 
and finds that it is a cultural construct, grounded in social relationships and 
exchange.

It is only in the past 35 years that finance lost this grounding and become a 
tsunami which, although shaped by humans through the creation of markets and 
institutions, is now out of control, and is controlling ordinary people 
instead. Graeber argues that states have lost the power or the will to shelter 
their people from high finance and its slavery. They have lost thelanguage and 
means to resist 
<https://theconversation.com/financial-literacy-is-shockingly-low-and-the-academy-must-do-more-31321>
, as the technical complexity is too much for them.

My research <https://ucs.academia.edu/AtulKShah> has covered similar areas, 
such as the reasons for the risk management and audit failure of HBOS, and the 
role of politics and conflicts of interest. I have worked with whistleblower 
Paul Moore to expose the truth about what went wrong at HBOS. I have 
forensically examined the ethics and culture of the“big four” accounting firms 
<https://www.academia.edu/17958528/THE_CHEMISTRY_OF_AUDIT_FAILURE_-_A_Case_Study_of_HBOS_audit_by_KPMG>
.

As a Jain, a chartered accountant and an academic, I cannot ignore such 
truths. I have been hugely influenced by the work of ProfessorPrem Sikka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/08/predatory-practices-accountancy-firms>
 of the University of Essex, who has never been afraid of speaking truth to 
power. In the past three years, I have transformed my teaching by infusing 
every class with ethics, and encouraging students to talk about their personal 
experiences with finance and how it affects their families on a daily basis. I 
have made my teaching personal and holistic.


University management: new finance models need better equipped leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/sep/26/university-management-professional-development-australia>
My students have responded enthusiastically. Many are undertaking 
dissertations on ethical finance, or investigating financial exploitation and 
banking culture. When I showed the Academy Award-winning filmInside Job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/17/inside-job-review> in class, one 
MBA student was so impressed that he set up a series of visits to local church 
and community groups to give them the facts behind the financial crash, and 
show them how the public were duped, exploited and forced to bail out the 
industry without their consent.


I am teaching three courses in finance this semester, and I have once again 
updated my teaching to include recent events. Instead of feeling disempowered 
by finance, my students will learn to question its values, culture and 
theoretical frauds. They will not fear the technical sophistication which 
disguises the corruption of modern accounting and finance.

Dr Shah tweets at @atulkshah 
<https://dashboard.ophan.co.uk/info?path=/higher-education-network/2016/feb/02/q-what-did-universities-learn-from-the-financial-crash-a-nothing#tweet-694415486960951296>
.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 