
Jobs lost in the death of Queensland’s mining boom have been dwarfed by new 
jobs in service industries, pointing to a bankable future a so-called “rocks 
and crops” economy, according to a new report.

The report by thinktank The Australia Institute highlights figures showing 
record job losses in mining have been outstripped by a wave of job creation in 
every key service sector from tourism to education.

While mining shed 22,000 jobs between 2013 and 2015, health and community 
services created new jobs for almost double that number of workers.

Jobs growth in education (34,000), tourism-related services (27,000) and 
professional services (26,000) also more than made up for the decline in 
resources jobs.

Australia can have good jobs without sacrificing employment growth | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/feb/11/australia-can-have-good-jobs-without-sacrificing-employment-growth>
While workers appear to be surviving the declining mining industry, 
Australia’s big banks are having more trouble, with separate research 
suggesting mining companies will soon start defaulting on loans.

Tom Swann, co-author of the Australia Institute report, said data from the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics showed “marked improvements” inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> job growth “after some 
volatile years”.

“Last year jobs growth in Queensland hit a seven-year high, the unemployment 
rate fell, and all this while the participation edged upwards and the mining 
industry shed a record amount of jobs,” he said.

“Most of the growth has come from services, which already provide four in five 
jobs in Queensland. These industries are well placed to contribute new jobs in 
coming years.

“The easing of the high dollar and cost pressures associated with the 
phase-out of mining construction creates a really positive situation for jobs 
growth in many industries in Queensland.”

The report outlines projections from the commonwealth Department of Employment 
to show most industries apart from mining, especially services, will drive jobs 
growth.

A surge in building-related construction is predicted to pick up the slack 
from mining-related construction. Food product manufacturing – by far the 
biggest manufacturing industry in Queensland – is expected to buck a declining 
trend in other parts of the sector.

Banks, on the other hand, appear to be having more trouble with the mining 
bust.

ANZ announced last month it was writing-down $100m of bad debt from mining 
company loan defaults. Now a report from Bernstein Research has suggested ANZ 
and the Commonwealth Bank could face even larger losses from recent fossil fuel 
lending, the Australian Financial Reviewhas reported 
<http://www.afr.com/business/energy/anz-cba-face-debt-risk-as-energy-producers-wilt-20160420-goasaa>
.

According to the report, ANZ and CBA have each lent about $1bn to fossil fuel 
exploration and production companies, much of that before oil prices plummeted 
in 2014, raising concerns about the companies’ ability to repay the loans.

Recent research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/26/australias-biggest-banks-pump-billions-into-fossil-fuels-despite-climate-pledges>
 has shown Australia’s big four banks have continued lending to fossil fuel 
companies, amounting to about $5.5bn in 2015.

Tim Buckley, an analyst at the Institute for Energy Economics & Financial 
Analysis said Australian banks “to date have clearly underestimated the 
magnitude and breadth of stranded asset risk”.

He said the risk is bigger than indicated by the Bernstein report since it 
just examined exploration and production companies. Associated infrastructure 
companies have also been having trouble servicing their debts. Wiggins Island 
Coal Export Terminal in Gladstone in central Queensland, for example, has
reportedly 
<http://www.afr.com/street-talk/glencore-floats-2b-refinance-plan-for-wiggins-island-coal-terminal-20150812-gixbuz#ixzz46QVXSpS3>
 been at risk of defaulting on its future debt payments.

Swann said turning Queensland’s job growth “prospects into a reality” would be 
the focus of asummit 
<https://www.eventbrite.com.au/e/qld-jobs-growth-summit-tickets-22670028666> at 
parliament house next week where senior Palaszczuk government minister, 
including deputy premier Jackie Trad and treasurer Curtis Pitt, will speak.
 