Which drug did screenwriter and director Wes Craven say he kicked before 
writing the script?  LSD  Cocaine  Quaaludes  Methamphetamine The film’s 
premise was based on true cases of nightmare deaths, reported in 1981 by the 
New York Times. In which south-east Asian country did they occur?  Cambodia  
Vietnam  Laos  Indonesia Who was Craven’s first choice to play killer Freddy 
Krueger?  David Warner  Johnny Depp  Charlie Sheen  Jackie Earle Haley What was 
the title of the last Elm Street film to feature Robert Englund as Krueger?  
Never Sleep Again: the Elm Street Legacy  Wes Craven's New Nightmare  Another 
Nightmare on Elm Street  Freddy vs Jason Why did Craven decide on a red and 
green jumper for Krueger?  Because he secretly loves Christmas  Because he read 
that red and green clash most when viewed by the human eye  To emulate comic 
character Plastic Man’s costume  Because he wanted to forever taint Christmas 
colours Freddy Krueger appeared on-screen in the 1984 film for approximately: 
<img src="http://i.imgur.com/DE4buqT.gif" width="460" height="276"/>  Forty 
seconds  Three and a half minutes  Seven minutes  Twenty-five minutes What was 
the name of Krueger’s one-off MTV show in 1988?  Freddy Krueger Time!  The 
Freddy Krueger Hour  Don’t Sleep: Freddy’s Here  Seriously, Freddy Krueger 
Loves MTV Though shot in California, in which state was the first film meant to 
be set?  Ohio  Virginia  Florida  None is implied Who rapped about Krueger in 
1988’s Nightmare on My Street?  LL Cool J  Big Bank Hank  Will Smith  Tupac 
Johnny Depp was cast in the film mostly because Craven’s 14-year old daughter 
described him as:  Dreamy  Gorgeous  Flawless  Hunky  You got…  Your reign of 
knowledge terror is legendary, my friend – perfect marks!  You've clearly spent 
many a sleepless night studying this film. Freddy'd be proud.  Not a bad 
showing at all. Give yourself a pat on the back (but take that deadly glove off 
first).  You might spend more time sleeping soundly than tearing through trivia 
on this film. Fair enough.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  