
When the curtain goes up on Rachel Cusk’s version of Medea at London’s Almeida 
theatre, her whole family will be in the audience. The writer says she is 
tempted to spend the evening “around the corner in a pub with a bag over my 
head”, but talking in her agent’s offices about her first experience of play 
writing, she sounds more determined than afraid.Rupert Goold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rupert-goold>, the director, has been an 
“astonishing mentor”, she says. Writing for him has been like learning Chinese, 
or playing tennis withRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>: every time she thought she 
had played her best shot, it was batted back.

When I was allowed to read the script a few weeks ago it was still a work in 
progress, with ideas being passed back and forth between Cusk, Goold and the 
actors. Cusk says she and Goold have tussled over the fate of Medea’s children, 
whom in the original version she murders as part of her revenge against Jason, 
the husband who has abandoned her. Both the writer and director know that 
Cusk’s decision to spare the children their deaths at their mother’s hand is 
provocative. What audiences and critics will make of this, and the less bloody 
but still tragic alternative she has come up with, they are about to find out.

Euripides wants to liberate women but he is worried about what is going to 
happen to children if women are liberated

Cusk’s version of Euripides’ drama, first performed in Greece almost 2,500 
years ago, is about as modern as you could imagine. Settings, characters and 
language are all contemporary; the chorus emits what Cusk calls the threatening 
“jungle noises” of a gaggle of mothers at the school gates.Euripides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/euripides>, she thinks, was a feminist whose 
work “suffers massively” at the hands of traditionalists who take it too 
literally.

“I guess there are a couple of women on the planet who murder their children, 
but these days we see that as psychotic behaviour, those people are mentally 
ill, they suffer a great deal and they don’t kill their children for the 
reasons Medea kills her children,” Cusk explains. “You’re never going to go and 
seeMedea and think, ‘Oh yeah, I was a bit careless with that carving knife, I 
got a bit close to stabbing my child to death the other day.’ What I want is 
for people to think, ‘Here are some things I recognise, little echoes of my own 
experience.’Medea has everything to do with lots of people’s lives and I 
couldn’t write a play in a modern setting about a woman who kills her children.”

Last year, Cusk published a novel, Outline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/07/outline-review-rachel-cusk-daring-greek-chorus>
, which was shortlisted for the Baileys, Folio and Goldsmith’s prizes, and 
which she says received more praise than any of her other books; she is working 
on a sequel set in London, in which she hopes to meet a challenge she has set 
herself to write about sex. As well as the new novel, she would like to write 
more plays. She has been reading Greek drama since Freud switched her on to it, 
but didn’t like going to the theatre much, and laughs as she describes how, 
when she recently saw Euripides’The Bacchae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/02/bakkhai-review-almeida-ben-whishaw-bertie-carvel>
, she was delighted to find it was a captioned performance, meaning she could 
read as well as watch it. But working onMedea she has found she enjoys the 
company and liveliness of theatre, and already has a sketch for her own version 
ofThe Bacchae in her head: “Euripides wants to liberate women but he is really 
worried about what is going to happen to children if women are liberated.The 
Bacchae works for me as a little fable about feminism and its consequences.”

Feminism, the experience of women and the fate of children are themes that 
dominate not only her new life in drama but her whole writing career. She 
separates that career into three phases. The first began soon after she left 
Oxford, where she studied English. Brought up a Catholic, and influenced by
Evelyn Waugh <https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh>, she wrote three 
novels, beginning with the prize-winningSaving Agnes 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/00/04/16/reviews/000416.16gleickt.html>, which 
were psychologically astute and stylish black comedies.

The second phase lasted roughly a decade, from her early 30s to early 40s. 
Married and bringing up two daughters, first in Oxford, then Bristol and 
Brighton, Cusk published four novels, including 2005’sIn the Fold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/aug/27/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
 and 2006’sArlington Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/sep/16/featuresreviews.guardianreview6>
, that were formally more complicated, and continued to assert her interest in 
contemporary subjective experience and relationships. These books were less fun 
than her early ones and their author could be fierce. In an article for the 
Guardian in 2005 shedecried what she saw as the middle-brow philistinism of the 
women in a book group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/aug/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
she left when none of them could find a good word to say aboutChekhov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chekhov>.

Her novels, though not to every taste, were admired. James Lasdun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jameslasdun> called her one of the few 
writers “in possession of a style”.Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> defended her against the 
charge laid by another (male) critic that she was too clever by half.Arlington 
Park was on the Orange prize shortlist.

This period was bookended by two memoirs, both of which saw Cusk embroiled in 
a new kind of critical wrangle. These daysA Life’s Work: On Becoming a Mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/09/biography.features>, is seen as 
a milestone in women’s memoirs and a brave attempt to say unpopular things 
about having babies, but when it came out 14 years agosome readers disapproved 
of the emphasis Cusk placed on her own ambivalence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/21/biography.women>.

“When I describe having a baby, I’m not saying, ‘I’m so important because I’m 
having a baby,’ I’m saying that this is still an experience that is not 
understood because, OK, having a baby is pretty eternal but women are changing, 
so what it means to have a baby is changing all the time,” she explains. “None 
of these things is resolved and all I’m trying to do is push the line a little 
bit further in terms of what you’re allowed to say. That to me is a principle 
and it has a moral worth that is nothing to do with some middle-class woman 
sitting there navel-gazing or wittering on – that is not what I’m doing.”

Even so, Cusk, who now lives in London, says she was shocked by the reaction 
to her second memoir, about the breakdown of her relationship.Julie Burchill 
calledAftermath: On Marriage and Separation “brilliant”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/26/aftermath-rachel-cusk-review-burchill>
 Elsewhere Cusk was pilloried and one hostile piecewon the Hatchet Job of the 
Year award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/12/hatchet-job-of-the-year-rachel-cusk>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Frachel-cusk-interview-medea-divorce-almeida-theatre-london-feminist-euripides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf63f1458b3ca743ab930cd3d23b8f4e37699a7d%2F0_222_4200_2524%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Cusk%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Medea%20is%20about%20divorce%20%E2%80%A6%20A%20couple%20fighting%20is%20an%20eternal%20predicament.%20Love%20turning%20to%20hate%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Frachel-cusk-interview-medea-divorce-almeida-theatre-london-feminist-euripides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel%20Cusk%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Medea%20is%20about%20divorce%20%E2%80%A6%20A%20couple%20fighting%20is%20an%20eternal%20predicament.%20Love%20turning%20to%20hate%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Frachel-cusk-interview-medea-divorce-almeida-theatre-london-feminist-euripides%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf63f1458b3ca743ab930cd3d23b8f4e37699a7d%2F0_222_4200_2524%2F4200.jpg>
 Kate Fleetwood in Medea at the Almeida. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
“I didn’t quite know you weren’t allowed to talk about divorce either,” is her 
comment now. “It’s interesting to find I draw out this intolerance, because 
what it proves is that there is a taboo, there is censoring going on. But I 
wish I hadn’t had to prove it quite so violently.” Though she can cope with 
most criticism, she remains angry with journalists who claimed to feel 
concerned about her children in articles it could only pain them to read.

“The misuse of the term ‘narcissism’ in relation to my work is nauseating,” 
she says. “My life is the trash going into the incinerator to power the book 
I’m trying to write.”

For a time, Cusk felt her creative self had died: “Aftermath was very much the 
last iteration of a big phase of my life and I think I knew I had to dismantle 
my whole writing process because I had become a different person and I couldn’t 
write those books any more. I had to write a book that was about the new things 
but I didn’t know what the new things were.”

For Medea, she worked her way through several translations, watched Lars von 
Trier’s 1988 TV movie version 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medea_%281988_film%29> and embarked on 
discusssions with an academic expert. The breakthrough came when she realised 
she could not see the space-time dimensions of a play on a computer screen. She 
swapped her laptop for big pieces of paper spread across a table, and says the 
experience was a liberation – “an example of how you are freer than you think”.

But while the play and her most recent novel, with its stripped-back style, 
are a departure from her previous work, they are also connected to it and each 
other in interesting ways.Medea, Cusk says firmly, is “about divorce, not 
motherhood”, and Goold, the Almeida’s artistic director, wrote to her because 
he had readAftermath, which contains many Greek literary references. Meanwhile, 
Outline was not only set in Athens but inspired by the Odyssey, and “the idea 
of things being told afterwards, and that really being the basis for all 
narrative. InOutline writing becomes talking,” she explains.

Cusk wrote the scenes between Medea and Jason, the warring couple, first: “The 
arguments I wrote straight away, because they to me are the most amazing thing 
about the play ... This couple fighting and fighting is an eternal human 
predicament. Love turning to hate, it’s like splitting the atom, such 
destructiveness comes of it.”

The unsympathetic chorus is inspired in part by her own bad experiences at the 
hands of her female peers. Cusk was bullied at boarding school “for long enough 
for it to have had far-reaching consequences”, she says, and it has taken years 
to unpick the effects of her unhappy childhood. Though she has a good 
relationship with her sister and radiates pride in her daughters, she has never 
found a group of women to which she felt she belonged. Part of her discomfort 
in the early years of her daughters’ lives, she says, was that “I didn’t quite 
realise when I had children how much you go back to school”.

Aftermath: On Marriage and Separation by Rachel Cusk – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/26/aftermath-rachel-cusk-review-burchill>
In Medea as Euripides wrote it, the heroine kills her children with a knife in 
her final act of revenge, and while Cusk has modified the action to make it 
more comprehensible in the present day, she believes the fate of the children 
speaks to what she calls the “moral cynicism of the divorce world”. Perhaps 
surprisingly, at least to those readers who saw her as insufficiently 
protective of her own children’s privacy when she wrote about their family 
life, Cusk is unfashionably firm about the damaging consequences of divorce.

“Everybody desperately wants to believe that children are fine and there are 
lots of those lines in the play, lines I hate and that my daughters also hate: 
‘children are very resilient’ and all that sort of stuff they get told the 
whole time,” she says. “And I think: no they’re not, children are the most 
vulnerable of us all, they can change shape really easily and that’s what’s 
dangerous. Of course everyone wants to believe that what looks OK is OK, 
because you don’t want to think that with your selfishness you’ve damaged these 
people you’ve bothered to bring into the world. But I think the discourse about 
divorce is inadequate as far as children are concerned.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> of divorce are split down the 
middle and it’s very hard for their voices to be heard.”

School taught me that life was hard and people were cruel

For Cusk, “the truthful idea of damage to children” is the heart of the play: 
“this is what Medea sees and this is what Euripides sees, and it’s so good that 
someone sees that it absolutely relies on the institutionalised culture of 
motherhood to mop up and conceal the essential cynicism of divorce. What 
happens is: man leaves woman, children are damaged, and woman is expected to 
continue their lives and her life as a self-sacrificing pretence. The fact of 
this damage to children is covered up by everybody and Medea doesn’t do that, 
she won’t do it, she says: ‘These are our children and if you leave me the 
grounds for their existence are not there any more.’ They are cancelled, in a 
way.”

For all her conviction, is Cusk worried what reviewers will say about her 
play? The reaction to theatre is so swift compared with the drip-drip of book 
reviews, with the critics sharing the same physical space. She says she isn’t – 
that it feels less lonely than with novels because she didn’t makeMedea on her 
own.

Has she felt let down, in the past, by female critics who failed to appreciate 
what she saw as feminist writing?

“School taught me that life was hard and people were cruel,” she says. DH 
Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence>, for her “the greatest 
English novelist”, was “totally abused even in his obituaries”. She doesn’t do 
social media, doesn’t know which of her books is the best seller, and says 
awards ceremonies feel like “swimming-suit competitions”.

Is there something in her that thrives on an embattled, outsider status? It 
seems unarguable that painful life experience has fuelled her creatively.

“Part of change is very painful and very risky, but it is the only possible 
route I think to those new forms of expression. I’m very pleased that I have 
found, for now anyway, a new vein of creativity.”

She says this phase too may come to an end, that life may one day again stop 
delivering the material she requires. Last month, she gave up her job teaching 
creative writing. But there is no way back to what she calls “the happy-ending 
version of life” and for now, along with her fiction, there is tragedy.

“The most interesting bit of Medea is obviously the end, when she goes up in 
the chariot and is triumphant,” Cusk says. “I’ve thought an awful lot about 
that. Some kind of moral hardness and correctness delivers her into this 
transfigured place, and the question of what comes next is interesting to me.”

• Medea is at the Almeida <http://www.almeida.co.uk>, London N1, until 14 
November.
 