
It is almost exactly 20 years since Rachel Whiteread 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/whiteread> received official approval from a 
fractious coalition of councillors and residents in east London to create what 
still remains her best-known artwork,House 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/1993/house>. By the spring of 1993 there 
had already been two years of preparation for the project. Work eventually 
began that summer on the last remaining property in a demolished terrace on 
Grove Road, Bow.

Liquid concrete – the same product that is used to patch up the white cliffs 
of Dover – was sprayed on to the house's interior to create a cast, and then 
the external walls were carefully removed. The work was finally finished in 
late autumn, revealing a full-sized, inverse representation of the three-storey 
home, complete with outlines of fireplaces, windows, architraves and 
staircases. Less than a month after its official opening, Whiteread, aged just 
30, was awarded theTurner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize>.

The work was Whiteread's most ambitious exploration to date of the utterly 
familiar, yet almost entirely overlooked. And within the apparently blank 
concrete surface were exposed the affecting remnants of lives lived. Whiteread 
found herself being thanked by two former residents of the demolished terrace 
for "making their memories real".

"People still talk to me a lot about House," she says today. "It still seems 
to be incredibly evocative and people can bring it up in their mind's eye. 
That's obviously very pleasing, but I also know that part of it is undoubtedly 
to do with the way it was destroyed."

For all the praise House attracted, it was also a lightning conductor 
for varying degrees of opportunistic political and artistic objection. 
Unofficial laureate of east LondonIain Sinclair 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/iain-sinclair> captured well the 
"freakish alliance of extremes" that eventually coalesced in opposition: "Come 
in the K Foundation, Brian Sewell, Stewart Home, Councillor Eric Flounders. 
Come in Class War, the BNP, and the M11 protest lobby." On the very day of the 
Turner prize announcement, a sub-committee of the local authority made the 
decision that the lease should not be renewed, and so in January 1994, less 
than four months after its completion,House was demolished.
 Rachel Whiteread in her studio. Photograph: Anita Corbin 
Whiteread's early career was associated with the Young British Artists 
generation. "YBAs? OBAs?" she laughs. "What is the correct term these days?" 
(LikeTracey Emin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/traceyemin> and several 
other YBAs, Whiteread is 50 this year). And over the last 20 years she has 
put together a body of work that includes theHolocaust memorial 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?imgurl=http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/26/Rachel_whitereadwien_holocaust_mahnmal_wien_judenplatz.jpg&imgrefurl=http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Rachel_whitereadwien_holocaust_mahnmal_wien_judenplatz.jpg&h=768&w=1024&sz=635&tbnid=72RGnabZCjgEGM:&tbnh=93&tbnw=124&prev=/search%3Fq%3Djudenplatz%2Brachel%2Bwhiteread%26tbm%3Disch%26tbo%3Du&zoom=1&q=judenplatz+rachel+whiteread&usg=__-6C4Pda_WmjSLrVOkfxrKxC61Zo=&docid=CIsXKNx7s2RxvM&sa=X&ei=-elaUYa2Geqn0AXHwIGYDw&ved=0CEYQ9QEwAg&dur=646>
 in the Judenplatz in Vienna, thefourth plinth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/nov/13/germaine-greer-photograph-decade>
 in Trafalgar Square, filling theTurbine Hall 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/unilever-series-rachel-whiteread-embankment/rachel-whiteread>
 of Tate Modern with 14,000 plastic boxes and providing a new frieze on the 
façade of theWhitechapel Gallery 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/art/articles/2012/june/14/rachel-whiteread-unveils-whitechapel-frieze/>
. Her latest work will be exhibited at theGagosian Gallery 
<http://www.gagosian.com/exhibitions/rachel-whiteread--april-11-2013> in London 
later this week. The show is calledDetached and features casts of secondhand 
sheds, doors and windows, as well as smaller casts and works on paper.

Back in 2002, speaking about House, Whiteread declared it was a shame the work 
"didn't have the chance to become invisible, the way architecture becomes 
invisible. I think that's an interesting idea and maybe it's something that I 
will work with at some point." The sheds inDetached could be seen as her 
addressing that idea. "I call them 'shy sculptures'," she says. "The first one 
I made was of a boathouse <http://www.skulpturstopp.no/en/gran> on a fjord in 
Norway. It's had hardly any attention, and I really wanted to make things that 
you just come across, very much a part of the landscape." She's also making a 
piece that will go into a wood in Norfolk, and one for a desert in America. "
House disappeared, but these things will just be there in the landscape."

Alongside the large sheds will be smaller objects, "items put together that 
might include a found old can, a new cast of an old can, and something that 
might be called sculpture." Her large east London studio – and home she shares 
with husband and fellow sculptor Marcus Taylor and their two sons – is full of 
disparate objects she has found or made. "Myshow of drawings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2010/sep/12/art-exhibition> at 
the Tate a few years ago made me think of all these things I'd collected since 
I was a kid. I've called them 'abject objects', and I've just sort of played 
with them, applying silver leaf or casting in ferrous plaster so that they rust 
or patinate."

She says that physically playing with these objects helps her to work things 
out. "They are almost like doodles. It's what I've always done. When I was a 
kid my friends would be obsessed by music and would learn every lyric of songs, 
but I was never into that. I was totally interested in the physical world and 
would always be making something, playing around with bits and pieces I'd 
found, changing them from one thing into another."

Whiteread was born in 1963, the youngest of three girls with her elder sisters 
being identical twins. Their mother was an artist and their father a teacher, 
lecturer and educational administrator. The family lived in rural Essex until 
moving to London when Whiteread was seven, where she remembers a house full of 
politics and art. Not only would she go canvassing with her father for the 
Labour party, there'd be trips to the National Gallery, "and also to wacky 70s 
happenings at the Roundhouse. We went to lots of interesting things and my 
mother was involved in a famous feminist exhibition at the ICA calledWomen's 
Images of Men. I remember it being put together in our basement in Muswell 
Hill, and so I've known people likeIwona Blazwick 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2006/aug/19/art.art> and Sandy Nairne 
[who both worked at the ICA early in their careers and are now directors of the 
Whitechapel Gallery and the National Portrait Gallery respectively] since I was 
13."

She says she did go through a brief period of rebelling against her mother 
"and claiming that I wanted nothing to do with art. But by the time I was in 
the sixth form I was pretty committed." As a child, Whiteread's two favourite 
images – printed on postcards she still has – were of Bridget Riley op art and 
Anthony Caro's groundbreaking 1962 sculptureEarly One Morning 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/anthony-caro>. 
Although she never thought of herself as the best painter in her school, she 
was aware of having "a hyperactive mind and seeing a lot of possibilities. By 
the time I went on a foundation course I was desperate to start making work."

Despite enrolling on the BA painting course at Brighton Polytechnic, she spent 
most of her time in the sculpture department. In her second year the artist 
Richard Wilson gave a workshop on casting and, importantly for the rest of her 
career, Whiteread saw for the first time that the cast of the space around a 
simple spoon resulted in it "simultaneously both losing and retaining elements 
of its essential 'spoon-ness'. I can't say that I realised there and then that 
the possibilities might be almost endless, but I knew it was challenging and 
interesting that something so simple could change your perception of objects."

It was while on the Sculpture MA at the Slade from 1985–87 that Whiteread made 
her first discernibly Whitereadean piece of sculpture,Closet 
<http://www.museomadre.it/opere.cfm?id=243>, a black felt-covered plaster cast 
of the inside of a cupboard. The impulse for the apparently blank and stark 
piece was both emotional and nostalgic in that it conjured for her the – 
comforting, she insists – childhood memories of hiding in a dark cupboard. It 
was followed by another work prompted by personal experience:Shallow Breath 
<http://www.museomadre.it/opere.cfm?id=248>, a cast of the space underneath a 
bed, has often been described as reminiscent of a rib cage, and was made not 
long after her father died.

By then she was renting a studio "funded by Thatcher's dream, the Enterprise 
Allowance Scheme. It was a massage of the unemployment figures and I know an 
awful lot of people who went on it. You got 40 quid a week but you could do 
anything. So I was an artist, but also a painter and decorator, a prop maker, a 
film person. I had a studio with no windows and lots of mice. It was where the 
Olympics site is now, and there were a lot of artists there" – Grayson Perry's 
studio was close by – "so we would visit each other's studios a lot and people 
were generally supportive of each other."
 Rachel Whiteread's Detached 1 (2012). Photograph: Mike Bruce/Rachel 
Whiteread/Gagosian Gallery 
Both Closet and Shallow Breath featured in her first important solo show at a 
tiny Islington gallery in 1988. "It was basically a very small domestic space, 
and I showed the cast of the inside of a dressing table, the underside of a 
bed, the inside of a wardrobe and a hot water bottle. I thought they were all 
elements that you might have in a room like that, filled with postwar 
utilitarian furniture."

The pieces all sold and Whiteread was able to attract funding for her most 
ambitious project to date,Ghost 
<http://www.nga.gov/fcgi-bin/tinfo_f?object=128234.0&detail=none> (1990), that 
saw her shortlisted for the Turner prize. It was a cast of a room in a house in 
Archway, north London, that was put together with a "great deal of second-hand 
dexion, plaster, rubber, wood and a lot of hard work." The work has passed 
through several collectors since then, including Charles Saatchi, and is now in 
the National Gallery of Art in Washington. In an unusual validation of her 
belief that spaces retain human history, she was recently told by a visitor to 
the museum that the room must have been part of a house occupied by relatives 
of Rod Stewart. "Apparently the fireplace had been installed by this guy's 
father."

By 1992 Whiteread had featured in Saatchi's Young British Art shows alongside 
the likes ofSarah Lucas <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/lucas> and 
Damien Hirst <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/damienhirst>. She also 
showed work in the definitive YBA exhibitionsSensation and Brilliant. How did 
she react to her friends and contemporaries becoming as famous as pop stars? 
"Some people have made it their mission to become extremely well-known. For 
Tracey [Emin] it is part of her work. I'm nothing like that and neither are 
most of my contemporaries. People like Gary [Hume] or Sarah [Lucas] muddle 
along and get on with their work and do a bit of publicity when they have a 
show."

She says she went into a career in art knowing what was ahead of her. "My mum 
was an artist so I was aware that being a committed artist didn't mean you 
would earn any money. As it turned out I have earned quite a lot of money and 
that's been great. But I didn't expect it, unlike a lot of my contemporaries 
during the heady early days of YBAs when money was quite an important part of 
it all. I was ambitious for my work, but I always thought I would fund it 
through teaching, and that's what I did for five years."

She says she enjoyed teaching but eventually gave it up when too many students 
"wanted to know how to become a wealthy artist. It wasn't really about making 
work any more, it was about having a big career. I just kept saying 'keep your 
head down and get on with it'. If the work is good enough the career will come."

Whiteread's own career certainly came with House and the Turner prize, 
although she found the process uncomfortable. "I'd madeHouse and I was 
something of a physical and nervous wreck. Then, on the day of the Turner, the 
council said they were going to pull it down and there was also the crazy K 
Foundation thing." Art pranksters the K Foundation awarded Whiteread their 
worst artist of the year award and "blackmailed" her into accepting the £40,000 
prize – twice the money of the Turner prize – by threatening to burn the cash 
if she refused. In the end, she gave away the bulk of it to homelessness charity
Shelter <http://www.shelter.org.uk/> and in grants to young artists. "So the 
whole thing was too much stress really, and looking back it is a bit of a blur."
 Rachel Whiteread's Vienna Holocaust memorial, perhaps her most prestigious 
work. Photo: Martin Gnedt/AP 
Her next major commission, the Vienna Holocaust memorial, was an equally 
fraught process due to the complications of Austrian politics and the 
inevitable sensitivities around the issue. It took over five years to complete, 
but while she now says she wouldn't go through that sort of process again, she 
is very proud of the work, a large concrete cast of a library with the titles 
of the books facing inwards. "The politics were horrendous, but I'm happy at 
the way people seem to respect the piece and to use it as a place to think 
about what happened."

She now takes on very few commissions, but was keen to make a new frieze for 
the Whitechapel gallery despite the problems of negotiating with English 
Heritage "about what you can and can't do. Having to stick to your guns is kind 
of exhausting. But as I've lived round here forever it was very nice to be 
asked, and it did feel as if I was giving something back.

"What I'm not into is what I call 'plop' art. Making things and just putting 
them in places for the sake of it. I don't like much sculpture in the street. 
It really needs a reason for being there, but when it does, it can be a 
wonderful thing. I don't think art changes the world in terms of stopping 
people dying of Aids or of starvation or being homeless. But for an individual, 
seeing a great piece of art can take you from one place to another – it can 
enhance daily life, reflect our times and, in that sense, change the way you 
think and are."

Her forthcoming schedule – "I'm booked until 2018" – includes large-scale 
works as well as making a special edition of a book to accompany the New York 
stage version of Colm Tóibín's novellaThe Testament of Mary. Small art remains 
as important to her as her large projects. "I changed my way of working a few 
years ago in that I used to have lots of assistants and then realised that 
wasn't for me. A lot of the early work was based on my size and what I could 
lift. I still bring in people to help me when needed, but I love doing the 
smaller things myself and I try to keep my touch on the work. It goes back 
to the beginning."

There is a print in the new show of a squashed can she found on her first day 
as an undergraduate, and she still uses college sketchbooks.

"I'm always recycling in my head. It can take a long time to develop your 
vocabulary as an artist, but now I'm coming up to be half a century I suppose I 
should be getting there. Then again, my mum always said that I had an old soul, 
and I do now feel as if I've finally grown into my age."
 