
It has been a fascinating few days for women and theatre. Comments by Vicky 
Featherstone, the artistic director of the Royal Court – about howcritical and 
audience responses 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/vicky-featherstone-critics-are-harder-on-women/>
 to male and female dominated narratives are markedly different, and that 
strong female characters often make viewers uncomfortable –generated 
considerable debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/03/vicky-featherstone-do-strong-female-roles-theatre-make-theatre-audiences-uncomfortable>
. Meanwhile, in Australia, there has been a fascinating conversation going on 
below the line on Jane Griffiths’spiece about critical reaction to her 
reworking of Antigone 
<http://performing.artshub.com.au/news-article/opinions-and-analysis/performing-arts/jane-griffiths/what-women-critics-know-that-men-dont-249447>
, in which she suggests that the reviews provided a startling example of the 
way criticism is gendered.

These conversations are not new. I recall Timberlake Wertenbaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/jun/30/theatre> talking 20-odd years 
ago about the panic that breaks out in a theatre when the critics (in those 
days mostly male) turn up at a theatre to discover that the pilot is female. 
Only last week, I was talking toBrigid Larmour 
<http://www.watfordpalacetheatre.co.uk/page/3132/Staff>, who runs Watford 
Palace where the policy is to commission equal numbers of men and women. She 
recalled working at the RSC in the early 80s, where female directors “only got 
one chance” in the face of box office or critical failure, while their male 
counterparts got a second bite at the cherry.

Medea review – Rupert Goold directs a ferocious Kate Fleetwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/medea-review-rupert-goold-kate-fleetwood-almeida>
It is clear that we need to keep having these conversations, not least because 
earlier this yeara report found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/28/nothing-changed-female-playwrights-uk-theatres-gender-equality>
 that, in the past decade, the number of new plays written by women and 
performed on UK stages has only risen from 30% to 31%. When men write about 
their experiences for the stage, it is often perceived as being universal. When 
women write about their experiences, it is too often dismissed as personal, 
marginal or domestic.

So to Rachel Cusk’s new version of Medea at the Almeida in London, which 
largely takes place in the domestic setting of a chic Islington home, and in 
whichKate Fleetwood 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/14/theater/14macb.html?pagewanted=all> gives 
sucha blazing performance in the title role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/medea-almeida-greeks-review-kate-fleetwood-laura-wade>
 that it seems as if the theatre itself might spontaneously combust. Cusk is a 
first-time theatre writer and it sometimes shows, but what is interesting about 
some of the responses from critics and audiences is how uncomfortable they are 
when a woman remakes and reimagines a familiar story that has been 
predominantly told by men.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Frachel-cusk-medea-gender-politics-ancient-and-modern-almeida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444048517863%2F4a3f9d4b-6182-41d8-ba3f-82cb28cafe26-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Cusk's%20Medea%3A%20a%20lesson%20in%20gender%20politics%20ancient%20and%20modern%2C%20onstage%20and%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Frachel-cusk-medea-gender-politics-ancient-and-modern-almeida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel%20Cusk%27s%20Medea%3A%20a%20lesson%20in%20gender%20politics%20ancient%20and%20modern%2C%20onstage%20and%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Frachel-cusk-medea-gender-politics-ancient-and-modern-almeida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444048517863%2F4a3f9d4b-6182-41d8-ba3f-82cb28cafe26-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Medea at the Almeida theatre, directed by Rupert Goold. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton 
In this case, it is a story about a woman who kills her children. Although in 
real life women who kill their children are rare, we are usually comfortable 
with the story because Medea’s actions allow us to label her as bad or mad or 
both. But Cusk’s version does not allow us the comfort of pathologising a woman 
who, when deeply hurt, does not take the traditional female route of 
internalising her feelings of anger and injustice. Crucially, Cusk makes Medea 
a writer. Her sorcery is with words, and it is that which means she is 
perceived as dangerous and as an outsider. That, and also her strength, are 
what make the male characters and the chorus of conforming yummy mummies (who 
collude in their own oppression for the price of a babyccino and a comfortable 
life) afraid of her. Creon recognises that words are dangerous, which is why he 
tries to silence her via her agent and the publishing house. Left isolated and 
defenceless, Medea uses words like weapons to get her revenge in a way that 
differs from Euripides’ original but speaks directly to centuries of women 
silenced, denied a voice and written out of history.

This Medea speaks to the injustice of a world where men abandon their children 
all the time, largely with impunity, but the woman who dares not to put her 
children before herself, and whospeaks of the exhaustion, the isolation and 
sheer slog of being a mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/21/biography.women>, is deemed to 
be unnatural. To remain silent and accept the dominant narrative is to 
perpetuate the myth that motherhood is always rewarding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Frachel-cusk-medea-gender-politics-ancient-and-modern-almeida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444048600824%2Fc5299613-7f6f-4bd4-b614-1969b591f81c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Cusk's%20Medea%3A%20a%20lesson%20in%20gender%20politics%20ancient%20and%20modern%2C%20onstage%20and%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Frachel-cusk-medea-gender-politics-ancient-and-modern-almeida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel%20Cusk%27s%20Medea%3A%20a%20lesson%20in%20gender%20politics%20ancient%20and%20modern%2C%20onstage%20and%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Frachel-cusk-medea-gender-politics-ancient-and-modern-almeida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444048600824%2Fc5299613-7f6f-4bd4-b614-1969b591f81c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Blazing … Medea at the Almeida theatre. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
In their arguments over the divorce settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/03/rachel-cusk-interview-medea-divorce-almeida-theatre-london-feminist-euripides>
 – ugly and excruciating, both parties behaving badly – Jason chides Medea for 
standing her ground, arguing that “it will be horrible for the children”. There 
is a moment towards the end when he accuses Medea: “You did this to them.” But, 
unlike in Euripides and so many subsequent versions of the play, in this 
version the parents share responsibility. They both did this to their children, 
destroying them as surely as they made them together.

If Cusk’s version points to the double standards over parental responsibility, 
it also points up the possibility that Featherstone, Griffiths and others are 
right when they observe that women on stage who cannot be explained away or 
demonised leave us puzzled and unsettled. If there is one thing that Cusk’s 
version of the narrative demonstrates, it is that the pen can be mightier than 
the sword. And that these ancient plays aresturdy enough to withstand new 
versions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/04/observer-view-greek-drama-theatre-feminism>
 that give their heroines a voice that is fierce, troubling and utterly 
uncomfortable. Telling the truth is often all those things, and as both Cusk 
and her Medea have discovered, it comes at a price.
 