
The pan-industry internet radio service RadioPlayer has joined forces with 
Audioboo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo> to offer an instant 
listen-again service for its 300-plus stations.

The tieup is likely to be of most benefit for smaller commercial and community 
stations unable to invest in the infrastructure and technology developed by the 
bigger commercial broadcasters and the BBC.

RadioPlayer, which is backed by the BBC and commercial radio and launched last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/31/radioplayer-launches?INTCMP=SRCH>
, currently has almost 7 million listeners a month.

The joint initiative with sound-sharing application Audioboo 
<http://audioboo.fm/> will allow stations to make selected clips available to 
listen to again in their RadioPlayer console, which will also be integrated 
into its centralised search engine.

Mark Rock, the founder and chief executive of Audioboo, said it offered a 
low-cost, cloud-based listen-again service for UK radio operators.

"We've always seen ourselves as a platform complementary to existing 
broadcasting brands, rather than an industry disrupter," said Rock.

"We believe RadioPlayer is a fantastic platform, as demonstrated by the 
notable success it has already achieved. The bite-sized, contextual and 
real-time content that Audioboo can deliver will add significant depth to 
broadcasters' presence on the platform.

"Since anyone can upload boos via landline, mobile or web, with moderation 
tools available in the cloud, it's another example of how radio can really 
broaden its reach and relevance in the digital audio space."

The new facility, due to be demonstrated at the Consumer Electronics Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces-2012> in Las Vegas, will be 
available to any UK radio station licensing one of Audioboo's Pro services.

RadioPlayer founder and managing director Michael Hill said it was "now ready 
to enter a new phase of deepening people's listening habits, making them more 
social, and helping smaller stations offer high-quality audio content. Audioboo 
is obviously a perfect fit for that".

Hill used an appearance at the Radio Festival in October last year to promise 
a range of new improvements to RadioPlayer which he said would make it "
measurably the best mobile radio player app in the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2011/oct/31/radiolayer-founder-lets-nail-this>
".

RadioPlayer currently offers <http://www.radioplayer.co.uk/> access to more 
than 300 BBC, commercial, community and student stations.

Audioboo launched in 2009, allowing users to record and upload almost 
unlimited amounts of audio which can be integrated with Facebook and Twitter. 
It washailed in the MediaGuardian 100 as "democratising radio or, at least, a 
short-form, on-demand version of it" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/19/mark-rock-mediaguardian-100-2010>
.

Clive Dickens, chief operating officer of Absolute Radio, said: "We are a 
strong supporter of innovation in radio as IP continues to help us redefine 
radio.

"Audioboo has already successfully exploited the social side of listening, 
it's essentially becoming desktop audio publishing for radio, with the added 
benefit of allowing contributions from listeners to the brands they love."

Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> listening accounted 
for 3.7% of radio listening in the third quarter of 2011, the latest period for 
which figures are available, up from 2.8% in the same period in 2010. Digital 
audio broadcasting (DAB) radio remains by far the biggest digital radio 
platform, with 18% of all listening out of a digital share of 28.2%.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 