
If the combination of the budget and England's performance at the World Cup 
has put years on you this week, take comfort in the adage that the old ones are 
the best. Proving the point, Radio 7 has given another airing to Stop Messin' 
About – a celebration of Kenneth Williams' audio work (listen again here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007jv7z>).

You'll find episodes from all the shows you'd expect in this three-hour 
extravaganza: Round the Horne, children's programme Big and Little and The
Kenneth Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-williams> 
Playhouse. But the real treats are the actor's readings from his autobiography, 
Just Williams, (you'll find them at 33mins and 2hrs 40mins) and the monologue 
Diary of a Madman (58mins). The latter, if you've never heard it, was intended 
as the narration to an animated version of Nikolai Gogol's short story about a 
Russian civil servant during the 1830s. Williams ratchets up the tension as the 
protagonist descends into paranoia and delusion, and the result is 
spell-binding.

From classic comedy to brand new banter: Rhod Gilbert's Saturday morning show 
on BBC Radio Wales offers a fun couple of hours (listen again here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0079g3l>). Fans of his stand-up act and panel 
show appearances will not be disappointed, as he considers the contents of the 
local newspapers and struggles to remember what happened to his pet hamsters, 
Shwnny and Ianto.

Music-wise the choices are a bit rock-MOR but inoffensive enough – sometimes 
bordering on good. If you're here for the comedy only though,try the podcast. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/podcasts/series/rhod>

If you're looking for something poppier on the music front, Annie Mac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/annie-mac> is standing in for Fearne 
Cotton, instantly making the Radio 1 morning show more listenable for anyone 
over the age of 16.

On Tuesday's show (Listen again here <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00srwgm>
), Scissor Sisters dropped into the studio to put a country spin on Kylie's 
rather pedestrian new single All the Lovers (listen and watch them perform here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p008hb25>), as well a performing one of their 
own tracks, Fire with Fire (listen and watch here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p008hb3s>).

Over on Radio 4, comedians Susan Calman and Tim Key talk about their favourite 
books in Tuesday's A Good Read (listen again here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00srnzz>) – but don't expect belly laughs. 
Key selects God's Own Country by Ross Raisin, a gripping and somewhat 
disturbing tale of social misfit. Calman's choice is Born Standing Up: A Comic 
Life by Steve Martin – a book she credits with helping her through her early 
career as a stand-up comic. Although Sue MacGregor's guests do discuss their 
shared profession, this isn't a platform for gags, but is honest and engaging 
in a way that book-club shows rarely manage to be.
 