Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0fv0ix2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0fv0ix2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0fv0ix2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Rafael Nadal will have to beat Swiss players back to back to win his second 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Sunday, 
and may have a slightly tougher time of it against Stanislas Wawrinka than he 
did in a curiously uneven semi-final against Roger Federer on Friday.

The world No1 took two hours and 23 minutes to win 7-6, 6-3, 6-3 – his 23rd 
victory over the Swiss, in 33 matches, moving him to within a win of drawing 
alongside Pete Sampras on 14 slam titles – and three behind Federer. Sampras 
was in the audience at the Rod Laver Arena, the first time he saw them play 
each other live.

"I never thought about 13 grand slams, or 14 either," Nadal said. "I need to 
keep playing great to win this title. Stan's serve is huge, and he is hitting 
the ball very hard. I will try to play the same as I did tonight. When I play 
with Roger, it's a very special feeling. We play a lot of times for important 
things in our career. He's a really great champion, and it's an honour to play 
him. We played some tough rallies in the first set, he was playing some very 
aggressive tennis. I think tonight I played my best tennis of the tournament. 
After missing last year, it is very emotional for me to be back on this court."

Nadal tried to downplay the effect of a blister on his left hand and it did 
not seem to inconvenience him unduly – at least not as much as inhis 
quarter-final win over Grigor Dimitrov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/22/rafael-nadal-defeats-grigor-dimitrov-australian-open>
. "Too much talk about the blister," he said. "It is OK. It is the position of 
the blister, it is difficult to cover. Normal life, it is OK, but to play the 
best players in the world it is a challenge. I have a very tough opponent in 
Wawrinka. He's played some amazing tennis. He will come to the final with a lot 
of confidence."

At the beginning, this semi-final had the feel of a major prizefight, Nadal's 
Joe Frazier to Federer's Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/nov/08/joe-frazier-muhammad-ali-1971>. 
And the crowd might have been divided down those lines, too, leaning towards 
Roger, as ever, perhaps 75-25, craving artistry and style over strength and 
doggedness. In the early exchanges, Federer's sharper ground strokes, with 
subtle changes in direction and weight, as well as his new-found eagerness to 
kill the point at the net at the earliest opportunity, kept Nadal on the back 
foot. Going into the match, Federer had won 135 of 178 net approaches, and 
Nadal was sometimes three metres behind the baseline when receiving, and not 
much further forward after serving, so wary was he of his opponent's aggression.

Nadal was the first to get into a spot of trouble, having to fight through 
deuce to hold in eight minutes for 2-2 after a quarter of an hour. Then a 
stinging cross-court return and a passing shot down the left flank that only 
Nadal could conjure gave him two break points in the seventh game. But he 
failed to handle the tricky wind inside the open-roofed arena and his last shot 
of the game was a shanked forehand that skewed into the seats.

It was Federer's turn to suffer in the breeze in the ninth game, as he 
double-faulted and netted to give Nadal his third break point, but hung on, and 
the Spaniard had to serve to stay in the set at 4-5 after 36 minutes. He held 
with an ace – as did Federer for a 6-5 lead. The pressure was back on Nadal – 
who held to force the tie-break, then won it, Federer's final forehand floating 
long.

However, after holding to 30 in the first game of the second set, Nadal needed 
his blister tended to – not a good sign. It did not matter. When Federer 
slapped a forehand wide in the sixth game, Nadal led 4-2 and comfort flooded 
his tennis, the pain of his wound forgotten. He closed out the set and his 
confidence rose appreciably.

It was Federer's turn to struggle, and he did not handle the challenge so 
well. The fightback never really took off, from an unpromising deficit, and, 
when he netted another backhand volley, he fell 2-1 behind in the third, with 
the end beckoning more quickly be the shot. He delayed the fall to break back 
at 2-2, but Nadal forced him wider and deeper, and Federer faced a mountain 
when serving to stay in the match at 3-5.

He went down in flames, of course, belting an ace and making one final charge 
at the net, only to be passed again for deuce. There was absolutely nothing he 
could do about Nadal's arrowed passing shot for a second match point and he was 
resigned, maybe even a little relieved, when the agony ended on the end of his 
concluding forehand, which sailed harmlessly over the baseline.
 