
11.19am GMT 

Roger Federer stalks down the tunnel, giving a wave to the crowd as he departs.
He has played some stunning tennis over the past fortnight, raising hopes that 
we might about to see a resurgence, but he probably knows he'll never win 
another grand slam if he has to get past the astonishing Rafael Nadal. This was 
not the classic we had been promised. In the end, it was as one-sided as it 
gets, Nadal too powerful and too consistent to ever be properly challenged. 
Instead he methodically took Federer's game apart and he will face Stanislas 
Wawrinka in Sunday's final. A 14th grand slam is within touching distance. See 
you on Sunday. Thanks for reading. Bye.

Updated at 11.21am GMT

11.17am GMT 

NADAL WINS 7-6, 6-3, 6-3 TO REACH THE AUSTRALIAN OPEN FINAL!

Federer thinks he's a dead cert to hold at 40-15. But Nadal won't quit with 
the winners. A backhand down the line at 40-15 is followed by a forehand pass 
as Federer comes forward. Deuce. Two more points and Nadal is in the final. 
Federer dumps a backhand long to give Nadal his first break point. To be 
brutally honest, Federer has looked beaten for a while. He saves the match 
point, though, Nadal netting, but he's soon facing another one as Nadal dashes 
on to a volley and curls a ridiculous forehand pass down the line. Federer 
misses a first serve. Trouble. Nadal senses his moment but all he needs to do 
is wait for the error. Sure enough, Federer batters one last forehand past the 
baseline and victory is Nadal's! 


11.11am GMT 

Third set: Federer 6-7, 3-6, 3-5 Nadal* (*denotes server): Nadal is taken to 
30-all by Federer, a lovely backhand winner doing the damage, but the 
consistency isn't there from the great man. He nets a backhand to make it 40-30 
and then sends a reckless drive volley into the net. Nadal is one game away.


11.08am GMT 

Third set: Federer* 6-7, 3-6, 3-4 Nadal (*denotes server): Oh dear. Oh dear, 
oh dear, oh dear. At 30-all, Federer nets an easy backhand in dismal fashion. 
There have been too many of those moments. Nadal has a break point, a chance to 
stamp out the Federer resurgence. Although he doesn't actually have to do 
anything other than stand at the back of the court and look menacing in order 
to throw Federer off. A simple forehand presents itself to Federer but his shot 
hits the top of the net and loops long to give Nadal the break. The jig is 
almost up. "Another moot point is to wonder how good McEnroe would have been 
given today's conditioning, nutrition etc," says Gary Naylor. "I'd have taken 
him to beat Nadal more often than not on all surfaces, excluding clay 
obviously. McEnroe would have turned Nadal's power back on him and found angles 
that would have moved Nadal up and down the court, as well as across it. And 
I'm not sure Nadal would have coped with the McEnroe serve all that well." And 
how good would Jeremy Bates have been? We can only wonder.

11.03am GMT 

Third set: Federer 6-7, 3-6, 3-3 Nadal* (*denotes server): Federer's won two 
games in a row, but Nadal's not about to let him add a third. He holds to love.
 "On the Federer vs Nadal debate, I have always thought that looking at who 
they had to beat to win each slam is the best barometer for who is the 
greatest," says Patrick Rennie.  "Federer: Phillippoussis, Safin, Roddick x 4, 
Hewitt, Agassi, Baghdatis, Nadal x 2, Gonzalez, Djokovic, Murray x 3, 
Soderling.  Nadal: Puerta, Federer x 6, Soderling, Berdych, Djokovic x 3, 
Ferrer." I'd say it's also worth looking at who they beat along the way; 
Federer, for example, had to beat Djokovic, the world No1 at the time and the 
defending champion, in the semi-final at Wimbledon in 2012.

11.00am GMT 

Third set: Federer* 6-7, 3-6, 3-2 Nadal (*denotes server): Federer is 
muttering darkly at the back of the court as a forehand goes long to give Nadal 
two break points at 15-40. It must drive him mad. He just can't catch a break 
against this guy. He saves the first break point and thinks he's got the second 
too as a Nadal return goes long, only for Nadal to challenge the serve. It was 
indeed out. Second serve. Federer is looking around for something to kick. 
Nothing presents itself, so he serves instead and Nadal nets a backhand! It's 
deuce. Federer finally gets a volley right to earn the advantage and then holds 
as Nadal hits long. Admirable resilience from Federer.


10.56am GMT 

Third set: Federer 6-7, 3-6, 2-2 Nadal* (*denotes server): Nadal's level drops 
a tad and two errors give Federer a sniff at 15-30. Can he finally get a break 
point? He can! Nadal's forehand goes wide to make it 15-40! But the first goes 
begging, a return going long. Federer challenges, just for the sheer hell of 
it. But he's got another opportunity. Nadal pummels the Federer backhand but he 
clings on and eventually Nadal whacks a forehand past the baseline! Federer 
breaks for the first time in the match. It's probably not going to make much of 
a difference in the long run but it's still good to see. You have to relish 
these little victories in life. "It’s a moot point – and probably so moot it’s 
pointless and even boring – but I wonder if Nadal would have been as good as he 
is had Federer not existed," self-hates Joe Pickering. "He’s clearly got a 
pathological ambition and set his sights on being the best in the world. To do 
that he knew that he had to be better than someone at the time regarded as the 
best of all time. Great players force each other to improve, make each other 
greater, and I just wonder if Nadal would have had to push himself as hard 
without someone as great as Federer to aim for."

10.51am GMT 

Third set: Federer* 6-7, 3-6, 1-2 Nadal (*denotes server): On the one hand, 
Federer should probably stop coming to the net, because Nadal is starting to 
pass him regularly. A backhand pass from Nadal makes it 0-15. On the other 
hand, he's not going to beat Nadal from the baseline. A Federer backhand into 
the net makes it 15-30. Then a forehand clips the top of the net and lands 
wide. 15-40. The disappointment in the crowd is audible. Federer moves forward 
and should save the first break point but plants a backhand volley into the 
net. That should have been a winner. And yet. No other player has this effect 
on Federer. If you're after drama, I recommend switching over to Homes Under 
the Hammer on BBC1.


10.46am GMT 

Third set: Federer 6-7, 3-6, 1-1 Nadal* (*denotes server): It's not happening 
for Federer. Nadal's service games are complete non-events. 


10.44am GMT 

Third set: Federer* 6-7, 3-6, 1-0 Nadal (*denotes server): I'll level with 
you, I missed most of this game because I was walking back to my desk from the 
toilet in between sets. Sue me, if you must. Federer holds to love. "For me the 
'greatest ever' debate in tennis rests on a combination of record and how you 
rate the player playing at their peak," says Vincent Villock. "I think it's 
pretty clear that Nadal has been the superior player for several years now, but 
also that Federer has been below his peak for a similar period of time. Would 
be interested to know what your take is on who the superior player would be 
assuming both were at their peaks? Was 2008 Wimbledon final that moment (I 
guess you could argue Nadal was still improving, though not yet that Federer 
was in decline). If so Nadal?" Federer's peak was probably 2003-07. I'd say 
we've never seen them play each other when they've both been at their absolute 
maximum. For me, Federer is the more memorable and better player to watch.

10.39am GMT 

NADAL WINS THE SECOND SET 6-3 TO LEAD 2-0 IN SETS

A long baseline rally and, inevitably, Federer wins it. Wait. That's not how 
it's supposed to go. A Nadal backhand drifts long to make it 0-15 and the crowd 
cheers, a little hopefully. They want a classic and they don't look like 
getting one at the moment. Then Nadal sends a forehand long. Hang on a 
minute, it's 0-30. Not for long. The crowd oohs and aahs as Nadal attacks and 
Federer defends. Nadal smacks a volley down into the ground and up into the air 
and Federer, on the run, smacks a weary forehand into the net. 15-30. Then 
Nadal wins another engrossing rally with a forehand down the line. What a 
weapon that shot is. Federer's hope is being crushed. A forehand into the net 
makes it 40-30. Set point. Nadal misses a first serve but Federer nets a 
backhand off the second serve. This is more or less over. 


10.33am GMT 

Second set: Federer* 6-7, 3-5 Nadal (*denotes server): Federer must hold serve 
to stay in this set. He holds to love. An ace polishes it off. But now he has 
to break, something he hasn't remotely looked like doing at any point.


10.30am GMT 

Second set: Federer 6-7, 2-5 Nadal* (*denotes server): The question is: can 
Federer be considered the greatest if he can't beat Nadal? Nadal is currently 
on 13 grand slams and if his knees don't break down again, he's surely going to 
beat Federer's record of 17.


10.28am GMT 

Second set: Federer* 6-7, 2-4 Nadal (*denotes server): And he's being severely 
irritated on serve. Again he's down 0-30, more unforced errors undoing him. A 
cute volley makes it 15-30 but what follows defies belief. This is absurd. 
Federer looks like he has won the point with an outstanding volley that 
wrongfoots Nadal. The ball is behind him. It's actually behind him. But, just 
like Mr Fantastic, he somehow bends a long left arm behind his body and scoops 
a preposterous flicked forehand back over the net. Federer is too surprised to 
react. That's not fair. This isn't fair. Life isn't fair. 15-40. Two break 
points. Nadal misses a forehand on the first. It was there for him to put away. 
But this time there's no escape from Nadal's wrath. He works the body, wearing 
Federer out, and then delivers the knock-out blow with one of those crushing 
forehand winners. For the first time in the match, he breaks. It had to happen 
eventually. Things are not going to plan for Federer.

 Rafa breaks. Photograph: DAVID GRAY/REUTERS 
Updated at 10.32am GMT

10.23am GMT 

Second set: Federer 6-7, 2-3 Nadal* (*denotes server): Thing is, Nadal is 
never bothered on serve. He gets over the disappointment of not breaking by 
holding to love for the second successive service game, a booming backhand 
winner and an ace the highlights. Federer won't win this match if he can't come 
up with a solution.


10.19am GMT 

Second set: Federer* 6-7, 2-2 Nadal (*denotes server): Federer had a long 
conversation with Jake Garner during the change of ends. They were either 
having some watercooler chat about Juan Mata's move to Manchester United or 
Nadal's tardiness on serve. On the balance of probabilities, it was probably 
about the weather. Federer is in trouble at 0-30, Nadal winning the first point 
with a magnificent forehand pass. Scratchy play from Nadal brings it back to 
30-all but then, inevitably, a baseline rally goes the Spaniard's way. Break 
point. A big serve down the line saves him, but Nadal works Federer over on the 
next point with all the precision of a surgeon, dragging him into the corner 
and then finishing him off with a backhand down the line. Another break point. 
More ballsy play from Federer, who saves it with a forehand. But Nadal is 
knocking on the door with quite some force. A superbly angled backhand leaves 
Federer in no man's land and Nadal picks him off with a cross-court backhand. 
Another stonking forehand from Federer saves it. Back to deuce. Advantage 
Federer. He lopes to the net. Nadal likes a target on his forehand. Back to 
deuce. A serene, dreamy forehand winner from Federer gives him the advantage. 
He goes for a forehand winner. It's called wide but he challenges and ... it 
was in! He survives. He holds. There's still life in this one.


10.08am GMT 

Second set: Federer 6-7, 1-2 Nadal* (*denotes server): Federer seems to be 
grumbling about Nadal taking too much time between serves. Just like old times. 
He should be more annoyed about his failure to give Nadal anything to worry 
about, though. His returns have left much to be desired, even if the spin and 
accuracy of Nadal's serves are awkward to deal with. Nadal holds to love. 
Federer's not had a break point yet. 

 The bandaged blister on the left hand of Rafael Nadal. Photograph: Andrew 
Brownbill/AP 
Updated at 10.14am GMT

10.07am GMT 

Second set: Federer* 6-7, 1-1 Nadal (*denotes server): The magic sponge has 
done its stuff and the players are back on court. Federer is fired up now and 
he's not been put off from using his serve-volley tactic. At 40-15, he enjoys 
the benefits of two net cords and then wins the point with a volley off the 
frame. Nothing Nadal could do about that.


10.02am GMT 

MEDICAL TIME-OUT

The camera shows the rather gruesome blister on Nadal's left hand. It's on his 
palm. It's the size of a crater. It does not make for pleasant viewing, 
especially not on a Friday morning.

10.00am GMT 

Second set: Federer 6-7, 0-1 Nadal* (*denotes server): Federer is going to 
have to produce the match of his life to win from here. Nadal hasn't made a 
habit of losing in grand slams after taking the first set, although that's what 
happened against Lukas Rosol at Wimbledon in 2012. Federer, it must be said, is 
no Lukas Rosol. At 30-all, Federer summons up all his resources to stay with 
Nadal in a long baseline rally and then messes up the killer shot, sneezing a 
forehand volley into the net. A dreadful miss and the chance to fashion his 
first break point disappears. You just can't waste those opportunities against 
Nadal, who holds with a light drop-shot. He walks back to the chair and asks 
for the trainer. His blister is troubling him again.

Here are some nice pictures. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2014/jan/24/australian-open-roger-federer-rafael-nadal>
 

9.52am GMT 

RAFA NADAL WINS THE FIRST SET 7-6!

First-set tie-break: Federer 4-7 Nadal* (*denotes server): A baseline rally. 
It doesn't feel promising for Federer. He matches Nadal for power for a while 
but he can't last. He was never going to last. Eventually a backhand goes way 
past the baseline and the first set is Nadal's! On the balance of play, he 
deserves it. He's not been in much trouble at any point. It's his match to lose 
and it's hard to see him doing so from here. 

 First set Nadal. Photograph: Jason Reed/Reuters 
Updated at 10.14am GMT

9.50am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer 4-6 Nadal* (*denotes server): A brutal forehand 
from Nadal forces Federer to waft long. Set point. Nadal leaps about a bit and 
pumps his fist.

9.49am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer* 4-5 Nadal (*denotes server): Nadal sends a 
backhand return long. But he'll now have a chance to win the set on his serve.


9.49am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer* 3-5 Nadal (*denotes server): Federer beckons 
Nadal to the net with a drop-shot and wins the ensuing battle there.


9.48am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer 2-5 Nadal* (*denotes server): Nadal badly misses 
a forehand. 


9.46am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer 1-5 Nadal* (*denotes server): Federer slashes a 
backhand into the net. Nadal is winning the long rallies. As usual. This feels 
familiar.


9.45am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer* 1-4 Nadal (*denotes server): Federer, scrambling 
around at the back of the court, can't do anything with a forehand. He's lost 
all three points on his serve.


9.45am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer* 1-3 Nadal (*denotes server): A miserable 
forehand volley from Federer flies into the net!


9.44am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer 1-2 Nadal* (*denotes server): Federer goes this 
close with a backhand. Butthis close doesn't pay the bills.


9.43am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer 1-1 Nadal* (*denotes server): Nadal misses a 
backhand down the line. Well.


9.42am GMT 

First-set tie-break: Federer* 0-1 Nadal (*denotes server): An unfortunate 
start to the tie-break for Federer as a diagonal backhand clips the top of the 
net and deflects the ball wide.

9.41am GMT 

First set: Federer 6-6 Nadal* (*denotes server): Neither man is willing to 
give the other an inch. This game starts with a 34-stroke rally, though you 
always feel Nadal, a sentient brick wall, a sentient, grunting, frowning, 
snorting brick wall, is going to win it and Federer eventually nets a forehand. 
15-0. A Nadal backhand down the line then leads to Federer netting one in 
response. 30-0. It looks like the game is going to be a snooze at 40-0 but 
things change; a Nadal miss makes it 40-15 and then Federer charges to the net, 
a grasping Nadal sending a backhand pass well wide. But Federer is allowed 
nothing more than a quick glimpse. Nadal holds. He has been so tough on serve 
that he surely has to be favourite in the tie-break.

 Nadal. Photograph: Jason Reed/Reuters 
Updated at 10.13am GMT

9.36am GMT 

First set: Federer* 6-5 Nadal (*denotes server): An ace ensures Federer holds 
to 15. The scoreboard pressure is on Nadal. Once again, he has to hold to stay 
in the first set. They went to a tie-break in the first two years ago, 
actually. At the moment, there's nothing to separate them.


9.34am GMT 

First set: Federer 5-5 Nadal* (*denotes server): The problem for Federer is 
getting the ball back into play off the Nadal serve. He's struggling when it's 
angled out wide. Two misses make it 30-0, before Nadal plops a tame 
backhand slice into the net to make it 30-15. Nadal then wallops a forehand 
long to make it 30-all. He's frowning. Is that news? He's always frowning. He's 
even frowning after Federer sends a forehand long. He's positively seething 
after an ace seals the hold. This is totally unacceptable! How dare he not 
entertain me by walking around the court grinning like a bovine idiot!

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_1FbjuJp4E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_1FbjuJp4E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_1FbjuJp4E&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_1FbjuJp4E&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_1FbjuJp4E>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl_1FbjuJp4E&media=>
close  Why don't you smile. 
9.29am GMT 

First set: Federer* 5-4 Nadal (*denotes server): At 15-0, Federer serves a 
double-fault. Excuse me a moment, I'm just going to look outside for airborne 
pigs. While I'm busy doing that, Federer is being forced back past the 
baseline, which is not a good sign. He nets two backhands, so often the way 
against Nadal, to make it 30-40. Again, a chance for Nadal. The pressure is 
growing. Again, Nadal can't take advantage. Federer digs deep and whistles a 
stinging forehand into the corner, Nadal hitting long in response. The chance 
is gone. Deuce. Advantage Federer. He lets out a cry of joy as a Nadal return 
goes long. One more uncharacteristic error from Nadal makes it game Federer. 
But if this keeps going on, you'd have to expect Nadal to make the breakthrough 
sooner rather than later. As it is, he has to serve to stay in the first set.

9.24am GMT 

First set: Federer 4-4 Nadal* (*denotes server): Since we're sharing, I can 
exclusively reveal that I have a new set of balls  the new balls are out. 
Federer, not too surprisingly, is making more unforced errors than Nadal. But 
he's also hitting more winners. At 40-15, he comes up with a peach of a 
forehand to wrongfoot Nadal, who was busy running the other way. Wrong way, 
Rafa! The best rally of the match follows. Nadal starts grunting as he hits his 
forehands but Federer stays with him. It looks like momentum is with Federer as 
he pings a backhand from left to right but Nadal somehow sends a forehand back 
with considerable power and Federer can only flap weakly into the net. Nadal 
holds. 


9.18am GMT 

First set: Federer* 4-3 Nadal (*denotes server): At 0-15, Federer goes through 
the gears and pummels a searing forehand down the line, forcing Nadal to lob 
long. But Nadal then produces his first moment of magic, a brilliant backhand 
return from right to left undoing Federer. 15-30. Federer decides to come in 
but it's the wrong option. Nadal has too much time and too much talent, 
whipping a forehand down the line to earn two break points. 15-40. Federer's 
stubborn, though. It doesn't stop him from coming in again and this time Nadal 
sends a backhand miles long. He's not pleased. One more break point - but Nadal 
nets a difficult forehand. Federer escapes, but Nadal will be furious to have 
missed the backhand on the first break point. It was not especially difficult, 
certainly not for a man of his stature. Federer ekes out the advantage with an 
ace and then Nadal horribly mishits a forehand. Federer holds in gutsy style, 
but Nadal had his chances there. We remain on serve.


9.13am GMT 

First set: Federer 3-3 Nadal* (*denotes server): Federer has settled into this 
match quicker than Nadal. He's looking good and he's playing with aggressive 
intent, always searching for memorable winners. That doesn't mean he's going to 
make them all the time, though. On the first point, he arrows a backhand return 
inches wide - Nadal wasn't getting there - and then fails with an attempted 
forehand pass. Nadal holds to love as Federer hits long. They're both pretty 
comfortable on serve at the moment, while Nadal doesn't seem to be affected by 
the blister on his hand.


9.09am GMT 

First set: Federer* 3-2 Nadal (*denotes server): Whenever Nadal makes an 
error, he has a look of rage on his face that would put Nelson van Alden to 
shame. It's quite scary actually. He makes four errors in this game, allowing 
Federer to hold to love, and therefore he is now ready to kill somebody. Those 
ballboys better watch out. Don't give him the wrong towel, he'll have your head 
off.

 Federer. Photograph: Paul Crock/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 10.13am GMT

9.07am GMT 

First set: Federer 2-2 Nadal* (*denotes server): A lovely point to start the 
game. A feature of the match against Murray was Federer's willingness to attack 
the net - a dangerous tactic against Nadal, potentially - and a spinning volley 
drags Nadal forward again. He tries to flick another backhand past Federer but 
he wins the point with a fine forehand volley. 0-15. Suddenly Nadal is in a 
spot of bother. He mishits a shot that drops shot and then can only block 
Federer's backhand wide. 0-30. He pulls it back to 15-30 with a impeccably 
backhand pass. There we see the problem Federer has by coming in; Nadal rarely 
misses. Federer then knocks a backhand long to make it 30-all, before netting a 
forehand. 0-30 becomes 40-30, just like that. But that becomes deuce as Federer 
skips around a serve and skelps a forehand return down the line. It's not 
coming back. Nadal survives this test, though. Federer misses a forehand and 
then Nadal whips a forehand volley from right to left to hold.


9.00am GMT 

First set: Federer* 2-1 Nadal (*denotes server): Both players are wearing 
brightly coloured trainers,writes your resident fashion expert. Federer is in 
red, Nadal in bright pink. Federer is taken to 30-all in this game as Nadal 
starts to get into his stride, striking his forehand crisply and thunderously. 
A beautiful forehand from Federer makes it 40-30 and he wins the game as he 
pulls Nadal to the net with a drop-shot. Nadal tries a cross-court backhand but 
Federer reads his intentions and taps the ball back over the net and into the 
open court.


8.56am GMT 

First set: Federer 1-1 Nadal* (*denotes server): Nadal, taking his time in his 
trademark style, walks to the baseline to serve. He bounces. He scratches. He 
bounces some more. He serves. Federer's backhand goes long. 15-0. Then Federer 
nets a backhand. 30-0. A third goes long. 40-0. A fourth goes into the net. A 
neat symmetry there.


8.54am GMT 

First set: Federer* 1-0 Nadal (*denotes server): To a huge roar, we begin. 
There are cheers for both players. It's evenly split. It's The Wire v The 
Sopranos. Breaking Bad v Mad Men. Dawson's Creek v One Tree Hill. Federer opens 
the serving then and he's quickly into a 40-0 lead as Nadal fails to make any 
of his returns. Then Federer comes to the net off a second serve and a mishit 
from Nadal lands just in, Federer mistakenly leaving the ball. He holds anyway, 
Nadal hitting long this time.

8.51am GMT 

They might have solved the roof issue now. Which is just as well, because 
we're about to start.
 Those two again. Photograph: Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 10.13am GMT

8.47am GMT 

Jake Garner is in the umpire's chair. USA! USA! USA!

8.44am GMT 

Tok! Tok! Tok! They're knocking up. Federer won the toss and chose the side - 
and Nadal chose to receive. So Federer will serve first.

8.42am GMT 

The players are out. Time for the toss. Eurosport goes to an ad break. Of 
course.

8.42am GMT 

There's already been drama, with the roof on Rod Laver Arena stuck. It's 
half-open (or half-closed). Cue panic. Someone's pressed the wrong button! A 
pleasingly farcical start to the day. What a business! Minor technical 
difficulties, basically. Maybe if they just turn it off and on again. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBlTZyHV0kAY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBlTZyHV0kAY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBlTZyHV0kAY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBlTZyHV0kAY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBlTZyHV0kAY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBlTZyHV0kAY&media=>
close  D'oh! 
8.25am GMT 

Enjoy. The greatest match ever?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-1yfWb0-jqQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-1yfWb0-jqQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-1yfWb0-jqQ&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-1yfWb0-jqQ&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-1yfWb0-jqQ>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-1yfWb0-jqQ&media=>
close  TENNIS 
8.16am GMT 

While we wait, here's Kevin Mitchell's preview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/23/roger-federer-rafael-nadal-greatest>
.

6.35pm GMT 

Preamble

It's Roger Federer v Rafael Nadal in the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> semi-final. What more do 
you need to know?

Seriously. Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>. 
Rafael Nadal. Australian Open. Semi. Final. What else to say? I'm giddy enough 
with excitement.

It's not enough? Fine, I guess I'll just have to write my own preamble 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JDFGINcPH-4>! It's Roger Federer v Rafael Nadal 
in the Australian Open semi-final and seriously, what more do you need to know? 
 everyone 's mighty excited about the 33rd meeting in a classic rivalry that 
has dimmed in the past few years. This is the first time they have met in a 
grand slam since Nadal won here in the semi-final two years ago. We thought we 
might never see the likes of this again. It seemed the time had passed when 
sparks would fly between these two in grand slams, a combination of Nadal's 
time out with a knee injury and Federer's relative decline from the days when 
he dominated tennis as a matter of course, playing as if he could beat an 
opponent while filing a tax return and performing heart surgery at the same 
time.

But that was rarely, if ever, the case against Nadal. While Federer gave the 
young Spaniard a lesson in the art of grass-court tennis in the Wimbledon final 
in 2006 – at which point he was more or less unbeatable – his other experiences 
against Nadal have ranged from the disappointing to the downright traumatic, 
via the heartbreaking and the embarrassing. Who can forget Federer weeping 
after losing in five sets in the Australian Open final in 2009? It must be 
difficult for the greatest player of all time to understand how it is possible 
that this young buck can keep on beating him. That's not what's supposed to 
happen.

But that's what tends to happen. It's not just the numbers that make us 
proclaim Federer as the GOAT, although they do make a convincing case, it's the 
elegance and artistry with which he plays that makes us love him. It's why the 
majority of neutrals will want to see him win this match. But the 
counter-argument is that he has a 22-10 losing record to Nadal and that he has 
lost eight of their 10 meetings in grand slams. There's something about Nadal's 
brutal power and hard running that unnerves Federer and makes his aim go 
haywire. Even if Nadal's hand is red-raw because of that blister, his record 
against Federer means it's hard to see him losing one. Sorry to any romantic 
types, don't shoot the messenger, I'm just dealing out cold, hard facts. The 
numbers don't lie and Nadal has won their last four matches – three were on 
hard courts.

But let's make the case for Federer nonetheless. 1) He's Roger Federer. 2) 
He's got a brand new big racket that's making him hit the ball cleanly. 3) He's 
improved his fitness. 4) He's unveiled a brand new volleying game that 
bamboozled Andy Murray and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. 5) Nadal struggled in his 
quarter-final against Baby Fed, Grigor Dmitrov. 6) Lists are fun.

Anyway this is all just hot air. It's Roger Federer v Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> in the Australian Open 
semi-final! What more do you need to know?

Play begins at: roughly 8.30pm, but don't hold me to that.

The winner plays: Stanislas Wawrinka. He's Swiss. So is Federer. Come on, put 
it together.

Updated at 10.12am GMT
 