
The answer to the question, "Why can't the United States have a grown-up, 
rational discussion about reasonable gun control measures anymore?" was 
actually provided before the Tucson, Arizona shooting – specifically, on 3 
January, at the National Press Club. The candidates for the Republican National 
Committee chairmanship –a race just concluded on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/jan/15/michael-steele-republicans?INTCMP=SRCH>
 – were having a debate marked by frustratingly silly questions, but one of the 
silliest moments had to be whenGrover Norquist asked, "How many guns do you 
own?" 
<http://www.examiner.com/rnc-in-washington-dc/how-many-guns-do-you-own-to-rnc-chairman-candidates>

If the asking of the question itself didn't suffice as evidence that guns have 
ceased to be weapons and tools and become, instead, objects of worship on the 
right, the answers to the question put any lingering doubts to rest. 
Ironically, a woman, Ann Wagner, "won" this mystical phallic power competition 
by having 16 guns. For those conservatives who scoff when liberals suggest that 
sometimes a gun is more than a cigar, I would like to note candidate Saul Anuzi 
tacitly conceded the point, describing himself as "inadequate" – having only 
four. The rhetorical difference between guns and inches collapsed yet again in 
conservative circles.

With this sort of worshipful atmosphere around guns – and with the 
ever-present threat of the NRA hanging over their shoulders –Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> (and quisling Democrats, 
afraid to start a real fight) have basically made even the mildest discussion 
of the most commonsensical restrictions on weaponry impossible. If anything 
could shift the political atmosphere in a more rational direction, it should be 
the stunning news that a young man with a history of mental disturbance was 
able legally to buy a semi-automatic Glock, load it with an extended magazine 
with 30 rounds. And that he was able, because he had 30 rounds in the magazine, 
to hit 20 separate people with bullets, killing six, before he was wrestled to 
the ground while he attempted to reload.

It's stunningly obvious that if gun laws were even slightly more restrictive – 
if background checks were more thorough, if semi-automatic weapons were more 
restricted, if you couldn't buy 30-round magazines – we would have more 
survivors of this attack today. Or we may have never had an attack at all.

But we can't even have a debate about whether or not we should minimise the 
number of casualties at these mass shootings, which have become numbingly 
routine events, much less a debate on actually doing anything realistic to stop 
them from happening in the first place. Republican House speaker John Boehner 
has not only indicated he won't allow any gun control bills, no matter how 
mild, onto the floor, but alsothat he'd try to damn 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20110111-714059.html> any reasonable 
attempts at crime prevention with the poisonous but nonsensical word 
"politicising". (Boehner has confused governance with team sports, it appears; 
but in the real world, politics is about using government to solve social 
problems.)

When Representative Trent Franks of Arizona was asked about the gun issue, he 
hid behind the nearly magical problem-solving powers which conservatives invest 
in guns,claiming to wish 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/glennthrush/0111/Ariz_Rep_wishes_there_was_one_more_gun_in_Tucson.html>
 "there had been one more gun there that day". The problem with this whine is 
that one of the people who helped immobilise Jared Loughnerdid have a gun, and, 
by his own admission, only a split-second decision that fortunately went the 
right way prevented him fromshooting an innocent man 
<http://www.slate.com/id/2280794/>. The lesson here is surely that conservative 
fantasies of playing Dirty Harry don't translate neatly to real-life situations 
of confronting of violent crime.

Most gun control advocates are so demoralised that they aren't even asking for 
new laws, just thereinstatement of old laws <http://www.slate.com/id/2280794/> 
that would have, most likely, limited Loughner to shooting off 15 rounds before 
he was stopped. And even this teeny-tiny "hey, maybe fewer people murdered in 
mass shootings?" suggestion has been stonewalled by Republicans, who are afraid 
of the over-the-top hysterical reaction from the NRA and their supporters.

Gun enthusiasts often take the stance of reasonable people who see guns as 
inanimate objects, chastising gun control advocates by saying, "Guns don't kill 
people; people kill people," as if any understanding of nuance and damage 
control is for silly children. But it's gun control advocates who are truly the 
ones in this debate who see guns for what they are, which are objects for sale 
that can be regulated because they're potentially dangerous, like fast cars or 
toxic chemicals. It's the pro-gun people who have elevated the gun into 
something more than what it is.

But it's time to grow up and stop treading lightly around guns, fearful that 
we'll upset the tender-hearted who see guns as totems of power that cannot be 
viewed with rational eyes. Rationality needs to re-enter the debate about guns 
and minimising the damage they can do.

Discussion thread shortcut

The author of this piece, Amanda Marcotte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amanda-marcotte>, has been participating 
in the conversation below asAmandaMarcotte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/AmandaMarcotte>. This is an 
excerpt selected by a Cif editor:

DocMolotov says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/9186759>:

I'm not deeply afraid of ordinary people owning guns, I know a few that have 
shotguns over here and a swedish mate of mine has automatic weapons in the 
house. It's when a gun becomes a creepy totemic object, fetishised by a 
paranoid culture, and surrounded by an onastic jingoism that things start to 
look grim and that is undoubtedly what has happened in the states.

Chronos comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/9187267>:

Do you know any gun owning Americans Doc or are you just projecting some 
rather nasty prejudices onto very large and diverse group of people?
The only Americans I have ever known who owned guns were about as far removed 
from that stereotype as it is possible to be. Their weapons were anything but 
fetishised, they weren't toys and they weren't to be treated with anything less 
than the respect and caution that a potentially dangerous implement commands.
The only people I've ever known who fetishised guns and were from a paranoid 
culture were British. I think most of them ended up in the armed forces.

AmandaMarcotte responds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/9187548>:


Chronos, I grew up in West Texas, where everyone has a small arsenal, and 
Doc's stereotypes of gun nuts tailor very neatly to reality. The paranoid 
militia types are real. Pretending otherwise helps no one.
 