
"My ex-wife had a tape of old-time American music when we were first together 
in 1961, and I heard all this fantastic stuff. I knew a little bit about 
Appalachian music, so I wasn't unprepared for bluegrass, but I was completely 
blown away bythe Stanley Brothers <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DAIdXRGgg1Y>.

"There was Ralph and his brother Carter, and they did the best version of 
Amazing Grace I've heard in my entire life. It's the most thrilling, 
exhilarating thing you've ever heard, and it makes all the other versions look 
very, very silly indeed. It's just fabulous, unbelievably good. It's my all 
time favourite recording of that song, because you're hearing primitive Baptist 
music straight from the soul. It's proper soul music, the kind that makes your 
hair stand on end.

"I lost touch with a lot of that kind of music for a while, and then I heard 
Ralph on his own. Hearing him singing O Death and recognising the same voice 
that sung Amazing Grace was just glorious. He's a staggering singer. He's got 
this beautiful old-fashioned way of singing: exciting and intriguing and yet 
completely straightforward. It's a deceptive simplicity because, believe me, it 
really ain't simple. His voice tells you everything you need to know about that 
world.

"I always refer to him as Dr Ralph – he got his degree, so he's Dr Ralph! – 
but I've never met him. What would you say? He's a piece of human history, but 
he seems to me to be a perfectly normal, straightforward man. It's nice to see 
him get some recognition at his age. Change has been so violent and swift in 
the past 40 years, perhaps people are grabbing on to something so beautiful 
because they feel it's in danger of disappearing. All we can do is stand back 
and admire the fact that he's going to do it until he drops down dead. He's a 
wonderful man, extraordinary and unique, and I'm completely in awe of what he 
can do."

Key recording: Ralph Stanley 1971-73 (Rebel, 1996)
 