
It is a story of vaulting ambition and ruthless scheming which takes a nation 
very quickly from stability to chaos. Sound familiar?

Richard III review – Ralph Fiennes gets to grips with Shakespeare's ruthless 
ruler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/16/richard-iii-review-ralph-fiennes-almeida-theatre>
The parallels between Shakespeare’s Richard III and British politics this 
summer are striking and it is not being lost on audiences, the actorRalph 
Fiennes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes> said on Tuesday.

Fiennes is playing the villainous king at the Almeida theatre in north London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/16/richard-iii-review-ralph-fiennes-almeida-theatre>
, a production that willbe filmed and broadcast to cinemas around the world on 
Thursday <http://live.almeida.co.uk/>.

“Most Shakespeare plays that deal with power, whether they are the history 
plays or the Roman plays, you can always broadly speaking find a parallel 
somewhere in the world to what’s going on,” Fiennes said.


“It’s quite rare that you actually are close to a political crisis, political 
uncertainty. We went into this not knowing what the referendum result was going 
to be, so when it was as divisive as it was and we saw all these political 
figures making a play for leadership,Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, Michael Gove ... the audience 
suddenly, it changed.

“Not through our doing but just because of events happening around us. 
Suddenly it became full of a pertinence that perhaps it hadn’t had before.”

Many people are seeing parallels between the character of Richard III, his 
brilliant scheming and then apparent reluctance to take the throne, and Tory 
politicians. “Michael Gove is closest,” said Fiennes. “Because all those 
protestations about ‘I could never lead, it’s not in my DNA to lead’ – that’s 
classic Richard.”

Milibands as princes in the tower

The play is directed by the Almeida’s artistic director, Rupert Goold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rupert-goold>, who said he originally – in 
2012 – planned to do a Richard III that riffed on the character of Johnson. “I 
thought Boris is this figure who is physically strange and yet sexually 
predatory and potent, inherently comic, outside the rules, of questionable 
motives, ultimately ambitious. It was going to be very crude ... Milibands as 
princes in the tower.”

Those ideas were abandoned, particularly when Fiennes became part of the 
project. But Goold added: “What’s potent about the play is that people are able 
to read all those parallels without us banging them over the head.”

While there are parallels, Goold hopes politicians will come to the play and 
see dangers. “Sometimes we people in theatre think we are ‘responding’ to 
events,” said Goold. “I weirdly feel now, having MPs come to see the production 
that, without being pretentious about it, potentially the arts have the ability 
to offer an example as well as respond. It is our job to offer warnings and 
inspirations.”

Fiennes, who has been attracting strong reviews in the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/19/richard-iii-almeida-review-ralph-fiennes-vanessa-redgrave>
, called Richard a complex, tormented figure “with different degrees of 
self-loathing … He is a man who has been without intimacy all his life and I 
feel there is lots for any actor to mine to find an interior life.”

Fiennes and Goold were speakingbefore Thursday’s broadcast, the first outing 
for AlmeidaTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Live. It will be 
in partnership with Picturehouse Entertainment, which is distributing it.
 