
O Canada! Land of the beaver, the goose, bear and moose, the maple, caribou, 
mountie and loon. Such a landscape of vast space – the second biggest of any 
nation in the world, behind Russia, but larger than China and the US, and with 
the world’s biggest volume of fresh water in a whopping, lapping 31,700 lakes. 
As Canadian singer-songwriter Paul Anka (who, incidentally wrote for Frank 
Sinatra, Tom Jones and Michael Jackson) put it, it’s a country “that has a 
gentler, slower pace - it lends perspective”. This, and all those lakes, is 
something to musically reflect on in time for this comingCanada Day 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/?title=Canada_Day> on 1 July.


I visited the land of the maple leaf when I was 12 to see an auntie, uncle and 
cousins. I was gobsmacked at the scale of things – we took a very slow train 
from Edmonton in Alberta, going west, and visited Banff National Park, spotted 
a moose, crossed part of the Athabaska glacier on a snowcat then drank, 
trickling from its gentle melt, some of the purest water in the world. For two 
days the train, with a curved glass viewing dome, trundled across vast plains, 
ending up in Vancouver, where, in Stanley Park, I was amazed to spot and throw 
nuts to squirrels the size of cats, and all of them entirely black.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435248902742%2Fb8057395-4a6e-4075-b590-984fefe7fca6-1699x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20from%20or%20about%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20from%20or%20about%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435248902742%2Fb8057395-4a6e-4075-b590-984fefe7fca6-1699x2040.jpeg>
 Not Justin Bieber, just a beaver - a truer symbol of Canada. Photograph: 
blickwinkel/Alamy 

Think of Canadian music and you’ll probably recall songs by Neil Young, Joni 
Mitchell, Leonard Cohen, Alanis Morissette, Arcade Fire, KD Lang or Shania 
Twain, or if you’re not so lucky, Celine Dion. Or if you just read the 
tabloids, Justin Bieber. But simply naming songs by Canadians won’t cut the 
mustard, or indeed the Montreal smoked meat, nor will it put out thepoutine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2014/sep/07/poutine-the-posh-chips-and-gravy-taking-over-the-world>
, or sweeten the selection process like maple syrup might. Major Canadian 
artists will only be worth mentioning if their songs are about Canada, its 
cities, people, or some aspect of Canadian life. But this topic does include 
other lesser known artists who may not mention Canada, but in some way 
represent the culture of the country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuceBWqia3E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuceBWqia3E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuceBWqia3E&media=>
 La Bolduc, also known as Madame Bolduc - a Canadian legend 
Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> has a strong history of jazz 
from Oscar Peterson to Diana Krall. Much of the music draws on the country’s 
bilingual heritage. You might choose to draw, for example, from the rich 
influences of the lively Quebec scene, perhaps from satirical singer Madame 
Bolduc, other French inspirations from Brittany and Picardy, the rock and metal 
of the Stills or Godspeed You! Black Emperor, the hip-hip of Loco Locasse and 
more, the Inuit influence, the Celtic folk influx from Scotland and Ireland, 
not to mention the Aboriginal sounds and stories from the Inuit, Métis, 
Iroquois, Mi’kmaq, Huron, and Haida. Now have a taste of some pretty 
astonishing Inuit throat singing.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnXKBx67GzVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnXKBx67GzVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnXKBx67GzVo&media=>
 Inuit throat singing. Hearing is believing 
What does Canada mean to you? Like many countries it has a harsh history of 
invasion and colonialism. But it has always struck me as a down-to-earth and 
welcoming place, laid back in its rich multiculturalism, and proud to contrast, 
in some ways, to its brasher, flashier neighbour to the south. But while a 
majority of Canada’s population live in the southern areas, within reach of the 
borders of the US for commercial reasons, perhaps your song choices may include 
something that tells how it differs from America, and how this has shaped its 
identity. Canada, for example, has a national healthcare service, not unlike 
Britain’s NHS. As the writer Douglas Coupland put it: “In Canada, we’re happy 
to provide a safe haven for next-door neighbours in the middle of a marital 
dispute. And if anyone trips while crossing the border, we’re happy to set 
their broken bones for free.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435249594926%2Ff810015d-01d3-484e-8198-c0ff1fc94a70-1020x694.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20from%20or%20about%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20from%20or%20about%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435249594926%2Ff810015d-01d3-484e-8198-c0ff1fc94a70-1020x694.jpeg>
 Given the slip ... Canada’s own Leslie Nielsen in Naked Gun 2 1/2: The Smell 
Of Fear (1991). What’s not to like? Photograph: Allstar/Paramount/Sportsphoto 
Ltd./Allstar 
Alternatively your song suggestions might touch on wonders of nature as well 
as the effects of climate change causing extreme temperatures, including the 
last year’s extraordinaryfreeze of Ontario’s Niagara falls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/jan/12/niagara-falls-frozen-tourists-flock-icy-spectacle-video>
. Alternatively your songs might hit on bruising ice hockey falls, a sport 
that’s a national obsession. Canada is also a big exporter of comedians and 
comic actors from Mike Myers to John Candy, Rick Moranis to Leslie Neilsen, so 
your songs might be heavily humorous. So where might your choices come from? 
Can we (the) Guess Who? There’s a huge list of multifarious artists, from 
Barenaked Ladies to Bedouin Soundclash, Cœur de Pirate to Crystal Castles, 
Fucked Up to Hooded Fang, Ladyhawk to Men Without Hats Nickelback to the Slugs, 
or Trooper to Yukon Blonde.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435249866578%2F44563049-0fa9-43e5-867f-79586f0ded16-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20from%20or%20about%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20from%20or%20about%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-from-or-about-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435249866578%2F44563049-0fa9-43e5-867f-79586f0ded16-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Niagara Falls frozen in Ontario in 2014, where temperatures plummeted to -37C. 
Photograph: Dan Cappellazzo / Barcroft USA 
So then, this week’s topic may be as much about discovery as prior knowledge, 
so get beavering, dig deep and come up with some Canadian treasure, whether 
that be inspired by the busy cities, the quiet towns or the huge, beautiful 
countryside. There can be no finer Canadian connoisseur than this week’s music 
guru - returning lord of the RR vaults,Marconius 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3092202> – who will as ever, will 
judge your nominations with faultless grace, thoroughness, and efficiency. Put 
in your nominations in comments below or optionally in the Spotify list bylast 
orders (11pm BST) on Monday 29 June for the results list published next 
Thursday 2 July.

To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify or 
SoundCloud are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 