
"Suppress prostitution, and capricious lusts will overthrow society," remarked 
St Augustine, eyeing a flagon of mead, and somewhat surprising the merry 
company with his fifth-century mixed morality. But then, with a Martini in her 
elegant hand, a distinctly less saintly Marlene Dietrich added: "Indeed 
darling, a country without bordellos is like a house without bathrooms." 
Playwright Brendan Behan chipped in with an toothy Irish grin, having dished 
out a big round of whiskies: "Well, y'see, the big difference between sex for 
money and sex for free is that sex for money usually costs a lot less." Fellow 
authorAngela Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter> wasn't 
going to be left out. "What is marriage but prostitution to one man instead of 
many?" she asked, sipping a sherry. "The whore is despised by the hypocritical 
world because she has made a realistic assessment of her assets and does not 
have to rely on fraud to make a living."


Such is the lively debate we can have here at the Readers Recommend tavern, as 
the four then broke out into laughter and song around the table. And this week 
can all do the same with nominations on what is indeed a potent subject. For, 
on this oldest of professions, much has been expressed in music and other 
genres. The sex worker must have a multitude of skills, many of which must come 
into play before, after, above and beyond the act itself, especially in dealing 
with difficult customers. The tough, complex and clever of the profession are, 
for example, portrayed with particular brilliance in the HBO goldrush-era series
Deadwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jul/26/deadwood-season-one>
. But, in reality, the law, and those who use and abuse it, can also be a 
capricious dominatrix, interpreted with as much flux as any carnal desires.


So your song suggestions may include the perspectives of cruel pimp exploiters 
as well the exploited, their needs and motivation, the vicious and the 
sympathetic, the kinky or the caring. In literature, the plights of prostitutes 
in early novels, such Daniel Defoe'sMoll Flanders 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jhpt6xb_lWA>, and John Cleland's Fanny Hill 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCuwz9ckm54>, project the profession with a 
lusty humour. Later Charles Dickens was more earnestly obsessed with 
prostitutes and spent much of his time off walking the streets to rescue them. 
AndJames Boswell's 1760s journals <http:// 
http://teainateacup.wordpress.com/2012/11/03/james-boswell-and-london-prostitutes>
 are perhaps a revealing insight into the self-loathing sex addict, torn 
between risking infection, the unsatisfactory use of his thick sock-like 
"cundum", and a constant need to "pull the bell and discharge the reckoning".

But what of prostitution in the future? Will man- and womankind be serviced by 
sexbots? Might they resemble Gigolo Joe in the Spielberg film A.I.?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLuVQWech6N0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLuVQWech6N0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLuVQWech6N0&media=>
 Gigolo Joe, professional sexbot in Spielberg's A.I. 
 My favourite rendition of prostitution comes in the wonderfully moving and 
funny Midnight Cowboy (1969), in which a blue-eyed Texan in the shape of a 
young Jon Voight heads to New York with dreams of being a superstar stud to the 
city's wealthy ladies. Aided and abetted, very badly, by slithery sidekick 
Dustin Hoffman, this offbeat tale of an American dream turns out quite 
differently.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjnFoaj8utio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjnFoaj8utio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjnFoaj8utio&media=>
 Texan stud? Jon Voight and Dustin Hoffman in Midnight Cowboy (1969) 
And so from strumpets to courtesans, molls to midnight gigolos, escorts to 
extras, suggest your song on this subject in comment below and optionally in 
the Spotify collaborative list. This week's guru of gratification is the 
outstandingly scrupulousleaveitallbehind 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/leaveitallbehind/public>, who will 
undoubtedly face a very colourful week. So please place these treasures of 
pleasures by last order11pm (BST) on Monday 27 July for the results blog on 
Thursday 31 July.
 Add you songs about prostitution to the Spotify collaborative playlist 
To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it's a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song's words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify, 
SoundCloud or Grooveshark are fine.
• Listen to others people's suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you'd like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com> or adam.boult@theguardian.com 
<mailto:adam.boult@theguardian.com>
• There's a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are "zedded", at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
"zedded", "donds" and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the 'Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 