
"You're so full of yourself!" said the Russian doll to the mirror, as more 
Russian dolls appeared, reflecting on how the thing we're most interested in is 
perhaps ourselves. That may be the case, but self-absorbed behaviour can be 
variously fascinating, amusing or aggravating. It can come in many forms, from 
the autism of the narrator inMark Haddon's The Curious Incident of the Dog in 
the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/13/mark-haddon-curious-incident-book-club>
, to the self-absorbed worries of Woody Allen in his films or many stand-up 
comedians. Selfishness and narcissism however can also have negative 
connotations to the point of extremity and personality breakdown. It's a 
serious matter, but let us not get too bogged down in this. Instead perhaps we 
might briefly marvel at Andy Serkis's rendition of such neuroses asGollum in 
The Lord of the Rings <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=08k1Ds3A1gE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D08k1Ds3A1gE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D08k1Ds3A1gE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D08k1Ds3A1gE&media=>
 They stole it from us! Gollum and Sméagol reflect on a spot of narcissistic 
revenge in The Lord of the Rings 
Is humanity driven by selfishness? That's a question too big to answer here, 
but some may argue that we're driven, in our very DNA, by what Richard Dawkins 
calledThe Selfish Gene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/31/the-selfish-gene-richard-dawkins-review>
. Another more political perspective on self-absorption and self-interest is 
also brilliantly examined in the documentary seriesThe Century of the Self by 
Adam Curtis <http://vimeo.com/67977038>, which examines how the work of 
psychologists, including Freud, influenced corporations and governments on how 
to analyse and control society. Meanwhile as German social psychologist Erich 
Fromm put it: "Selfish persons are incapable of loving others, but they are not 
capable of loving themselves either."

But what of song? Whether serious, comic or ironic in tone, songs about "me, 
me, me", or others who are self-absorbed are what we're looking for this week. 
Neurosis can be a source of creativity, and while self-obsession is often a 
driving force for songwriters, they must also be collaborators and that is 
where conflict can arise. Music is a team game, in which the players must 
listen to each other. The team ethic also applies to any sphere of life, 
including of course football. I now it is time for me to shamelessly and 
selfishly shoehorn mention of the World Cup – can't think why. By now it's at 
least halfway through the first Brazil game, so feel free to nominate songs 
later. On this very topic, some might say that for all his brilliance, the 
current Ballon d'OrCristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> is a selfish player who too much 
goes for individual glory. But would he, like many a performer or songwriter, 
be as good without his obvious vanity and narcissism ? By contrast, one of the 
greatest egos of the game, as well as player, for all the goals, described his 
greatest ever moment on the pitch: a pass. I'm talking of course about the 
immortal Eric Cantona.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_uzU85htH4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_uzU85htH4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_uzU85htH4&media=>
 Eric Cantona: 'You have to trust your team-mates. Always. If not you are lost.'
And with that we pass back to Readers Recommend, where the same team theme 
applies, and in which it is perfectly natural to have primary interest in one's 
own contributions, but the whole point of the game is to enjoy and absorb those 
by others. So with that it mind, I leave you once again with the words of that 
prima donna of panache, Vivian Stanshall: "I don't know what I want, but I want 
it NOW!"

This week's selfless volunteer is the excellent attwilightlarks 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/attwilightlarks/public>, another first-time 
guru following a very fine opening by vikingbones, so please put in your song 
nominations by last orders (11pm BST) on Monday 16 June for his results blog on 
Thursday 19 June.

To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it's a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song's words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify, 
SoundCloud or Grooveshark are fine.
• Listen to others people's suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you'd like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com> or adam.boult@theguardian.com 
<mailto:adam.boult@theguardian.com>
• There's a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are "zedded", at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
"zedded", "donds" and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the 'Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 