
In summer 2012, I landed in Baghdad with a large suitcase containing the 
clothes I planned to wear for the next two years. Alongside shirts and 
underwear, I had packed a selection of Russian classics, including an old 
Penguin paperback of plays byAnton Chekhov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/theatreblog/2010/nov/03/theatre-anton-chekhov-modern>
.

The Chekhov was a recent addition to my library – a spine-broken paperback I’d 
picked up at a Sydney fleamarket, one of those beautiful, random encounters. I 
was about to start writing a book about Russia and it was a piece of Russia to 
take with me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fguillermo-erades-anton-chekhov-baghdad-back-to-moscow-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea615e21605e21b8269e82994c922c6090f3ecae%2F0_0_2506_1878%2F2506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20Chekhov%20in%20Baghdad%3A%20how%20I%20made%20Moscow%20in%20Mesopotamia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fguillermo-erades-anton-chekhov-baghdad-back-to-moscow-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20Chekhov%20in%20Baghdad%3A%20how%20I%20made%20Moscow%20in%20Mesopotamia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fguillermo-erades-anton-chekhov-baghdad-back-to-moscow-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea615e21605e21b8269e82994c922c6090f3ecae%2F0_0_2506_1878%2F2506.jpg>
 Guillermo Erades at work. Photograph: Rebecca Tott 
I was met at arrivals in Baghdad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/16/story-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation>
, to begin my EU diplomatic posting, by a broad-shouldered man who introduced 
himself as the leader of my close protection team. Lugging my suitcase, I 
chased him as he marched into the scorching sun, where three armoured Toyotas 
waited for us, engines on. The man handed me a flak jacket, which he helped me 
to strap on, and a helmet, which he said should be kept next to me but not 
necessarily on my head. “Welcome to Iraq, sir,” the driver said, wedging his 
machine-gun between the seat and gear shift. Then, after a quick security 
briefing that felt pre-recorded, the vehicles moved off.

We came across military vehicles, checkpoints and soldiers, yet it was the 
walls that struck me. Entire roads were lined with tall anti-blast concrete 
boulders. It was like driving through a giant maze. I’d read the reports, of 
course. Every week, dozens of Iraqis blown up in markets and mosques, beheaded 
at checkpoints, gunned down in the streets, at their own weddings and at the 
funerals of those killed the day before. It was carnage. It had been for years.

I’d been warned before accepting the post: other than for diplomatic 
receptions and official meetings, I would not be allowed to leave my 
residential compound. I’d have few entertainment options, and it’s so hot in 
summer that I’d have to spend all my free time inside my air-conditioned pod. 
It sounded great, the perfect place to crack on and write myMoscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/moscow> book.

Other than turn up the air con, the best way to create a Russian mood was to 
dip into some Chekhov

Soon, I’d arranged my routine so that I could spend a few hours every day at 
my laptop. It was true that, outside work, there was little to do. I could 
linger at the canteen, or join British diplomats at the compound bar 
(humorously named the Inn Coming). I could play football with the security 
guards.

But mostly I was in my pod. Through the thick glass of the small anti-blast 
window, which was always covered in a red dust, I could only see the cement and 
wire of the anti-blastHesco <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hesco_bastion> 
walls. The purpose of these, I’d been told, was to limit the damage in case a 
rocket landed inside the compound. There was not much you could do if it landed 
on top of your own pod, but I found comfort in the statistical unlikelihood of 
that happening. And so, as the scorching Mesopotamian sun rose beyond the 
walls, I would sit and write about Russian winters, trying to evoke the beauty 
of the snow as it falls silently over Moscow’s wide avenues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fguillermo-erades-anton-chekhov-baghdad-back-to-moscow-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3544a89beb7b24630e1b53d4bc3db574fb51427%2F0_0_1592_2289%2F1592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20Chekhov%20in%20Baghdad%3A%20how%20I%20made%20Moscow%20in%20Mesopotamia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fguillermo-erades-anton-chekhov-baghdad-back-to-moscow-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20Chekhov%20in%20Baghdad%3A%20how%20I%20made%20Moscow%20in%20Mesopotamia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fguillermo-erades-anton-chekhov-baghdad-back-to-moscow-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3544a89beb7b24630e1b53d4bc3db574fb51427%2F0_0_1592_2289%2F1592.jpg>
 Anton Chekov, in Melikhovo, south of Moscow, in 1897. Photograph: 
Bettmann/Corbis 
Here’s where Chekhov gave me a hand. I’d realised that, other than turn up the 
air con, the best way to create a Russian mood was to dip into his writing. I’d 
first encountered Chekhov when living in Moscow in the early 2000s. I’d enjoyed 
the stories but had found them plain. But now, in the solitude of my pod, I 
began to appreciate the plays. Reading the yearnings and preoccupations of his 
three sisters, the way they saw Moscow as an elusive symbol of future 
happiness, I realised Chekhov was not only writing about life in 19th-century 
Russia, he was writing about life. Ours. About the dullness of it all, about 
the insignificance of our existence.

In Baghdad I found resonance in Chekhov’s claustrophobic sense of entrapment, 
in the historical doom cast over the times he described. Yet, under a layer of 
Chekhovian melancholy, there was a sublime aesthetic quality in the writing, a 
subtle beauty that evoked – as experienced by many a Chekhov reader – an 
unbearable sense of nostalgia.

In August 2014, after two years in Iraq, I left the compound for the last 
time. As the armoured Toyotas carried me to the airport, I thought about all 
the people who were still getting killed. By now,Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> had taken over a vast part of the 
country. The region was at war; it would be for years to come. Peeking out of 
the car’s window, observing the walls bordering the road, I wondered how much 
all this had affected me, and to what extent it had seeped into the draft I was 
now carrying in my luggage.

Guillermo Erades is the author of Back to Moscow, published by Scribner 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/374567/>. 
 