
Take a look, it’s in a book – the voice of the RR collective has produced a 
veritable rainbow of book-themed songs, and we’ll start with the bestselling 
book of all. But the things that you’re liable to read in the Bible? Well,It 
Ain’t Necessarily So. The Gershwins’ gleeful destruction of Old Testament 
chestnuts, full of disrespectful rhymes, is sung by reprobate Sporting Life in 
the original Porgy and Bess. Nominator kolf suggested the Ella Fitzgerald 
version but I’ve plumped forAretha Franklin instead. 

Certain books seem to be particularly rich in inspiration. Moby Dick came up 
several times, butNantucket Sleighride by proto-heavy metal band Mountain takes 
it in an unexpected direction, with a title that refers to the dragging of a 
boat by a harpooned whale – although its protagonist has an easier time of it 
than Ahab and company.

Even more ubiquitous is cult novel A Clockwork Orange. Reader wyngatecarpenter 
prolifically provided no fewer than 11 takes on Alex and his droogs, but an 
alternative came with1-2 Ultraviolento by Los Violadores. With a distinctive 
Spanish take on Nadsat, it also makes clever use of Beethoven’s Ode to Joy to 
get us in the mood for a touch of ultraviolence.

The Cure are infamous for choosing less obvious pop cultural references in 
their many literary songs. Hidden in a dark, watery blur, I hadn’t noticed the 
lyrics ofThe Drowning Man before. The name Fuchsia reveals their source to be 
epic gothic fantasy Gormenghast, from which the spine-chilling line “and 
drowned her at its ease” also survives almost intact.

Apparently artist-singer Laurie Anderson had originally wanted to write a 
whole album about Gravity’s Rainbow 
<http://www.transmitmedia.com/svr/vault/anderson/ander_transcript.html> until 
Thomas Pynchon insisted the whole thing had to be written for banjo. She 
contented herself with the staccato, compellingGravity’s Angel instead. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435147796876%2F57d76405-f445-4522-9a65-f6c984bf8128-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435147796876%2F57d76405-f445-4522-9a65-f6c984bf8128-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Laurie Anderson – a big fan of Thomas Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton 
Heading slightly further out into left field, we find Mos Def and Talib Kweli 
asBlack Star with their response to Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye. Morrison’s 
title refers to a black girl’s belief that if she had blue eyes she would be 
perceived differently. The powerful retort in the lyrics ofThieves in the Night 
is offset perfectly by the quiet, atmospheric backing.

Uncategorisable combo Shriekback’s The King in the Tree was inspired by the 
Flann O’Brien novel of Irish folklore At Swin Two Birds. Apparently, King 
Sweeney was cursed for attacking a priest and went to sit in a tree. But the 
song is mostly included here for its catchy, jauntily minimalist ostinato 
accompaniment.

With Russian satirical classic The Master and Margarita we should be on more 
solid ground. This is another novel that has formed the basis for dozens of 
classic songs, but instead of the Faustian main plot,Patti Smith chooses to 
focus on the Pontius Pilate sub-plot, and specifically on Pilate’s faithful dog
Banga, following his master on his long journey to redemption.

Kate Bush has drawn on literature since her very first hit Wuthering Heights. 
For this list I’ve chosen her frenzied take on The Shining,Get Out Of My House. 
Typically complex, in keeping with its unsettling subject it drives through 
powerfully without ever deciding on any kind of tune.

Winnie the Pooh is unsurprisingly well represented in song, but rather than 
the more upbeat takes, here isThe United States of America’s ethereal Cloud Song
that perfectly captures Milne’s ode to childhood imagination in Pooh’s poem How 
sweet to be a cloud.

Back down on earth, we find Nirvana’s harsh take on Patrick Süskind’s amoral 
tale of olfactory murder Perfume. The protagonist Grenouille, who “was born 
senseless and scentless”, gives them their titleScentless Apprentice.

We finish (well, almost) with one song that is not about any novel in 
particular, but still celebrates the driving force of creativity. It says 
something aboutNick Cave that even his most upbeat and pop-friendly song There 
She Goes, My Beautiful World contains the line “John Willmot penned his poetry 
riddled with the pox”. And then, well, as a humorous footnote, I couldn’t 
resist including the worst song ever written, so as a final bonus track, enjoy
Leonard Nimoy’s simply unbearable The Ballad of Bilbo Baggins. 

This week’s list is dedicated to a dear departed friend, Rostislav Černy. 
Before coming to Britain in the wake of the Soviet invasion of 1969, Rosta was 
a successful Czech songwriter, and his most inexplicable hit would have been 
eligible for this list, were it not for its blatant, joyous ignorance of its 
subject matter. So just a Dishonourable Mention for the song whose lyrics ask 
us to “compare his courage to a Spanish toreador” - join me in doing theOliver 
Twist.




The playlist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2FbP1Q-2Ds&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2FbP1Q-2Ds>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2FbP1Q-2Ds&media=>
 A-list for songs about books 
It Ain’t Necessarily So – Aretha Franklin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2FbP1Q-2Ds> 

Nantucket Sleighride (To Owen Coffin) – Mountain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KqWqCuHR0Og> 

1-2 Ultraviolento – LosVioladores <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oia0YA4uCNs>

The Drowning Man – The Cure <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9j53D4o0CfQ> 

Gravity’s Angel – Laurie Anderson <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AyvhzyOqEMk>

Thieves in the Night – Black Star <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GjxtRehIz2Y>

The King in the Tree – Shriekback <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IK8hhk0VN4>

Banga – Patti Smith <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPfNOd1JZrE> 

Get Out Of My House – Kate Bush <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJyp5HaPj68> 

Cloud Song – The United States Of America 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Yqr4UK41GM> 

Scentless Apprentice – Nirvana <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SmSp6fdBVKc> 

There She Goes, My Beautiful World – Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Jc0ib5Rh5s> 

The Ballad of Bilbo Baggins – Leonard Nimoy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGF5ROpjRAU> 




Dishonourable Mention (separate video):

Oliver Twist – Eva Pilarová <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nv1spmPbtwM>


 