
“So many books, so little time.” - Frank Zappa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-zappa>.

The voracious reader, the ebullient book fan, the edgy eccentric, the pithy 
polymath – what better characteristics are there for the process of 
songwriting? It was just over 20 years this week that I was lucky enough to be 
present at a recording, in the old BBC TV Centre, of an early edition of BBC2’s
Later with Jools Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/15/later-with-jools-holland-bbc2>
, now of course a cornerstone of British music TV for many a discerning and 
curious music lover. Elvis Costello, no slacker on literary reference and 
wordplay, was on the bill, but the showstealing highlight was the still 
relatively young band Radiohead, who had gigged for years, but were just 
beginning to break it big withThe Bends 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gNzdI_XLfBs>, powerfully performing from that 
now classic album. In the short breaks between their songs, a friend with me at 
the time remarked how amusing and odd it was that frontman Thom Yorke didn’t 
busy himself with checking his guitar, or disappeared backstage for drink or 
drugs, as is expected of the self-respecting rock star. Instead he sat alone on 
the edge of the stage, quietly reading a book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434640545382%2Fe1d6a672-0af8-484d-a613-c08807fa0b2f-1702x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434640545382%2Fe1d6a672-0af8-484d-a613-c08807fa0b2f-1702x2040.jpeg>
 A younger Thom Yorke of Radiohead back in the day. No stranger to a sneaky 
read between songs … Photograph: Mick Hutson/Redferns 
But of course, there is nothing strange about that at all. Itchily intelligent 
and Oxford-educated, Yorke was simply upfront and unashamed about liking books, 
something not rare at all for many songwriters, but less seen in the then 90s 
laddish scene in which Morrissey seemed to stand out like a bemused puritanical 
scholar on a monasterial rock, surrounded by a sea of writhing hedonists.
Morrissey more recently chose his autobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/13/autobiography-by-morrissey-review>
 to be published as a Penguin Classic in homage to his reading habits. But 
behind the scenes books have always been read, and ideas gained, on the road, 
on the park bench or in the bedroom, by musicians, for many forms of 
stimulation. As Game of Thrones author George RR Martin put it: “A mind needs 
books as a sword needs a whetstone, if it is to keep its edge.”

So welcome then to the Readers Recommend library, bigger than the Bodleian in 
Oxford, more stunning than the Sainte-Geneviève in Paris, and with more angles 
than the edgy architecture of theSeattle Central Library in Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2014/mar/24/libraries-around-world-pictures>
. Why? Because our library is infinite, a collective emporium that not only 
contains music, but this week, by association, shelves of finely bound volumes 
spiralling high to the ceiling with glorious, grand staircases to match. 
Membership is not only free but you are more than encouraged to bring your own 
material. Silence is frowned upon, talking preferred, and even a bit of 
friendly shouting welcome. Now, as Shakespeare put it, lend me your ears – and 
your eyes. And as author David Foster Wallace said in Infinite Jest: “I do 
things like get in a taxi and say, ‘The library, and step on it.’”

 State Library of South Australia, Adelaide. A bit like what we imagine a tiny 
portion of the Readers Recommend library looks like. Photograph: State Library 
of South Australia 
So first, we visit the reference section. Your nominations for songs about 
books may be about the subject in general – about writing a book, about reading 
or referring to a something in a book in the course of lyrics. The general 
connection to books can create feelings that may include losing, or indeed 
finding yourself. “Many a book is like a key to unknown chambers within the 
castle of one’s own self,” said Franz Kafka. Songwriters find joy in books 
because they help bring out the individual and the creative subconscious. “A 
book is a dream you hold in your hand,” saidNeil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman>. “No two persons ever read the 
same book,” said Edmund Wilson. But having books doesn’t necessarily make you 
clever, especially if you’re an adult seen on the train reading Harry Potter. 
Still, JK Rowling put it that: “Books are like mirrors: if a fool looks in, you 
cannot expect a genius to look out.”


While songwriters may spend many happy hours in libraries (free heating and 
shelter after all), or indeedbookshops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/gallery/2014/oct/10/weird-and-wonderful-bookshops-worldwide-in-pictures>
, how do the books therein influence them? Many songs and books are linked by 
narrative and many great songs tell a story. So now in the fiction section, 
what authors have influenced musicians? William Burroughs, Jack Kerouac, Albert 
Camus, Philip K Dick, Charles Bukowski are figures whose writing and lifestyles 
have been regularly referenced by songwriters. Among the biggest of all rock 
star readers is David Bowie, rumoured to have consumed as many as eight books a 
day, and whoseown list of recommended reads, at an exhibition in Ontario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/01/david-bowie-books-kerouac-milligan>
, included authors as diverse as Spike Milligan to Colin Wilson, Truman Capote 
to Martin Amis, and many books about working-class boys made good. His 
experiments with cutting up sentences in lyrics was particularly influenced by 
Burroughs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434640799691%2Fb758215e-5e47-4237-933a-febfe3f053f7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434640799691%2Fb758215e-5e47-4237-933a-febfe3f053f7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 William Burroughs with an admiring Joe Strummer of the Clash in Burroughs’ New 
York apartment in 1980. The author has had a huge influence on songwriters. 
Photograph: Victor Bockris/Corbis 
Music is littered with graduates of art school and university heavily using 
references to authors and their books. But you don’t have to have higher 
education to be a songwriter, and many include echoes of Dr Seuss, JRR Tolkien, 
Aldous Huxley, George Orwell, JG Ballard, Vladimir Nabokov, Earnest Hemingway, 
Stephen King, Anaïs Nin, not to mention, of course, Shakespeare and the Bible 
itself. Novels and plays also influence the narratives of song lyrics. From 
Oedipus to Faust,Christopher Booker’s 2004 psychology-based study, The Seven 
Basic Plots <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/nov/21/fiction.features>, 
identifies recurring story patterns in literature, ranging from rags to riches, 
beating the monster, to voyages and quests and various forms of tragedy and 
comedy. How do these often come in song? Road journeys? Selling soul to devil? 
Boy meets girl, or accidentally fancies his own mother?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434644098658%2Ff9f8f1bb-c6e4-484f-bc24-b0709bde3939-2060x1433.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20books%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434644098658%2Ff9f8f1bb-c6e4-484f-bc24-b0709bde3939-2060x1433.jpeg>
 Cool cat … Dr Seuss’s ‘Cat in the Hat’ graffiti on side of a building in the 
East village section of New York City. The author’s influence pops up in music 
more times than one can imagine. Photograph: Jonathan Elderfield/Getty Images 
Exploring the rest of the RR library, you may also find many a song that 
refers to other forms of books - children’s, dictionaries, map books, 
instruction manuals, philosophy and, of course poetry, probably the most 
closely aligned genre to songwriting itself.


So then, dust of those volumes and name songs that quote or borrow book 
titles, authors, lines or plots and place them in comments below, or optionally 
in the Spotify playlist. We welcome also to the chair, and this week’s chief 
librarian, new guruflatfrog <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4166071>, 
who undoubtedly has a rich literary treat in store. Your reading deadline for 
returns islast orders (11pm BST) this coming Monday 22 June for flatfrog’s 
song/booklist published on Thursday 25 June. 


To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify, 
SoundCloud or Grooveshark are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.

Interested in compiling a list of songs from readers’ suggestions? We’re 
looking for writers for subjects starting from next wek 25 June. Email 
peter.kimpton@theguardian.com to arrange.
 