
Visitors to Reading jail this autumn might encounter Patti Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/patti-smith> reading the 
four-and-a-half-hour entirety ofOscar Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>’s De Profundis, or see new 
artworks bySteve McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, 
Nan Goldin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/goldin> or Marlene Dumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/11/the-daring-art-of-marlene-dumas-duct-tape-pot-bellies-and-bin-laden>
 dotted around echoing corridors and empty cells.

Artangel <https://www.artangel.org.uk/> announced on Thursday that it was 
taking over one of the most notorious prisons in the UK, the place where Wilde 
spent a harrowing, soul-destroying two years from 1895-97.

The organisation <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel> is well 
known for presenting ambitious art in unexpected places and Reading prison, 
opened in 1844 and closed for good in 2013, is no exception. But the stellar 
list of about 30 artists, writers and performers it has signed up for the 
project is particularly striking, fromAi Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/aiweiwei> and Doris Salcedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/10/doris-salcedo-review-artist-in-mourning>
 toMaxine Peake <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maxine-peake> and Ralph 
Fiennes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes>. “It’s the closest we 
have ever come to doing an Artangel exhibition,” the co-director Michael Morris 
said. “We are really excited about it.”

The beau of Reading jail: was prisoner 1122 Oscar Wilde’s lover?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/16/reading-jail-oscar-wilde-lover-photograph>
During two-month project artists will respond to the work of Wilde, the 
architecture of the prison and themes of imprisonment and separation.


Morris said they had visited the empty jail many times but the first time was 
extraordinary. “There is a feeling of real oppression: you feel very heavy 
following the experience.”

Every Sunday at midday in the prison chapel, a writer or performer will read 
De Profundis, the extended letter Wilde wrote to his lover, “Bosie” –Lord 
Alfred Douglas <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/feb/12/poetry.books>. It 
was written in his prison cell when, after a year, he was finally given access 
to pen and paper.

Wilde was imprisoned at the height of his fame and powers after misguidedly 
suing Bosie’s father, the Marquess of Queensberry, who had accused him of being 
a “sodomite”. The libel case set in train a sequence of events which resulted 
in him being jailed for two years with hard labour.

After two months in Wandsworth, Wilde was sent to Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/reading> jail, a starkly isolating place – 
one of the Victorian era’s new model prisons with huge wings and rows of small 
individual cells. The philosophy behind the design was to prevent any 
“corrupting” contact between prisoners, with inmates forced to wear special 
identity-hiding headwear when they were allowed out of their cell.

It was a brutal regime which broke Wilde’s spirit. He left Reading sick and 
bankrupt, divorced by his wife and unable to see his children. He went to Paris 
where he wrote his last work,The Ballad of Reading Gaol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/mar/23/oscar-wilde-ballad-reading-gaol-poem>
, but by 1900 he was dead, aged only 46.

James Lingwood, Artangel’s other co-director, said Reading had destroyed Wilde 
but also, perversely, remade him. He became “a tragic figure who would speak 
beyond his age, a martyr to oppression and the writer of one of the longest and 
greatest letters in the English language”.

De Profundis 
<http://www.bl.uk/collection-items/manuscript-of-de-profundis-by-oscar-wilde> 
is essentially a love letter, albeit one which was never sent, written 
intensively in the first three months of 1897. It charts Wilde’s journey into 
the depths, renounces his decadent lifestyle and celebrates the power of art. 
It contains many examples of Wilde’s pithy wisdom, sobered by his misery. For 
example: “Most people live for love and admiration. But it is by love and 
admiration that we should live.” Also: “With freedom, books, flowers, and the 
moon, who could not be happy?”

The list of names reading it includes Peake, Fiennes, Smith, Ben Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw>, Kathryn Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kathryn-hunter>, Neil Bartlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/neilbartlett>, Ragnar Kjartansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/17/ragnar-kjartansson-barbican-review>
,Lemn Sissay <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lemnsissay> and Colm Tóibín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/colm-toibin>; all keen to read 50,000 
words or 100 pages. Visitors will be able to dip in and out or stay. “All of 
the readers have wanted to do it for themselves,” Lingwood said. “It will be a 
deeply meaningful experience for them as well as shared to the broader world.”

New artworks have been commissioned from artists including Wolfgang Tillmans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/wolfgang-tillmans>, Robert Gober 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/03/robert-gober-moma-retrospective-review-sculpture-art>
 and Jean-Michel Pancin. There will also be existing works by artists including
Roni Horn <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/roni-horn>, Vija Celmins and
Richard Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-hamilton>.

Another strand will be prison letters written by figures including Ai, 
Jeanette Winterson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jeanettewinterson>, 
Gillian Slovo <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gillian-slovo> and Deborah 
Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/deborah-levy> who will use their own 
direct or imagined experience of state-imposed separation from loved ones. BBC 
Radio 4 will broadcast five of the letters over the course of a week.

People will also be able wander the many empty cells including that given to 
Wilde, prisoner C.3-3. “I think for many people it will be a kind of 
pilgrimage,” Lingwood said. “Wilde seems to speak to so many people in so many 
different ways.”

Previous Artangel works include Jeremy Deller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jeremy-deller>’s Battle of Orgreave 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/2001/the_battle_of_orgreave>, in which he 
organised the re-enactment of a memorable flashpoint between police and 
striking miners,PJ Harvey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pjharvey> publicly 
recording her next album ina glass studio in Somerset House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/02/pj-harvey-glass-studio-energy-recording-process-somerset-house>
 and, last May, Jorge Otero-Pailoswrapping a wall of the Palace of Westminster 
in latex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/18/where-theres-muck-artwork-showcases-houses-of-parliament-dirt>
.

The Ministry of Justice has given its permission for the prison to be opened 
to the public – the first time it has happened.

The project, which will have timed entry to prevent it becoming too crowded, 
is the first phase of a wider three-year arts initiative called Reading 
International, led by the University of Reading.

• Inside – Artists and Writers in Reading Prison runs from 4 September-30 
October <https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/inside/>
 