
Below is this week’s playlist – the theme and tunes picked by a reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/21/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-abour-hobbies#comment-79583408>
 from the comments onlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/21/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-abour-hobbies>
. Thanks for your suggestions. Read more about the format of the weekly Readers 
recommend series at the end of the piece.

What was your first hobby? Collecting dolls? Playing with Wendy houses? Trying 
to fly? None of the above? Perhaps you started where we are for the list – with 
scrapbooks. You could get them in the corner shop, huge pages of rough grey 
paper better suited to carpet underlay, and just stuck things in. Can you 
imagine anyone doing that these days? The lateFrank Sidebottom, who sings of 
his Great BigZoo Scrapbook <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1c7ERmsPetY> might. 
He preferred certain creatures over others, and to find out which you’ll have 
to listen to this duet with Huggy Bear...

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyT_nExtXMVdGiZSdQUK_2p_&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyT_nExtXMVdGiZSdQUK_2p_>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyT_nExtXMVdGiZSdQUK_2p_&media=>
 The YouTube playlist.Click here to listen via Spotify 
<https://play.spotify.com/user/matthew.holmes.guardian/playlist/4ShU21TsYD24ER9HZZdF6E>
. 
Next, with James Burton and Glen Campbell on guitars, Merle Haggard tells us 
the true story of his redemption. He was supposed to break out of San Quentin 
state prison, but the guys with whom heMade the Prison Band 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X3KzVqLPEA0> dissuaded him, citing rehearsals 
that would get in the way. They – and his hobby – saved his life; his erstwhile 
partner escaped, killed a guard, got caught and was executed.

Some say the camera never lies. Photographer George Jones believes he’ll see 
the woman he loves in some kind of new light whenDeveloping My Pictures 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFqnitCh9_A> (of her). He’s going to see her 
two-timing personality as if in x-Ray and 3D. Of course, he knows already, real 
life doesn’t lie.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2577906> Guardian contributor 
DarceysDad  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2577906> 24 July 2016 
10:28pm <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/79793998> 
Oh a headslap that must be at least 7.5 on the Richter Scale.

Willard Grant Conspiracy - Kite Flying 

This hits almost ALL of the DsD soft spots - Robert Fisher's baritone, 
delicate start, simple structure, but building and building to a climax.

Honestly, how many times have I tried to get you lot to listen to this by 
shoehorning it in, and when its natural-fit topic crops up, I almost forget! 
DOOFUS ME!

Freed from the flesh and bone 
Stretched on a cross of wood 
Tied to a string and then flown away 
In the wind, in the wind, in the wind
 Can't find it on YT or Spotty, so here's a public link to the 'Box: 

PLAY ME PLEASE; I'M PERFECT FOR THIS TOPIC! 
<https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/550863/03%20Kite%20Flying.mp3> 
My son flies kites at Hilbre Island. We’re very fortunate 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Hilbre+Island/@53.3806206,-3.2255399,3a,75y,90t/data=!3m8!1e2!3m6!1s-Jnt8DjRVafQ%2FV2c7dYvGFpI%2FAAAAAAAAAOg%2FuY0whw0zDaQhD6bQ8VUbbbkxMBGGTzklwCLIB!2e4!3e12!6s%2F%2Flh3.googleusercontent.com%2F-Jnt8DjRVafQ%2FV2c7dYvGFpI%2FAAAAAAAAAOg%2FuY0whw0zDaQhD6bQ8VUbbbkxMBGGTzklwCLIB%2Fs203-k-no%2F!7i6000!8i4000!4m5!3m4!1s0x487b2a3093c76799:0x1a524ff18e3bae15!8m2!3d53.3825099!4d-3.2275661!6m1!1e1>
, you know. He’s 18 stone of muscle and bone but still the kite lifts him off 
his feet and flies him for hundreds of metres ...Kite Flying (link to listen 
here) <https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/550863/03%20Kite%20Flying.mp3> by 
Willard Grant Conspiracy, I think, has a certain intentional languidness to it. 
Is this how you’d feel when at the mercy of the air?

The incomparable Dusty Springfield liked to do a bit of Doodlin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hVZKGJI8UGA>. Writing as a person who can’t 
draw a matchstick man I have some admiration for sketchers, like two of my 
brothers, and here’s Dusty on the blower, pen in hand, doodling away.

Sounding suspiciously like the Fall, here comes Frank Black reminiscing about 
playing computer games with his brother inWhatever Happened to Pong? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MeP2YkEpGOQ>, “taking money off guys more used 
to playing cards”. Now, we’re supposed to be representing hobbies in this 
playlist, but in this case I reckon suckering people at a bar game could 
qualify. Your call.

Blow me down, here are the Fall for real. There was some vocal bleeding from 
another tab as I listened to your suggestions, so I’m not sure if the female 
backing vocalists belonged on there ... They sure sounded all right, though. 
Anyway, Mark E Smith saysI’m into CB 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LnunhozizjM>. I worked with a lot of people 
who used CB radios and respect how they remember fellow enthusiasts’ handles, 
but I never tried the hobby myself.

I was there when Kung Fu <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2DhpaCUC8eg> was 
introduced to the UK and many took it up, though. My brothers gave up boxing 
and became champion martial artists. I don’t know a chop from a chopstick 
myself, but they became stars. I recall watching a karate film in the cinema in 
the early 70s – it was so bad that the audience laughed for 90 minutes, though 
maybe that was the point? But then along came Bruce Lee, a superhero in real 
life, and then Jackie Chan, and I could understand the attraction and the spirit
Ash capture well.


Poker: is it a game (ie a hobby) or a living? To Lady Gaga surely it’s just a 
sideshow. I lost eight bob once. Never again – myPoker Face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bESGLojNYSo> just isn’t good enough.

There’s perhaps something Beatles-like about Shonen Knife’s Insect Collector 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mmh-NdCL9QI>, up next. Are insect collectors 
right on? Thinking back, lots of lads used to stamp on them, which is unfair, 
right? You wait from the Big Bang until life evolves and eventually you cop for 
a gig as an ant or an earwig, and some evil kid squashes you, or chloroforms 
you and pins you to a board.


They pay “Five pence fares on the buses ... but got two-fifty to go and see 
the Clash!” sing Television Personalities of thePart Time Punks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_pKkOOQR7_o> they think don’t know they’re 
born. Asphilipphilip99 says in nominating the song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/21/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-abour-hobbies#comment-79582735>
 for this list, “it’s a dig at those treating punk as a hobby rather than a way 
of life”.


Last up, Barenaked Ladies’ Silverball 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_lRI5-Qzp8>, an ode to the machines singer Ed 
Robertson apparently obsesses over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/21/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-abour-hobbies#comment-79585437>
.

New theme

The theme for next week’s playlist will be announced at 8pm (UK time) on 
Thursday 28 July. You haveuntil 11pm on Monday 1 August to make nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  