
Atlanta, famous for the busiest airport in the world, the birthplace of Martin 
Luther King, Jr <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king>, Dirty 
South hip-hop culture, a burgeoning film industry, and 71 streets with 
“Peachtree” in their names, is also a literary hub. It is bolstered by the 
largest independent book festival in the US, theAtlanta Journal-Constitution 
Decatur Book Festival <https://www.decaturbookfestival.com/>, and the Georgia 
Center for the Book <http://www.georgiacenterforthebook.org/>, not to mention 
the century-oldAtlanta Writers Club <http://www.atlantawritersclub.org/>. Such 
community, however, underscores a motif running through much literature set in 
or written about the city – that divisive ol’ challenge of how to turnchange 
intoprogress. 


Like all Southern cities, Atlanta’s history is steeped in racial tensions and 
politics. Booker T Washington’s famousAtlanta Compromise Speech 
<http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/39/> at the 1895 Cotton States and 
International Exposition argued, “In all things that are purely social we can 
be separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to 
mutual progress”, the “we” being post-Civil War blacks and whites.WEB Dubois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/feb/22/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
, who taught at Atlanta University, disagreed with Washington’s 
“accommodationist strategy”, later writing the poemA Litany of Atlanta 
<http://www.bartleby.com/269/26.html> in response to the city’s 1906 race 
riots. Many factors led up to these riots, not the least of which were 
increased rights for blacks and a booming growth in the city that created 
competition between the races for jobs and services. But local newspaper 
reporting of alleged assaults of black men on white women, The Atlanta Georgian 
and The Atlanta News (both now defunct), in particular, helped incite the 
white-against-black mob violence. Rebecca Burns’sRage in the Gate City 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Rage_in_the_Gate_City.html?id=o1-S8bllfYkC&redir_esc=y>
 dutifully chronicles these riots.

And then there’s Scarlett O’Hara, the scrappy, civil war-ruined heroine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/20/francesca-simon-top-10-antiheroes>
 of Margaret Mitchell’s iconic 1936Gone with the Wind 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gone-with-the-wind.html>, a novel that 
rivals, globally, the Bible’s popularity. Replete with antebellum décor (gender 
roles included) and an undeniable racism that turned the Klan (minus the white 
sheets) into heroes, it is as much a love story between Scarlett and the Old 
South as it is between Scarlett and Rhett. Jennifer Dickey’s 2014A Tough Little 
Patch of History: Gone with the Wind and the Politics of Memory 
<http://muse.jhu.edu/books/9781610755436> is candid in her assessment of how 
factions of Atlanta endorsed Mitchell’s romanticised view of the past in order 
to depart from the city’s modern New South image and to promote “heritage 
tourism”. Mitchell wrote while living in “The Dump,” an apartment in the 
stately Peachtree Street home now ofThe Margaret Mitchell House and Museum 
<http://www.atlantahistorycenter.com/mmh>, a mere five and a half miles from 
another Atlanta literary landmark,The Wren’s Nest <http://www.wrensnest.org/>, 
former home ofJoel Chandler Harris 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Joel-Chandler-Harris>. Harris’s 
contentious Uncle Remus character, the product of the journalist’s long hours 
spent listening to the animal stories of slaves, first appeared inUncle Remus: 
His Songs and His Sayings—The Folklore of the Old Plantation 
<http://www.amazon.com/Uncle-Remus-His-Songs-Sayings/dp/1591094178>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-atlanta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436974321040%2F26d6d6a7-e286-4711-b378-adca90a1f3e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Atlanta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-atlanta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Atlanta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-atlanta%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436974321040%2F26d6d6a7-e286-4711-b378-adca90a1f3e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 More than a little polemical ... Detail from the Margaret Mitchell House and 
Museum, in one of the city’s 71 streets named Peachtree. Photograph: Alamy 
Flannery O’Connor’s short story The Artificial Nigger, included in her 1955 
collection,A Good Man Is Hard to Find 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/06/brief-survey-short-story-flanner-oconnor>
, follows Mr Head and his grandson who venture from rural Georgia into urban – 
and shocking – Atlanta.

Although Mr Head’s racism might be its own punishment, their experience of the 
city reads like a descent into hell, O’Connor’s allusion to Dante very 
apparent. Ironically, it is the black lawn jockey referenced in the title who 
promotes the grandfather’s realisation of suffering and his feeling a “mercy 
that covered his pride like a flame and consumed it. He had never thought 
himself a great sinner before but he saw now that his true depravity had been 
hidden from him lest it cause him despair”.

O’Connor’s emphasis on redemption, rather than racial guilt, echoes throughout 
Mary Hood’s 1986 collection,And Venus Is Blue 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/And_Venus_is_Blue.html?id=3rsE-qfZ86MC&source=kp_cover&hl=en>
. These seven stories and novella, conversely, explore the city’s heedless 
outward expansion as rural general stores and community centres are replaced 
with outlets and malls, the Old South made new, but for Hood’s blue-collar 
protagonists, not necessarily shiny. In Amanda Gable’sThe Confederate General 
Rides North 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Confederate-General-Rides-North/dp/1416598405>, 
Atlanta (or its suburbs) represents both a psychological and historical space. 
And although set in Atlanta, in Joshilyn Jackson’s sixth novel,Someone Else’s 
Love Story <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/someone-else-s-love-story.html>, 
fate and faith – even miracles – are at much more at stake than race.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-atlanta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436975509455%2F543f68e2-20ff-4aad-8970-1e827c62c855-1356x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Atlanta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-atlanta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Atlanta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-atlanta%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436975509455%2F543f68e2-20ff-4aad-8970-1e827c62c855-1356x2040.jpeg>
 Writer and artist Tom Wolfe (seen here in 1966), set the hugely popular and 
controversial A Man in Full in Atlanta. Photograph: Jack Robinson/Getty Images 
Other literary works explore privilege and power shifts. Years after Atlanta 
native James Dickey wrote the poemLooking for the Buckhead Boys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fd7bN7Wdp-Q>, in which the elite Atlanta 
neighbourhood of Buckhead symbolises an Atlanta long gone,T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomwolfe>om Wolfe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomwolfe> published A Man in Full 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/man-in-full.html>. Wolfe’s hugely popular and 
controversial (he was, after all, a transplanted New Yorker) novel allegedly 
took some shots at Buckhead, although his protagonist, Charlie Croker, embodied 
the entrepreneurial spirit that defines Atlanta (and perhaps even emboldened 
Scarlett O’Hara herself in her struggle out of poverty).

More recently, Susan Rebecca White set her novels Bound South 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bound-South-Susan-Rebecca-White/dp/1416558675> and A 
Soft Place to Land 
<http://books.simonandschuster.com/A-Soft-Place-to-Land/Susan-Rebecca-White/9781416558699>
 in well-to-do Atlanta, where, despite their best efforts, her female 
protagonists are particularly, and sometimes humorously, inscribed into roles. 
Across town,Pearl Cleage <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pearl_Cleage> explores 
the power struggles within Atlanta’s black community with her West End novels. 
Alfred Uhry’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play,Driving Miss Daisy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Driving_Miss_Daisy_(play)>, is the first in his 
Atlanta Trilogy focusing on Jewish residents at the turn of the century. 
Embedded in Jessica Handler’s poignant memoir about grief,Invisible Sisters 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Invisible_Sisters.html?id=SHKrfpKS0YkC&hl=en>
, is the story of moving to Atlanta with Jewish parents determined to 
participate in the civil rights movement. And Anne Rivers Siddons’ novel
Peachtree Road 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Peachtree_Road.html?id=nccaKEuLMAoC&redir_esc=y>
 follows a group of genteel Atlantans as the civil rights movement begins.


In the 70’s, Siddons, Bill Diehl <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Diehl>,
Pat Conroy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pat_Conroy>, and Terry Kay 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terry_Kay> were protégés of Atlanta Magazine 
<http://www.atlantamagazine.com/> founding editor Jim Townsend, after whom the 
prestigiousTownsend Prize for Fiction 
<http://depts.gpc.edu/townsend/jimtownsend.html> is named. Townsend himself was 
inspired by Ralph McGill, Pulitzer Prize-winning author ofA Church, A School 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/A_Church_a_School.html?id=Vd6JMQEACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
 and anti-segregationist former editor and publisher of newspaperThe Atlanta 
Constitution 
<http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/articles/arts-culture/atlanta-journal-constitution>
. Also influenced by McGill,Celestine Sibley 
<http://georgiawomen.org/2010/10/sibley-celestine/> wrote over 10,000 articles 
and many books, includingPeachtree Street, USA. 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/celestine-sibley-6/peachtree-street-usa-an-affectionate-portrait-o/>
 (a portrait of Atlanta). Meanwhile, The Atlanta Child Murders challenged 
Atlanta’s 1960’s moniker of “The City Too Busy to Hate” when more than 20 black 
children were kidnapped and killed between 1979 and 1981. Two novels, Toni Cade 
Bambara’sThose Bones Are Not My Child 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Those_Bones_are_Not_My_Child.html?id=LWVKPgAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
 and Tayari Jones’sLeaving Atlanta 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Leaving_Atlanta.html?id=HpuXuQAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
, confront, and give lyrical voice to, this volatile piece of Atlanta history.
 Robert Kirkman’s The Walking Dead, strolling through Atlanta 
Statistically, 1970’s Atlanta was one of the most violent cities in the US. 
While the Atlanta crime rate has decreased over the last several decades, most 
neighbourhoods remain racially separated, remnants of the Old South lingering. 
It turns out that the zombies ofRobert Kirkman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/15/walking-dead-robert-kirkman-sxsw-comics>
’sThe Walking Dead <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/walking-dead.html>, a 
comic book series, are often walking in Atlanta, a city already familiar with 
ghosts, and for that matter, apocalypse (just ask Scarlett).


The work of former US poet laureate Natasha Trethewey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/11/natasha-trethewey-us-poet-laureate>
, an Atlanta (well, Decatur) resident, offers an insistent examination of 
history and memory and race that encompasses the story of her mother’s murder 
in Atlanta. Just last year, Atlanta’s Alliance Theater staged a production 
based onNative Guard 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Native_Guard.html?id=Bcl0PgAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
, her Pulitzer Prize-winning collection, and each performance featured an 
impromptu dialogue between a community leader, occasionally Trethewey herself, 
and the audience. Complete strangers – of all backgrounds – talking to each 
other about race and violence and the sins of the past? Nowthat’s progress.

 * Anna Schachner is an Atlanta writer and the editor of the literary journal 
The Chattahoochee Review 
<http://thechattahoocheereview.gpc.edu/index.htm#.VaaD6WTF_5o>. 
Readers recommend

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * Burial for a King 
<http://books.simonandschuster.com/Burial-for-a-King/Rebecca-Burns/9781439130575>
 by Rebecca Burns: a look at the chaos that followed Martin Luther King Jr’s 
assassination, while the city prepared to (successfully and peacefully) host 
his funeral. (Recommended byjsbayne 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15140764>)

 * The Temple Bombing 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Temple-Bombing-Melissa-Greene/dp/0306815184> by 
Melissa Fay Greene: an examination of the bombing of a synagogue in Atlanta in 
1958, and the wider context of civil rights struggles in the city. (Recommended 
byjsbayne <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15140764>)

 * Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn: The Saga of Two Families and the Making 
of Atlanta 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Where-Peachtree-Meets-Sweet-Auburn/dp/0140265090> by 
Gary Pomerantz: an account of the city’s history between the end of the civil 
war and its hosting of the 1996 Olympics. (Recommended byjsbayne 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15140764>)  