
Please take your seats for the crowning of this week’s A-Listers and there’s 
one in particular that is the “King of Noms” this week.

Coronations since George II in 1727 have been accompanied by music from 
Handel: the Coronation Anthems and today’s ceremony will be no different as we 
commence proceedings withZadok the Priest performed by the Choir of Westminster 
Abbey.

Zadok was instrumental in bringing King Solomon to the throne and officiating 
the anointing ceremony. I underestimated the religious element of crowns this 
week and whilst I was aware of the symbolism of the crown of thorns I hadn’t 
appreciated how many musical references there were to this particular one. My 
choice from many nominations mentioning it this week isScud Mountain Boys.

Readers recommend: songs about crowns | Peter Kimpton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/nov/12/readers-recommend-songs-about-crowns>
There were many different types of crown put forward this week; gold, 
two-pronged, starry, light, flowers, a pub and thorns, so many crowns of 
thorns. Where there are thorns there’s likely to be roses -Jethro Tull’s Crazed 
Institution has a crown of roses to ring around your cranium.

As justification for Alison Krauss’s version of Down to the River to Pray RR 
reader severin simply said “sublime”. It is, no question, powerfully, 
fantastically sublime and the tune I’ve listened to most this weekend. From the 
sublime to the ever so slightly over the topThe Crown and the Ring by Manowar. 
What a triumphal opening and an equally powerful song.

Maintaining the religious theme through the crown of light that is a Halo; 
from several alternatives nominated on this theme there were two artists 
singing the same song. This was one of my expected tunes and I went forLotte 
Kestner’s version but it was a very, very close call against Beyonce.

You don’t need to be royalty to wear a crown; it can simply be recognition of 
the importance we place upon one person. InMidnite’s Wearing Her Crown it’s a 
woman and her kingdom appears to be her kitchen and her subjects her family but 
she’s no less held in reverence.

Collective Soul ask lots of questions; who’s gonna be - my saviour, the 
answer, my partner, the shepherd - who’s gonna wear my crown; the response is 
it may well have to be oneself.

Who will wear the crown is also the question asked by Aretha Franklin in When 
the Battle is Over but this isn’t a war of succession this is a battle of love 
between man and woman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-crowns-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447931184086%2F5429902347_5c16658d2a_o-1020x842.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20crowns%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-crowns-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20crowns%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-crowns-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447931184086%2F5429902347_5c16658d2a_o-1020x842.jpeg>
 Elvis Costello: King of AmericaPhotograph:Flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/punktoad/5429902347/> 
There’s no question who wears the crown according to the New Riders Of the 
Purple Sage, whilst they respect many rock and music heroes it’s clear cut when 
it comes to “rockabilly” it’s Carl Perkins who wears that crown.

The guru job is a tough gig. So much good music this week despite the lower 
number of nominations - and theawful events in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> that inevitably put a shadow 
across the weekend. Peter quoted Shakespeare - Henry IV “Uneasy is the head 
that wears a crown” in his introduction to the topic and this is oft misquoted 
as “heavy is the head” but there’s no misquoting theZac Brown Band and guest 
singer Chris Cornell whereas Honeydogs are the complete opposite as they sing 
“easy lies the head that wears the crown”.

No matter whether it’s in the context of royalty, religion, a husband or wife, 
being guru or our top A-Lister, whatever the crown is, asElvis Costello sings - 
justWear it Proudly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2&media=>
A-list for songs about crowns 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2> 
Zadok the Priest - Handel — Choir of Westminster Abbey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MiXgOQ9_-RI&index=1&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

Crown of Thorns - Scud Mountain Boys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VQIE4a5o0vc&index=2&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

Crazed Institution - Jethro Tull 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5O-1x2U2ppw&index=3&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

Down to the River to Pray - Alison Krauss 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zSif77IVQdY&index=4&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

The Crown and the Ring (Lament Of The Kings) - Manowar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lINit3FoIac&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2&index=5>

Lotte Kestner - Halo
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK4rhSdUwg8&index=6&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

Wearing Her Crown - Midnite
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MbChrqsh8BY&index=7&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

Crown - Collective Soul 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8jCRwVg-9s&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2&index=8>

When The Battle Is Over - Aretha Franklin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qFirpDd_EyI&index=9&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

Carl Perkins Wears The Crown - New Riders Of The Purple Sage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XGIu4JDSSE&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2&index=10>

Heavy Is The Head - Zac Brown Band ft. Chris Cornell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WWBm4Tx2bRo&index=11&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

The Crown - Honeydogs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pKA65BFUUT8&index=12&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2>

I’ll Wear It Proudly - Elvis Costello 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rC2dNC5Uwdk&list=PLwcnpt8eHNitHxQa7HAtmwoQtUqYeHRh2&index=13>
 