
“The times you lived through, the people you shared those times with – nothing 
brings it all to life like an old mixtape. It does a better job of storing up 
memories than actual brain tissue can do. Every mixtape tells a story. Put them 
together, and they can add up to the story of a life.”

Rolling Stone writer Rob Sheffield summarises the joy and meaning of playlists 
in his book Love is a Mixtape. But what is the secret ingredient in joy of 
combination and collaboration in Readers Recommend? It is all about making 
special connections, not merely in the ear and the brain, but with other people 
– something, as humans, we are hardwired to do. And with such positive spirit. 
Song suggestions and creating lists helps to highlight our existence. It 
focuses and defines the natural urge to make something. It shows the instinct 
to preserve moments and feelings, not only in the moment, but for posterity.


And we are somehow compelled to do this. We cannot help but try, as I’ve said 
before, to make temporary but beautiful arrangement of flowers in the jungle; 
to build stone monuments in the city or the wilderness; to collect, knit and 
furnish our bowerbird nests; and build our castles made of sand, even if they 
are bound to melt into the sea, eventually. We must do it because it expresses 
as much our human imperfection as any perfection. And we must do it simply 
because it is in our nature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9641359abff6af838bf6fa9cba0ff27bc7e3ef69%2F147_365_2376_1426%2F2376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20favourite%20songs%20and%20playlists%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20favourite%20songs%20and%20playlists%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9641359abff6af838bf6fa9cba0ff27bc7e3ef69%2F147_365_2376_1426%2F2376.jpg>
 Songs, bananas, banter? It’s all the same. Bonobo apes, our closest relatives, 
also do a spot of sharing. Photograph: Goran Tomasevic/Reuters 
So this week it’s time to not only look back, but also look forward. The theme 
is deliberately broad and the options wide. Feel free to suggest songs about 
playlists or mixtapes. or songs about writing and compiling songs for others. 
But for once, don’t worry about whether your suggestions have made previous 
lists. And your songs may, for example occur in lyrics, where perhaps a 
songwriter creates a list to express their feelings to someone else, woo a 
lover, or create an event or mood for others. But particularly this week, and 
into 2016, feel free to present your own open-ended songs and topic lists - and 
this can be on any subject at all. Fill in cracks, and find new ground. Indulge 
yourself and indulge others.


Through this site or via the marvellous Marconium <http://rrindex.com/>, look 
back at the bountiful joys of RR’s 10+ years of compilation and suggestion. 
Highlight your favourites, but also mention songs that were missed and also 
themes that could have been chosen. There are still many we haven’t covered. 
But above all let us show RR at its finest – a tail that continues to twitch, a 
voice that sings out, a lifeforce that refuses to die, an endless spring of 
wit, wisdom, knowledge, sharing, generosity, humour, zest and infinite jest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5152d423fb082a1b0f00a977de22e7dc1346f14a%2F0_147_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20favourite%20songs%20and%20playlists%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20favourite%20songs%20and%20playlists%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5152d423fb082a1b0f00a977de22e7dc1346f14a%2F0_147_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Jukebox joy. Don and Phil Everly and friends Photograph: Alamy 
Are you new to RR, an old friend who has been away, or a well-known regular? 
Whoever you are, come on in. The Readers Recommend tavern has opened its doors 
for the final night of 2015 … and who knows what the future brings. But you’re 
all very welcome. The fire is roaring, the drink is flowing, and as ever, the 
banter is brimming.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1bb969a5d5e1a3ef9e820bcb935109f3717dc8%2F0_65_2469_1983%2F2469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20favourite%20songs%20and%20playlists%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20favourite%20songs%20and%20playlists%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Freaders-recommend-favourite-songs-and-playlists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1bb969a5d5e1a3ef9e820bcb935109f3717dc8%2F0_65_2469_1983%2F2469.jpg>
 Let’s keep putting another record on ... Photograph: March Of Time./Time & 
Life Pictures/Getty Image 
The past week has seen a tidal wave of feeling and articulate passion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/dec/24/christmas-gifts-presents-giving-songs-readers-recommend>
 about this wonderful place of musical participation. I might be the doorman 
and landlord, but it is the readers who have made it, without any question, the 
best place on the internet. And how, recently, I have felt moved. How I’ve felt 
uplifted. My sorrow has been made sweet. I’ve felt a bit likeGeorge Bailey in 
It’s a Wonderful Life <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOzMdEwYmDU>, staring 
into an icy river of despair only to discover the community rallying round to 
try and save the Building and Loan from a greedy banker and small-minded 
bureaucrat. “This town needs this measly one-horse institution if only to have 
some place where people can come without crawling to Potter.” Thus spoke 
another Jimmy who knew how tostick it to the man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/03/readers-recommend-songs-that-stick-it-to-the-man-rebel>
.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO4ne13Zft9Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO4ne13Zft9Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO4ne13Zft9Q&media=>
 James Stewart sticks it to the man in It’s a Wonderful Life 
No matter what the future brings, there’s always the music. And who better to 
show that at its timeless, brilliant best thanAretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin>? Only this week she brought 
tears to the eyes of Barack Obama and almost made Carole King pass out the 
moment she began to sing. Ignore the fur coat. This performance by a 
73-year-old will make the hairs on the back of your neck stand up.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5RIgeu-6Jcs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5RIgeu-6Jcs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5RIgeu-6Jcs&media=>
 Aretha Franklin ... never better 
This week then, there’s no deadline, just a long horizon of joyful musical 
sharing. And we’re not just playing songs to the tomb of the unknown guru, or 
perhapsShmogmu <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/28659780>, 
but simply to each other. In the meantime, here’s my humble playlist, outside 
zeddedness, to kick things off. It’s just a snapshot of recent feelings and 
experiences about Readers Recommend, the ups, downs, and battles to save it. 
Thank you, everyone. Happy New Year. You’ve always made it special.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3irmBv8h4Tw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3irmBv8h4Tw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3irmBv8h4Tw&media=>
 RR ups and downs  