
Below is this week’s playlist – the theme and tunes picked by a reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/readers-recommend-share-songs-with-extraordinary-vocals#comment-75057778>
 from the comments onlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/readers-recommend-share-songs-with-extraordinary-vocals>
. Thanks for your suggestions. Read more about the format of theweekly Readers 
Recommend series at the end of the piece.

I was looking for extremely unusual or remarkable vocal performances, so where 
better to start thanmizdarlin <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3862641>
’s tip: the sensationalAmy Winehouse, who here sings Valerie 
<https://youtu.be/lqSKVv6YO8g> in a pared-down, slowed-down live performance 
that lets her really stretch, chant, and call in that chorus. An extraordinary 
contralto who made risky vocals a thing of beauty.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQE3yDzFfcuwKvGgSd_0Rh2&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQE3yDzFfcuwKvGgSd_0Rh2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQE3yDzFfcuwKvGgSd_0Rh2&media=>
 The Youtube playlist.Click here if you prefer Spotify 
<https://open.spotify.com/user/matthew.holmes.guardian/playlist/4EnXCrHu7amOgnrvhQcnkk>
. 
Howlin’ Wolf said that Smokestack Lightnin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=09j6vMdKi3E>, up next, was inspired by the 
sparks that flew from a train’s smokestack, but you can also hear the moan of 
the train’s whistle, the grunt of the bellows, the thunder of the wheels – and 
even the gravel between the tracks in his unique voice.


Aretha Franklin’s vocal musculature and agility are on grand display in Think 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HqYnevHibaI>. Elastic, effortless slides and 
pointed, impactful, one-note reprimands. I would think again, boy.


The reader recommending Barenaked Ladies’ One Week 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fC_q9KPczAg> suggested it was karaoke’s 
toughest challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/readers-recommend-share-songs-with-extraordinary-vocals#comment-75066501>
. Too true,philipphilip99 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2966817>. Ed 
Robertson’s fast-paced delivery is like scat or rap: every word is clearly 
enunciated and every phrase conjures up another funny pop-culture reference. My 
brain hurts.


Baaba Maal’s tribute to Nelson Mandela, Njilou 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTGJCkbkPk4>, begins with vocalisations that 
evoke traditional music from Senegal, but builds, assuredly and with the 
ecstatic cooperation of his audience, into a vision of a united Africa.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10548170> MisterIks  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10548170> 28 May 2016 8:41am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75142937> 
Cripes! *Leaps into action*

Krister Linder - Turning Daisies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c7XfWU5Z1Ys>

@thoughtballoons - during this youtube interlude I found he'd released a new 
song called Singing Shadow which I hadn't heard before, and under his video for 
Nothing Ever there's a sweet comment from Kirsty Hawkshaw, who can sing a bit 
herself.

Krister Linder’s ghost-like voice in Turning Daisies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c7XfWU5Z1Ys>, certainly appropriate to that 
song’s gloomy theme, seems an unusually pure form of singing – basically just 
adding a musical note to the act of breathing. I can hear the air suck over his 
teeth. Deliciously creepy and deeply moving.

“Jesus hits the high notes,” said Ravi Raman when recommending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/readers-recommend-share-songs-with-extraordinary-vocals#comment-75072857>
Ted Neeley’s unforgettable crisis in the garden of Gethsemane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_mJgVwQ3Qw> (I only want to say) <>. Another 
building – or should we say, climbing – song that conveys sadness, struggle, 
anger, and resignation, and, oh yes, hits that G5.


Mariza is a rich-voiced Portugese singer who revitalises fado – a style of 
dramatic singing designed to convey loss, longing, and in this song,Medo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9wQrrIywsok&list=RDn6LdDqvrIHE&index=28>, 
fears and anxieties that can fill the night.

Little Girl Blue <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FVpDOIPx_sY> is by far my 
favouriteJanis Joplin song. The way her exquisitely controlled voice stays true 
to the aches and sorrows of the song, almost in defiance of the jaunty 
accompaniment, breaks my heart every time.


I put Van Morrison next, because he said that the song Beside You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ke27QakSPxM> was about offering someone 
spiritual companionship and support, and I thought he could be there for Janis. 
There may not be anyone who has found so many uses for his voice, and I 
particularly like the way he uses hesitations, stammers, sustains, and silences 
in this piece, to make us all travel in the same emotional direction.


Samingad is a Taiwanese singer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/readers-recommend-share-songs-with-extraordinary-vocals#comment-75060179>
 who experiments with electronica to bring the traditional folk songs of her 
Puyuma people to a wider audience. What’s remarkable inMyth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8KTVQsfyCHM> is the impressive control as her 
voice glides over the background instruments, like a bird soaring over the 
forest.


We’ll end with something magical and unexpected. A pop-singer soprano and 
pop-singer tenor, each with very divergent singing careers and styles, decide 
to get together for a go at the operatic roles of Mabel and Frederic in Gilbert 
and Sullivan’s The Pirates of Penzance.Linda Ronstadt brings the plaintiveness 
of folk singing, like pepper, andRex Smith a softly stage-crafted vibrato, like 
salt, and suddenlyAh, Leave Me Not to Pine <https://youtu.be/bdQdDWCd--c> is a 
gourmet dish.

New theme 

The theme for next week’s playlist will be announced at 8pm (UK time) on 
Thursday 2 June. You haveuntil 11pm on Monday 6 June to make nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com> or add it
here via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/56bc5e1fe4b072fd3ded30fa>.

 * There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  