

Scenes from the golden age ... Francis Cuka and Avis Bunnage in A Taste of 
Honey <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-taste-of-honey>.

Fifty years ago this month A Taste of Honey by unknown teenage writer Shelagh 
Delaney opened at a London fringe theatre. The production was 
near-revolutionary in content, covering mixed-race relations, homosexuality and 
pre-marital sex - all from a female standpoint. By the time it wasfilmed 
<http://www.allmovie.com/cg/avg.dll?p=avg&sql=1:48700~T1> in 1961 it had 
heralded the birth of a new age of social realism dubbed kitchen sink drama. 
The play's main legacy, however, was its influence not over theatre or cinema, 
but on television. Delaney's play allowed writers to tackle subjects that went 
unspoken, and television found itself crossing over from entertainment into the 
arena of social reform.

Social realism is something the British have always done well. We live in a 
country more liberal than most, where contentious opinions have often been 
tackled through drama.Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> has helped break down certain 
social barriers by educating the populace. Coming of age in the 80s and early 
90s, my education came through books and especially television. It is only when 
considering the developments in television in the 00s that it becomes apparent 
we enjoyed something of a golden age of social realist drama starting with 
Delaney and co and leading to the socially aware 80s and censor-bothering 90s.

That era now appears to have passed. 'Reality' 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/tv/2008/06/the_return_of_big_brother_the.html> 
now means something else, while documentaries often editorialise or mock their 
subjects. So it's up to the dramatists to hold a mirror to our society once 
again. But where are they? Not in Britain.

All the most popular dramas (The Sopranos, Mad Men, Lost, etc) come from the 
US. If these dramas say anything, then it is about life in America. Only the 
British can truly comment on Britain - and right now the only comment being 
made is that, apparently, "Britain's got talent 
<http://youtube.com/watch?v=9M1vAC0VBsA>".

By way of a prompt to TV commissioners then, consider this a swift round-up of 
some of the most important and influential socially aware dramas the UK has 
produced. Let's hope that dramatists will return to creating series that will 
define our age rather than past eras or, indeed, other planets, as in the case 
of current favourites Life On Mars / Ashes To Ashes and Doctor Who.

Brideshead Revisited <http://youtube.com/watch?v=S6ouafJ0xLY> (1981) This John 
Mortimer adaptation of Evelyn Waugh's novel was the antithesis of the politics 
of the day, yet it said as much about the upper classes and a fading England as 
Alan Bleasdale did about the working class. Champagne quaffing, complicated 
love affairs and Catholicism - Brideshead still resonates.

The Boys From The Blackstuff <http://youtube.com/watch?v=ef8xQcw_Cc8> (1982) 
"Gizza job....". Most remember this for Bernard Hill's memorable turn as 
mad-eyed Yosser Hughes, but this whole series was an important visual protest 
against Margaret Thatcher's wholesale destruction of entire industries.

Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit <http://youtube.com/watch?v=aDaoYnrm1Cs> (1990) 
Jeanette Winterson's novel of lesbianism and evangelism in smalltown Britain in 
the 70s was full of humour and pathos, elements that were retained in a 
powerful screen version.

The Buddha Of Suburbia <http://youtube.com/watch?v=vBFM9KiN3xE> (1991) Glam 
rock, punk rock, multi-culturalism, racism, sexual experimentation and 
thespianism - Hanif Kureishi's suburban bildungsroman had it all and captured 
the spirit of the 70s perfectly.

Our Friends In The North 
<http://youtube.com/watch?v=RXHYp6boB70&feature=related> (1996) The series that 
launched the TV careers of Gina McKee, Daniel Craig and Christopher Eccleston, 
this sticks in the mind as arguably the last great generation-spanning drama 
epic. Love, tragedy, political import, the swinging 60s, the hedonistic 70s, 
the selfish 80s - and Malcolm McDowell. What more could you want?

Further honourable mentions Auf Wiedersehen, Pet (1983), The Singing Detective 
(1986), GBH (1991), This Life (1997), Queer As Folk (1999).
 