
The cream of Britain's legal establishment were gathered in court one at the 
Old Bailey on Wednesday for a hearing in relation to a proposed future trial of 
former News of the World staff.

But occupying the front row were some of the most outstanding stars of the 
bar, barristers known for high-profile clients including Harry Redknapp, Roman 
Polanski and MP Chris Huhne.

Andrew Edis

The lead crown counsel is considered one of the country's top prosecutors. He 
has acted in recent high-profile cases including thetrial of Shafilea Ahmed's 
parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/aug/03/shafilea-ahmed-parents-guilty-murder>
 who were sentenced to life for her murder this summer and a successful
prosecution of a terrorist group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/feb/09/terror-group-london-stock-exchange-jailed>
 who pleaded guilty to plotting to bomb the London Stock Exchange earlier this 
year.

Edis is in demand. He has in the past week been leading the prosecution of 
Nicholas Levene, 48, the former financier nicknamed Beano who is facing a 
"substantial" sentence after pleading guilty at Southwark crown court to 
running a £32m Ponzi fraud.

Next week he will be lead prosecutor in the case against Huhne and his former 
wife, Vicky Pryce, who are accused of conspiring to pervert the course of 
justice.

But the current case against the former News of the World team is not his 
first brush with the tabloid. As a junior, he came to public prominence by 
defending the footballer Bruce Grobbelaar following a sting by the now defunct 
newspaper.

His criminal work has involved him prosecuting dozens of murder cases 
including the infamous Lady in the Lake killingwhen Gordon Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jan/28/ukcrime.markoliver> was found 
guilty of bludgeoning his wife to death 30 years after he dumped her body in 
Coniston Water in the Lake District.

John Kelsey-Fry QC

Horse-loving John Kelsey-Fry is a sought-after defence barrister who has been 
hired byRebekah Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade> in the 
last month and by Huhne earlier this year. Tipped as the new George Carman when 
he was chosen by News International to defend the News of the World and the Sun 
against a Romanian who had brought a libel action following allegations of a 
plot to kidnap the Beckhams.

Known in legal circles simply as Kelsey, he is perhaps best known for 
successfully defending Redknapp, jockey Kieren Fallon, and footballer Steven 
Gerrard. He shot to attention in the libel courts in 2005 when he was chosen by 
Polanski to fight a defamation case against Vanity Fair, marking him out as a 
future favourite for News International and Trinity Mirror.

Legal lore has it that he spends one hour preparing for every one minute in 
court. His profile on his chambers' website cites one observer saying: "He can 
be delicate when the situation requires but can easily duff a witness when 
necessary".

Clare Montgomery QC


Montgomery will also be seeing Huhne in October after she was hired to 
represent his ex-wife in Southwark crown court where they will be on trial, 
defending allegations that they conspired to pervert the course of justice in 
relation to a 2003 speeding case.

One of the few female high flyers on the crime circuit, she was called to the 
bar in 1980 and after being made a Queen's Counsel 1996 continued her rise, 
becoming a deputy high court judge in 2003.

She prosecuted the Metropolitan police following the death of Jean Charles de 
Menezes who was shot dead in 2005 after being mistaken for a suicide bomber – 
and has been representing the Swedish authorities in their long-running 
extradition fight with Wikileaks founder Julian Assange.

Justice Adrian Fulford

Sir Adrian Fulford, presiding over all the Rebekah Brooks and Andy Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson> cases, is no stranger to 
high-profile criminal trials. He recently conducted the trial of Simon Harwood, 
the policeman cleared of killing Ian Tomlinson at the G20 protests in 2009. He 
became a high court judge in 2002, and was one of the first two openly gay men 
to reach that level in the judiciary. A year later he was elected at the United 
Nations to serve as a judge on the international criminal court. One of the 
most respected judges in the country, Fulford presided over the trial of four 
men who tried to bomb the London transport system on 21 July 2005.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>. 
 