
Victorian London is something we think we know. The architecture and urban 
planning of the era remain visible in today’s 21st century metropolis, while TV 
programmes like Ripper Street, Jekyll and Hyde and the forthcoming festive 
treat, Dickensian, celebrate its culture, both high and low.


It was no surprise, therefore, when Ubisoft decided to set the latest 
instalment of its historical action adventure series Assassin’s Creed in the 
19th century capital. Following the members of a secretive assassination sect 
from the 12th century to the modern day, the games have already taken in 
Renaissance Italy and Revolutionary France; the promise of the series is that 
you get to explore cities and cultures at key moments in time, investigating 
their iconic buildings as you carry out your missions.

But does the historical tourism of Syndicate actually give us any viable 
insight into 19th century London? To find out, the Guardian sat down to play 
the game with Alana Harris, a social and cultural historian of modern Britain 
at King’s College London and filmed the experience. This is what we discovered.

Politics

The Assassin’s Creed series often features historical figures who provide 
missions to the lead character, helping to anchor the game’s fictitious plot in 
an authentic setting. In Syndicate, Karl Marx provides a series of tasks 
relevant to his trade union activity during this period. It’s an inclusion that 
Harris finds immediately intriguing. “The interesting thing in concentrating on 
Marx is that you’re also getting a sense of the connections between London and 
the European continent and the cross-fertilisation of European ideas and 
political ideas,” she says.

Gladstone and Disraeli also appear, but Harris laments the missed opportunity 
to include lesser known characters of Victorian politics. The extension of 
enfranchisement is mentioned (the game takes place after the second reform 
act), but only in the context of workingmen. “Why no John Stuart Mill, and the 
proposal for the extension of the franchise to women?” asks Harris. “In some 
ways I would have thought he’d be a much more interesting character to focus on 
if you open out a gendered perspective on political discontent.”

In some ways, the game confirms common beliefs that the Victorian period was a 
time of class struggle, with gender issues arriving later in the early 20th 
century via the suffragettes. Syndicate missed a chance to explore some 
interesting and lesser known elements in women’s history, which might have been 
a great way of engaging with the period.

Child labour 

Children run about the streets in Syndicate, often shoeless, searching through 
piles of rubbish. It is a familiar depiction of poverty in the 19th century 
city. The game seems to explore the Victorian cult of the innocent child – the 
Dickensian picture of innocent cherubs waiting to be saved.

However, Harris argues that the game’s jarring mechanic of allowing players to 
“liberate” a select few children working in a factory is an example of us 
imposing our own anachronistic views of Victorian London onto the past. “Child 
labour was an ongoing concern for the Victorians, and there were concerted 
efforts to address it, particularly as we start to move into the 1870’s and 
80’s with the Education Acts,” she says. “But, of course, the ongoing issue was 
the need for child labour to actually supplement the family income, so if we’re 
liberating these children, what are we liberating them to? And what does this 
actually mean for their families and the family structures that were dependent 
on their wage?

“The socio-economic underpinning that was the reason behind child labour and 
the persistence of child labour, despite the efforts of various authorities to 
address this, is not acknowledged in the liberation strategy. The game has a 
very reductive understanding of what liberation for children might have meant 
in 1868.”

Prostitution and gender

Prostitutes are notably absent across the landscape of Syndicate’s London, 
despite the fact that prostitution was the cause of both moral and medical 
panic throughout society at the time. The issue also represents an interesting 
clash between modern culture and an engagement with women’s history.

“In the wake of Contagious Diseases Act, there was an opportunity to engage 
critically with the issue of the regulation of prostitution and a feminist 
debate around this too, which might have added a really interesting dimension 
to this,” says Harris. “Josephine Butler campaigned to protect female 
prostitutes and to acknowledge [prostitution] as a wider social and moral 
issue. Perhaps that is too much to expect of the game.”

It’s interesting that, although Ubisoft made a big deal of including a female 
protagonist – the resourceful assassin Evie Frye – there’s no attempt to 
consider women’s history. Of course, Assassin’s Creed is not a realistic 
series; it’s a game where you can leap from buildings and land safely in a pile 
of leaves. Furthermore, why should the character have to deal with women’s 
issues just because she happens to be female?

However, including a protagonist who has agency in a time when women had none 
could have lead to some enlightening moments – without recognition, it’s 
jarring. Syndicate is willing to address issues such as child labour, but 
sanitises race and gender. Perhaps it’s about distancing: in some ways child 
labour is a problem that’s been “solved” in the modern west, but race and 
gender issues are still very much ongoing. The game backs away from drawing 
parallels. As Harris says: “There’s an ahistorical representation of women here 
and whether that actually fully engages with the issues of women’s history, or 
gender history for that matter, it’s a missed opportunity perhaps.”

It seems like our first real engagement with prostitution will be through the 
brutally murdered victims of Jack the Ripper, whose crimes are set to form the 
basis of an extra downloadable mission for the game. Therecent controversy over 
the Jack the Ripper museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/29/museum-billed-as-celebration-of-london-women-opens-as-jack-the-ripper-exhibit>
 has shown the necessity of tackling these murders with both insight and 
sensitivity. The Whitechapel murderer became a kind of bogeyman to Victorian 
Londoners, but to treat the killer as a kind of mythical monster demeans the 
lives he took.

The challenge for Syndicate’s developers will be presenting the lurid details 
of the murders, and the voyeurism of the Victorian press, without asking 
players to become voyeurs ourselves. “It is difficult, and it’s something that 
the museum of London in its crime exhibition has been wrestling with too,” says 
Harris. “Can you actually engage with a social construction of crime which was 
intensely eroticised and fetishised in the Victorian period and actually move 
beyond that, to do something critical with it, to enable an analysis that 
doesn’t enter into that same problematic process of fetishising crime, and 
gendered violence?”

Commerce and diversity

One element Harris found missing from Syndicate’s depiction of London was its 
lack of diversity. Although aesthetically impressive, the docks and East End 
are lacking in the communities that made London so cosmopolitan and fuelled its 
commercial growth. Characters like Henry Green, Duleep Singh in The Last 
Maharajah downloadable content, and the Scottish train driver Agnes MacBean 
allude to London being a major site of immigration for both those around the 
empire and within Britain, but there are few examples within London itself.

It is not unusual for Victorian London to be portrayed as a predominantly 
white, predominantly English city. According to Harris, historians have only 
just started to really explore the various immigrant communities of the time. 
“The more recent waves of historiographers would point out that this is the 
heart of the empire and echoes the diversity of the empire in a bustling 
metropolis,” she says.

Official documents from the era only tell part of the story. For example, the 
primarily South Asian Lascar sailors were meant to stay on their ships when 
they arrived in London and would leave very quickly. However, through 
non-official documents we know that this was not the case: many Lascar sailors 
settled in London. There are cases of mixed race families and communities on 
the docks, and we have evidence of a festival that saw around 20,000 Lascar 
sailors celebrate together.

Although generating art assets for a vast multicultural community may have 
proved prohibitively time consuming, there are ways Syndicate could have used 
its intricate architecture to hint at diversity. One interesting example would 
be the Strangers’ Home for Asiatics, Africans and South Sea Islanders in 
Limehouse. Although it was run by Christian missionaries in an attempt to 
convert those who stayed, it also provided a home and a space to worship for 
thousands of sailors and migrants. In areas associated with specific migrant 
communities, such as the French in Soho or German communities in Aldgate and 
Oxford Street, relevant shops and restaurants would have informed players. 
“Particularly in Whitechapel, there’d be all kinds of opportunities in the 
streetscape to hint at that diversity,” says Harris.

Architecture and experience
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-historian-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F8%2F1449606186834%2F3ac68e1d-5e4f-4081-9fbe-fadff8588ca9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reductive%2C%20superficial%2C%20beautiful%20%E2%80%93%20a%20historian's%20view%20of%20Assassin's%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-historian-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reductive%2C%20superficial%2C%20beautiful%20%E2%80%93%20a%20historian%27s%20view%20of%20Assassin%27s%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-historian-ubisoft%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F8%2F1449606186834%2F3ac68e1d-5e4f-4081-9fbe-fadff8588ca9-1020x612.jpeg>
 The game captures the architectural detail of Victorian London perfectly 
The Victorian London we encounter in the game, much like the other historical 
cities we find in the series, is more of an adventure playground than a 
simulation – which, perhaps, is the point.

“In a way the emphasis is on a special understanding of London, a mapping of 
London,” says Harris. “1868 is a very appropriate setting for this; the modern 
London we know has been constructed at this point, this is the year we have the 
Holborn Viaduct, we have Paddington Station, we have a whole raft of famous 
landmarks and sites that you can connect with. I guess that’s probably been 
constructed with a mind to the international appeal of the game too, a way of 
connecting to London – a historical tourism.”


Assassin’s Creed as learning tool?

So could this game be used as a historical teaching aid? Harris is 
unconvinced. Assassin’s Creed: Syndicate is a fantastic visual representation 
of Victorian London. “The amount of detail, the aesthetic, the meticulous 
attention to the roofscapes and chimney stacks, I think it’s beautiful,” she 
says. “In many ways there’s a lot to it if you have a sufficient grounding to 
be able to decipher, unpack, augment and supplement what’s here, but it works 
on a fairly superficial level of engagement.”

Syndicate is a fascinating example, then, of what we value in history and the 
issues of our own society reflected in our interpretations of the past. A few 
may sigh and drag out the old mantra of “it’s just a game” when we consider 
Syndicate in such depth, but in a lot of ways that disrespects the medium; 
we’re classing games lower than historical literature or film by refusing to 
examine them through the same lens.Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> are the narrative medium of the 
digital age – they deserve to be taken seriously when they depict our world and 
heritage.

History <https://www.theguardian.com/education/historyandhistoryofart> is not 
confined to academic papers and the occasional documentary, it is a vital part 
of creative work. “There’s a historical memory and the reprocessing and 
repackaging of it is ever present. We need to be mindful of that.”

 