
This year’s Berlin film festival is a tribute to the world’s refugees, 
according to its director, with one of the frontrunners a film partly shot in 
the claustrophobic hold of a boat in which dozens of refugees died of 
asphyxiation.

Fire at Sea review – a powerful study of migrant crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/13/fire-at-sea-review-lampedusa-migrants-berlin-film-festival-2016>
Fuocoammare (Fire at Sea) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/13/fire-at-sea-review-lampedusa-migrants-berlin-film-festival-2016>
 is a haunting two-hour documentary by the Italian director Gianfranco Rosi 
shot over the course of a year on the Italian island of Lampedusa, which has 
been receiving thousands of refugees every year for decades. It is one of the 
favourites to secure the festival’s prestigious Golden Bear at the weekend.

The film weaves together the stories of the islanders, many of whom struggle 
to make a living on their seemingly idyllic island, with the harrowing stories 
of some of the hundreds of thousands of refugees who try to reach Europe for a 
better life, many of whom do not succeed.

Many who have seen it emerged from theatres in tears. With its closeup scenes 
of refugees dying in their own filth, the film shows much of the detail that is 
edited out of news bulletins.

Fire at Sea has set the tone of this year’s Berlinale, which the festival 
director, Dieter Kosslick, has called a tribute to the world’s refugees. The 
Berlinale, which has long had a reputation as the most political and socially 
conscious of the major festivals, has put a deliberate emphasis on those who 
have been forced to flee. Cinemagoers have been asked to donate to refugee and 
asylum seeker charities, and collection boxes have been placed outside each of 
the more than 400 screenings.

It has also welcomed some of the more than 1 million refugees who have arrived 
in Germany over the past year. Volunteers have accompanied hundreds of refugees 
to screenings and joined debates with them on a wide range of political and 
philosophical issues.

“The debate about refugees in Germany is very lively and controversial, so we 
have lots of films on the fate of refugees which also touch on the festival’s 
title, ‘the pursuit of happiness’, ” Kosslick said ahead of the festival. He 
pointed out that just as when the Berlinale launched in 1951, at a time when 
the city was still very much marked by the scars of war and heaving with 
refugees, its raison d’etre now is to foster understanding.

“As we did then, we need this now, to encourage understanding between 
religions, philosophies, between countries. We want to continue to be a lobby 
for relevant topics,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fberlinale-refugee-crisis-migrants-berlin-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90039302ef455bea3568c813c4bdda2549d7741b%2F0_0_3961_2380%2F3961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20crisis%20brought%20into%20sharp%20focus%20at%20Berlin%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fberlinale-refugee-crisis-migrants-berlin-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20crisis%20brought%20into%20sharp%20focus%20at%20Berlin%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fberlinale-refugee-crisis-migrants-berlin-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90039302ef455bea3568c813c4bdda2549d7741b%2F0_0_3961_2380%2F3961.jpg>
 Ai Weiwei’s installation at Berlin’s Konzerthaus was created with life jackets 
used by refugees. Photograph: Kay Nietfeld/EPA 
Even at screenings of films that have had nothing to do with refugees, the 
subject has seeped in. Following the world premiere of the Coen brothers’ film 
Hail Caesar! the talk turned to refugees, and George Clooney, its star, 
revealed that on the festival sidelines he and his wife, the human rights 
lawyer Amal Alamuddin, would bemeeting the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/george-clooney-meets-angela-merkel-germany-support-refugees>
 to discuss the crisis and “to talk about … what things we can do”. They were 
later seen deep in conversation with David Miliband, president of the 
International Rescue Committee.

But the tone has not been entirely uncontroversial. A charity event was held 
inside the Konzerthaus – the entrance pillars of which the Chinese artistAi 
Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> had decorated with 
14,000 bright orange lifejackets flown in from Lesbos, the Greek island where 
almost 450,000 refugees arrived last year. But the Cinema for Peace gala 
backfired when fundraising guests tweeted pictures of themselves donning 
shimmering golden emergency thermal blankets like those given to refugees.

Berlin’s culture secretary, Tim Renner, expressed his anger in a tweet: “When 
Ai Weiwei illustrates the dimensions of terror outside [the gala] with 14,000 
life jackets from Lesbos, it is perhaps not subtle but effective and justified; 
but when the guests of Cinema for Peace are prompted by the organiser to don 
emergency blankets for a group photo, even if understood as an act of 
solidarity, it has a clearly obscene element,” he wrote.

Celebrities don emergency blankets at Berlin fundraiser for refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/16/celebrities-don-emergency-blankets-at-berlin-fundraiser-for-refugees>
As the 66th festival drew to a close, it was striking how many other pictures 
had packed a powerful punch on some of the weightier issues of the day. It was 
proof, said critics, that fears the Berlinale had lost its edge with last 
year’s screening of the premiere of Fifty Shades of Grey were unfounded.

Life on the Border, a documentary film for younger people in the Generation 
14plus category, was compiled from footage gathered by eight children who were 
given cameras by the Kurdish director Bahman Ghobadi and asked to capture their 
own lives. The Road to Istanbul, by the French director Rachid Bouchareb, is 
about a Belgian woman who finds out that her daughter has gone to Syria to join 
Islamic State. And Danis Tanović illustrates inDeath in Sarajevo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/16/death-in-sarajevo-review-berlin-film-festival-danis-tanovic>
 how the effects of the Bosnian conflict, which triggered another wave of 
refugees in the 1990s, are still very much felt today.

Between films, people were invited to sign petitions on everything from 
demands for improvements to the refugee situation, to an appeal for the release 
of Oleg Sentsov, a Ukrainian film director being held as a political prisoner 
in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/25/russian-court-jails-ukrainian-filmmaker-oleg-sentsov-for-20-years-over-terror-offences>
.

“It really awakens me politically to be here,” said Sara Schneider, a student 
eating a tortilla from a fast food van on Potsdamer Platz, the main setting of 
the festival. “Most of the films are chosen to make you think more about the 
world around you, rather than escaping from it, which I think is a good thing. 
But it’s very Berlin.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fberlinale-refugee-crisis-migrants-berlin-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2b2889d1e259d52f63908ba8af89f9982e5031b%2F0_129_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20crisis%20brought%20into%20sharp%20focus%20at%20Berlin%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fberlinale-refugee-crisis-migrants-berlin-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20crisis%20brought%20into%20sharp%20focus%20at%20Berlin%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fberlinale-refugee-crisis-migrants-berlin-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2b2889d1e259d52f63908ba8af89f9982e5031b%2F0_129_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Gianfranco Rosi attends a press conference to promote his film Fuocoammare 
(Fire at Sea), which is the favourite to win the festival’s prestigious Golden 
Bear. Photograph: Stefanie Loos/Reuters 
Towards the end of Fire at Sea, doctors and aid workers are shown standing 
exhausted on the deck of their ship and looking out to sea. A doctor says he 
has seen far too many deaths, including those of women who have given birth and 
died with their children, to whom they are still attached via umbilical cord. 
The camera sweeps down to the lower deck of the refugees’ boat to reveal the 
corpses of the many who could not be saved, floating in rubbish and human 
waste. The scene was filmed just a month ago, according to the 51-year-old 
Eritrean-born director Rosi.

“My film bears witness to the tragedy that is playing out before our eyes for 
which we’re all responsible and against which we show our inability to do 
anything on a political level. The only answer we have is to build a wall … a 
wall in our heads,” he said.

“When I began filming it it wasn’t clear that the topic would become so 
relevant. It’s important for me to be able to show it at Berlin, because this 
festival has politics at its heart.”
 