
The Turnbull government has given its strongest signal yet that a deal is in 
the wind with the United States to settle 1,800 refugees from Nauru andManus 
Island <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island>.

The Australian newspaper reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/immigration/coalition-close-to-us-deal-on-nauru-and-manus-island-detainees/news-story/bfacfa7c45c7278cdc8e89cdd9021386>
 Australia and the US were expected to announce the resettlement arrangement 
within days.

Speculation has been mounting about a deal since Australia announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/21/australia-will-take-refugees-from-costa-rica-camps-turnbull-tells-un>
 at Barack Obama’s global migration summit in New York in September that it 
would take refugees from camps in Costa Rica.

Since then, the Coalition government has introduced legislation to place a 
lifetime ban on asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/30/asylum-seekers-face-lifetime-ban-on-entering-australia-if-they-arrive-by-boat>
 who have arrived by boat from ever travelling to Australia once they are 
resettled in other countries.

The defence industry minister, Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>, would not 
confirm the deal but he said if it did happen it would be a win for the 
government.

UN official criticises Australia's plan for lifetime ban on refugees who 
travel by sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/un-official-criticises-australias-plan-for-lifetime-ban-on-refugees-who-travel-by-sea>
“If it’s the case, it will be another great achievement from the Turnbull 
government,” he said on Channel Nine.

Pyne said there was plenty of time to make an announcement before the 
inauguration of Donald Trump as US president on 20 January.


Trump said he would put a blanket ban on Muslim immigration 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/07/24/politics/donald-trump-muslim-ban-election-2016/>
 and then “suspend immigration from areas of the world when there is a proven 
history of terrorism against the United States, Europe, or our allies”.

Among those on Manus and Nauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> are 
people from Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Iraq. There are some who are 
stateless.

Some refugees and asylum seekers expressed their support for the potential 
deal.

Many have spent years in the offshore processing system and, unless they have 
family in Australia, no longer desire to come to Australia. They still say they 
cannot go home, but because of the treatment they have received – for which 
they blame the Australian government – many are asking for refuge from any 
other refugee-convention signatory.

Behrouz Boochani, an Iranian journalist detained on Manus Island, told 
Guardian Australia he was sceptical of the reports but most other detainees he 
had spoken to would be happy to go to the US.

“Be sure that most people would love to go to America, but some people need to 
join their families in Australia,” he said. “I think Australia has to respect 
them because they want to join their families.”

Hundreds of men are currently involved in court action in Papua New Guinea, 
seeking compensation for their detention which thePNG supreme court ruled 
illegal and unconstitutional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
 this year.

“For me it’s hard to accept to go to America because [the Australian 
government] has tortured me for about four years, and now to say ‘go to 
America’, I question the Australian government,” Boochani said.

“How can I get what’s right from a country like Australia that violated my 
human rights?”

Syrian held on Nauru lands in Cambodia as sixth refugee to take up 
resettlement offer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/syrian-held-on-nauru-lands-in-cambodia-as-sixth-refugee-to-take-up-resettlement-offer>
Another said he would like to go to the US, but not before he was compensated 
for his treatment. The Iranian refugee, who did not wish to be named, has been 
physically assaulted twice since being detained on Manus Island.

“They took my past three years of life. I was born in 1992 and when I arrived 
here I was almost 21 years,” he said. “Now I’m 24. I missed best days of my 
life to go and have fun or go to university or play sport. The Australian 
government keep me in indefinite detention. They have to pay for this.”

A young man held on Nauru said he had dreamed of coming to Australia and 
joining the defence forces, but he believed the US was a good option.

Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> said a deal would 
be a good thing.

“These are people who are refugees, who have been found to be refugees, who, 
if they are settled in a country like the United States, that will be a good 
thing,” he said.

Kon Karapanagiotidis, the chief executive of the asylum seeker resource 
centre, said the deal sounded positive but he was waiting for details on 
whether it would include all refugees on the island, and how quickly the 
transfer would happen.

“From day one it’s always been about safely resettling people who are seeking 
safety,” he told Guardian Australia. “We know that’s not possible on Nauru and 
we know that’s not possible in PNG.”

Karapanagiotidis said their preference had been to have people settled in 
Australia because they were Australia’s responsibility, but “if there is a deal 
to resettle all of them safely, quickly, in America, in a country where they 
will in fact be safe and settled, that’s our priority.”

“The most important thing is that it’s done quickly and urgently given the 
imminent danger and risk and the extreme poor state of physical and mental 
health of so many of them.”

He said he wasn’t interested in politics, but all credit for any deal would go 
to groups and individuals who had campaigned against the camps for years rather 
than to the government, which he feared may use the deal as a Senate bargaining 
chip for its visa ban legislation.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has 
refused to comment or speculate on potential third-country negotiations to 
resettle the refugees.

On Melbourne radio station 3AW on Friday, the prime minister maintained his 
silence on the issue.

“There’s always speculation about these things ... and we never comment on 
them,” he said.

The Coalition’s latest migration bill, which would impose a lifetime ban on an 
estimated 3,100 people, has passed the lower house of parliament but is yet to 
clear the Senate.

Labor, Andrew Wilkie, Cathy McGowan, Greens MP Adam Bandt and Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> Team MP ­Rebekha 
Sharkie voted against the bill in the lower house.

The immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, said the government 
had support for the bill amongst the Senate crossbench. He would need eight of 
the 10 remaining crossbenchers to pass the bill.
 