
The results of a poll about the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> referendum by a regional newspaper may 
strike fear into David Cameron and his remain supporters.

Some 80% of the readers of the Wolverhampton-based Express & Star said they 
would vote for Brexit 
<http://www.expressandstar.com/news/politics/2016/03/15/eu-referendum-brexit-is-what-we-want-express-and-star-survey/>
 on 23 June.

The majority of the 7,979 readers who took part in the survey said immigration 
was the biggest issue facing Britain.

And, to rub salt in Cameron’s wounds, they named Brexiteer Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> as the politician most likely to 
influence voters’ decisions.

Before I continue, a word about the way the poll was conducted. It was 
self-selecting. Most of those who took part (7,538) did so online, while 441 
posted their responses. It gave people a week to register their answers.

Here are the major findings: 

Asked how they plan to vote in the EU referendum, 80% replied leave with 16% 
saying stay and 4% undecided.

Who is most likely to influence your voting intention? 66% Johnson; 22% 
Cameron; and 12%Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>.

Do you think Cameron negotiated a good deal for Britain? No, 82%; yes, 8%; 
unsure, 10%.

What’s the key issue? Immigration, 63%; economy, 19%; freedom of movement, 
10%; other, 8%.


Do you think the EU interferes too much in the UK? Yes, 86%; no, 12%.

Will the conditions for trade improve or decline if Britain leaves the EU? 
Improve, 80% and decline 20%.

Will Britain’s security against the threat of terrorism improve if it leaves 
the EU? Yes, 70%; no, 20%; and 10% unsure.

The Express & Star’s editor, Keith Harrison, told HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2016/news/regional-daily-poll-finds-most-readers-will-vote-to-leave-eu/>
: “These results reflect the biggest response we have ever had to a political 
poll and I am sure that politicians on both sides of the debate will sit up and 
take note.”

Unsurprisingly, the poll results were welcomed by Johnson, who spent three 
months as a trainee journalist with the Express & Star in 1988.

By contrast, Labour’s Pat McFadden, who favours Britain remaining within the 
EU, was less happy.

A Wolverhampton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wolverhampton> MP himself, he 
said: “I understand there is a lot of concern locally about immigration and 
this is a big factor in these survey results.

“But I hope voters think very carefully about a move that could damage us 
economically and hurt investment and jobs.

“Being part of the EU free trade area is a major reason why the UK attracts 
inward investment in areas like the automotive industry, financial services and 
more.”

Psephologists will probably dismiss the poll as “unscientific”, which it is. 
Even so, it does indicate that the people of the Black Country appear to be 
closer in their views to the residents of Romford than those of Aberystwyth,as 
revealed by the Guardian’s Stephen Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/romford-aberystwyth-most-eurosceptic-europhiliac-places-uk>
.

There is, of course, a long way to go yet. But the remain campaigners, and 
here I agree with Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/tony-blair-more-passion-pro-eu-europe-campaign-referendum>
, do seem to lack the passion and commitment of those urging a leave vote.

Note also one very interesting detail in Moss’s report. A Romford market 
trader held up that Sun front page with the “Queen backs Brexit” headline, 
saying: “If she wants to get out, I’m with the Queen, so let’s go!”

Although the story has been denied, that claim may well stick in people’s 
minds. The political effects of a single newspaper headline, no matter its 
(alleged) inaccuracy, have been proved before.

Remember the Sun’s 1979 headline, “Crisis? What crisis?” Prime minister Jim 
Callaghan said no such thing, but it helped to force hisLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government from office.

Blair’s former communications director, Alastair Campbell, is upset with the 
“dishonesty” of newspapers backing Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/12/alastair-campbell-dishonesty-papers-eu-referendum>
, accusing them of peddling lies and propaganda that insult the intelligence of 
their readers.

He is probably right. But railing against the press is not going to change 
matters. The lesson from the Express & Star poll for the remain campaigners is 
that they should up their game by improving their own propaganda... and do it 
quickly.
 