
Three of the biggest regional newspaper publishers got some good news for a 
change on Wednesday from the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations, with all 
reporting website traffic growth of at least 30% year on year in the first six 
months of 2011.

As sales of regional newspapers continue to take a hammering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/31/yorkshire-evening-post-nottingham-post>
 Daily Mail & General Trust's Northcliffe Media, Trinity Mirror and Newsquest 
can take some heart from huge online traffic increases for their regional 
newspaper websites.

The best-performer in terms of growth is Trinity Mirror's regional online 
network, which includes Walesonline.co.uk and Birminghammail.net, which 
reported a 54.7% year-on-year increase in monthly unique browsers to 9,005,634. 
This represents a 10% period-on-period boost.

Newsquest, which runs sites including heraldscotland.com and Oxfordmail.co.uk, 
reported a 31.7% year-on-year increase in monthly unique browsers to 8,525,236. 
This is a 14.4% period on period rise.

Northcliffe Media network, which runs the This is... website network alongside 
its regional papers in areas including Bristol and Nottingham, reported a 29% 
increase in monthly unique browsers year-on-year to 5,215,954. This is a 17.5% 
period-on-period increase.

Among the four biggest regional publishers, Johnston Press produced the 
smallest increase in web traffic. However, Johnston's web figures are still 
moving in the right direction, unlike its print circulation, with monthly 
unique browsers to its network of sites up 9% year on-year and 7.5% compared 
with the six months to the end of December.

Johnston's network of websites, which include Scotsman.com and 
Yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk, reported 7,639,859 monthly unique browsers on 
average in the first half of 2011.

Outside the four main regional publishing groups the next major player that 
reports audited web traffic is Midland News Association, owner of sites 
including Expressandstar.com.

MNA reported a 40.9% year-on-year increase in monthly unique browsers to 
976,980, a 16.5% rise period on period.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 