
What skills should a young journalist have nowadays in order to obtain a job 
on a newspaper?

Year by year, since the dawn of the digital revolution, journalism educators 
have been creating new courses designed to teach their students how to use 
online tools in order to enhance job opportunities.

For a good while, however, the people responsible for recruiting journalists, 
meaning editors, tended to ignore digital abilities in favour of traditional 
skills, asa 2011 review on behalf of the National Council for the Training of 
Journalists (NCTJ) showed. 
<https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/editors-still-prize-traditional-skills-finds-nce-review/s2/a545729/>

But times appear to have changed according to the results of an enterprising 
research exercise by a former head of news at the Yorkshire Evening Post, 
Rebecca Whittington,Journalism skills – has the digital tipping point been 
reached? 
<http://rebeccawhittingtonmedia.com/2015/09/16/journalism-skills-has-the-digital-tipping-point-been-reached/>

Her study of recruitment advertisements on the HoldTheFrontPage website 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/> over a three month period, from 1 November 
2014 to 31 January 2015, suggested “a definite tip towards digital skills 
preference.”

She analysed the language used in the adverts by noting keywords. The 
traditional set included terms such as print, contacts, exclusive, hard news 
and shorthand; the digital set used terms such as hits, UGC, platforms, 
multimedia and Facebook.

Rebecca then noted how many times each of keywords were used and where in the 
text they first appeared. Overall she discovered that the there was a higher 
number of digital keywords in the ads (56%) over traditional (44%).

She was also able to identify which publishing groups favoured digital skills. 
Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> placed the 
greatest emphasis on digital language, with a 73% use of digital keywords. 
Newsquest registered 54% and Local World had 52%.

(NB: The other large regional newspaper company, Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press>, did not place any adverts 
during the three-month period).

Archant <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, which placed eight 
adverts, gave greater emphasis to traditional language, with 59% of its keyword 
use coming from the traditional set.

Whittington conceded that her study amounted to being only “a snapshot rather 
than the big picture” but it does imply a growing preference for digital skills.

She also voiced a note of caution: “the preference for digital over 
traditional could merely be indicating a desired state of a newsroom or 
company, rather than reality.

“It could also indicate an urge to demonstrate the importance of newer digital 
skills in contrast to taken-for-granted traditional ones.”

She cited research published earlier this year by Lily Canter of Sheffield 
Hallam university in which she interviewed editors across the media industry, 
broadcasting as well as newspapers. She found that digital skills were being 
recognised as being at least as equally important as traditional.

But Whittington tells me, despite publishers’ increasing search for digital 
skills, certain specific requirements - knowledge of coding, for instance, or 
data mining - are not being sought in the adverts. So there is some way to go 
yet as the media landscape continues to change.

Whittington’s research, which she will supplement with a longitudinal study, 
is part of a larger and more complex consideration of the impact of digital 
reporting tools on regional media that forms the basis of her ongoing Phd 
thesis.


She is currently a teaching assistant at Leeds Trinity university. Prior to 
her work with the Yorkshire Evening Post andYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> Post she edited two Johnston 
Press weekly titles in the Wakefield area.

Source: Rebecca Whittington 
<http://rebeccawhittingtonmedia.com/2015/09/16/journalism-skills-has-the-digital-tipping-point-been-reached/>
 Hat tip: HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2015/news/digital-tipping-point-reached-in-regional-press-claims-new-study/>
 