
The world’s largest brewer, Anheuser-Busch InBev, has gained conditional 
approval from South African anti-trust regulators for its $100bn-plus 
acquisition ofSABMiller <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> on the 
condition that no South African employees would be laid off as a result of the 
deal.

The Competition Commission ruling brings a step closer the creation of the 
world’s biggest brewing group, which would make nearly a third of the world’s 
beer.

The commission said it had recommended to the Competition Tribunal, which has 
the ultimate say, that the deal be “approved with conditions”. Its 
recommendations usually meet the tribunal’s approval.

Eagle lager: the Ugandan beer that aims to help local farmers and communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/27/eagle-lager-ugandan-beer-local-farmers-communities-sabmiller>
Other conditions of the deal include a requirement the merged entity sell off 
SABMiller’s stake in liquor maker Distell, and that it make a 1bn rand ($43.9m) 
investment in South African agriculture.

The companies have also agreed to submit within two years of the merger “black 
economic empowerment plans setting out how the merged entity intends to 
maintain black participation in the company, including equity”, the commission 
said in a statement.

Jobs are a major issue in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, where unemployment is over 25% 
and income disparities are glaring. AB InBev has granted significant 
concessions on this front as it strives for approval of one of the largest 
corporate takeovers.

“The commission received concerns regarding the potential impact of the 
proposed merger on employment ... In this regard,AB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> has undertaken that it 
will not retrench any employee in South Africa as a result of the merger. This 
condition will endure in perpetuity,” the commission said.

In the area of social development, AB InBev has committed to investing 1bn 
rand over five years into the agriculture sector that supplies the brewing 
business, with a focus on emerging black farmers.

“This investment will be utilised for the development of the South African 
agricultural outputs for barley, hops and maize, as well as to promote entry 
and growth of emerging and black farmers in South Africa,” the commission said.

Last week AB InBev gained EU antitrust approval for the transaction. The 
merged entity resulting from the takeover would sell twice as much beer as its 
nearest rival, Heineken.
 