
A governor in Russia’s far north has said the reindeer population will be 
reduced by 100,000 after an anthrax outbreak, but scientists have said twice as 
many need to be culled.


Reindeer herding is an important industry and livelihood for indigenous 
peoples in the Yamal-Nenets region. Its governor, Dmitry Kobylkin,told 
<https://ria.ru/interview/20161006/1478617429.html> state news agency RIA 
Novosti that about 100,000 reindeer would be culled this winter because 
overpopulation was straining a limited food supply and increasing the risk of 
anthrax infection.

Nightmare before Christmas: Siberia plans to cull 250,000 reindeer amid 
anthrax fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/nightmare-before-christmas-siberia-plans-to-cull-250000-reindeer-amid-anthrax-fears>
An outbreak in Yamal-Nenets – the first since 1941 – killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia>
 a 12-year-old boy and more than 2,500 reindeer in July and August. Scientists 
and officials blamed the awakening of the “zombie infection” on abnormally hot 
temperatures caused by global climate change. Thawing of the permafrost soil 
can release the frozen bacteria.

“For [lack of fodder], some herder families take their animals to graze in 
restricted areas where there’s a high risk of Siberian plague infection,” 
Kobylkin said, using the Russian name for anthrax, a bacterial infection often 
transmitted through contaminated food or water.

Regional authorities will buy the reindeer to be culled and process the meat, 
he said. Officials havesaid 
<http://siberiantimes.com/other/others/features/f0260-yamal-trims-back-reindeer-cull-to-100000-as-herders-fear-future-of-nomadic-lifestyle/>
 reindeer meat exports could increase from 300 tonnes last year to 800 tonnes 
this year.

More than 750,000 reindeer live in the Yamal-Nenets region, even though the 
region’s pasture land can support only 386,000 reindeer without degrading, 
Vladimir Bogdanov, director of the Urals Institute of Plant and Animal Ecology,
told 
<https://rg.ru/2016/09/08/reg-urfo/uchenye-predupredili-ob-opasnosti-bolshogo-chisla-olenej-dlia-iamala.html>
 Rossiyskaya Gazeta. At least 200,000 reindeer need to be culled, he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Freindeer-to-be-culled-in-russias-far-north-due-to-anthrax-outbreak%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2740c53f614a152ff30a7df8bacef0519a122231%2F0_0_5624_3840%2F5624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reindeer%20to%20be%20culled%20in%20Russia%E2%80%99s%20far%20north%20due%20to%20anthrax%20outbreak&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Freindeer-to-be-culled-in-russias-far-north-due-to-anthrax-outbreak%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reindeer%20to%20be%20culled%20in%20Russia%E2%80%99s%20far%20north%20due%20to%20anthrax%20outbreak&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Freindeer-to-be-culled-in-russias-far-north-due-to-anthrax-outbreak%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2740c53f614a152ff30a7df8bacef0519a122231%2F0_0_5624_3840%2F5624.jpg>
 Nenets children, photographed in 2015, attend the Reindeer Herder’s Day 
holiday in the city of Nadym, in the Yamal-Nenets region. Photograph: Dmitry 
Lovetsky/AP 
Reindeer overpopulation compounds the anthrax risk. Over-grazing reduces the 
plant cover, which serves as a buffer to protect the permafrost from thawing in 
the summer sun. In addition, reindeer grazing where plant cover is thin tend to 
eat soil along with lichen, becoming infected that way, Bogdanov said.

“If steps aren’t taken, there will be a mass die-off in the near future,” he 
said. “The animals won’t hold out against lack of fodder and various diseases.”

Climate change is thawing deadly diseases. Maybe now we'll address it? | Mona 
Sarfaty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/climate-change-thawing-deadly-diseases-anthrax>
But reducing the reindeer population is a thorny political issue, since that 
is how many indigenous people earn a living.

Following Kobylkin’s remarks, reindeer herder Yeiko Serotetto started a 
petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B7%D0%B8%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%82-%D1%80%D0%BE%D1%81%D1%81%D0%B8%D0%B8-%D1%81%D0%BE%D1%85%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%82%D1%8C-%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%BC-%D0%BD%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%86%D0%B5%D0%B2-%D0%B8-%D0%BD%D0%B0%D0%B9%D1%82%D0%B8-%D1%80%D0%B5%D1%88%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5-%D1%83%D1%81%D1%82%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%8F-%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B1%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BC-%D0%B2-%D0%B1%D1%83%D1%80%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B5-%D0%BE%D1%81%D0%B2%D0%BE%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5-%D1%81%D0%B5%D0%B2%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B0>
 to president Vladimir Putin calling for the reindeer population to be 
preserved. He argued that there would be no risk of anthrax infection if the 
government hadn’t stopped vaccinating reindeer against the disease in 2007, and 
said the cull was “motivated by the interests of the gas drilling industry”.

Oil and gas exploration in the far north has led to increasing conflicts with 
indigenous peoples in recent years.

Kobylkin said regional authorities are “working on the issue of job placement 
for the local population” after the planned cull.

Bruce C Forbes, a research professor at the University of Lapland’s Arctic 
Centre with 25 years’ experience of studying Yamal tundra pasture, told the 
Guardianthe current number of reindeer was “probably at or near a historic 
high”, and the increased competition for higher, drier ground during the warmer 
months could result in the erosion of the most vulnerable places.

Forbes called for an “open and honest dialogue with the key players”, 
particularly with nomadic reindeer herders – though that was easier said than 
done.

“Appropriate representation of the tundra nomads who have precious little time 
to spare in their annual calendar and for the most part operate far from the 
levers of regional decision is extremely challenging.”
 