
'My reverend told me that he had prayed for me and that I had been healed," 
Mary Jere says, her wide eyes glazing. "So I stopped taking the HIV medication."

It is early morning in Mzimba, a sleepy town in northern Malawi, and although 
there is no service today Jere is sitting on a pew in the front row of the 
church. Instead of the usual congregation, the seats are filling with the 
members of the local HIV community support group.

"I was told that if I believed in God, then there was no need to take the 
medicine," Jere, who appears to be in her late 20s, continues. "I didn't know 
anything about HIV and so to begin with, I even refused to be tested."

Jere – together with over 80% of Malawi – is Christian. With most of the 
remainder being Muslim, faith is the cornerstone of Malawian culture and this 
puts faith leaders in an exceptionally powerful position.

Faith leaders and the beliefs they instil in their congregations, have a huge 
impact on people's decisions about HIV treatment, as well as influencing HIV 
prevention. Encouraging the use of condoms – or condemning it – can greatly 
affect HIV prevalence rates in a community. 

Pastors of Pentecostal churches such as Jere's can wield a great deal of 
power. Pentecostalism – where a great emphasis is placed on personal 
experiences with God – is an increasingly popular branch of Christianity in 
Malawi. So when Jere's Pastor told her that he had a vision, she trusted the 
message he said it relayed.

Pastors who are not part of any overarching institutions have few limits to 
their rhetoric and interpretations of visions. So – as in Jere's case – this 
can mean they have the power to make life and death decisions.

But when harnessed correctly, faith and faith communities have a great 
potential for positive influence.

Manerela+, the Malawi Network of Religious Leaders living with or personally 
affected by HIV and Aids, is hosting today's support meeting. This progressive 
group engages leaders from different religions to develop a multifaith response 
in the fight against HIV.

The Manerela+ representatives at this meeting come from various Christian 
institutions (including some from Pentecostal churches) and also from Muslim 
communities. They agree that the HIV debate transcends religion.

The dynamic Pastor Charli is a pivotal figure in this radical reassessment of 
the faith community's stance. This is no small task. Cases such as Jere's are 
common across Malawi and it is Pastor Charli and his colleagues at Manerela+ 
who are ostracised as radicals by the wider faith community.

Resistance to change

Years of messaging, values and belief discouraging the use of condoms, needs 
to be turned on their head. It is therefore perhaps unsurprising that Pastor 
Charli has come up against so much resistance.

According to Malawi's department of nutrition, HIV and Aids, it was not until 
1985 that the first case of HIV was diagnosed in the country and that the 
benefits of using condoms to prevent the spread of HIV were publicised. The 
Catholic church by comparison, which counts over 20% of Malawians as members, 
originates from the first century AD. It did not drop its blanket ban on the 
use of condoms until November 2010.

One key element of Manerela+'s work is in addressing the stigma and 
discrimination suffered by people living with HIV. In preventing access to 
medical treatments, attacking quality of life and killing self-esteem, the 
stigma can prove to be just as debilitating as HIV itself.

"We have to change the mindset," says Pastor Charli, leaning forward 
enthusiastically. "[People living with HIV], should think that they can achieve 
great things.

"Being such influential individuals, the faith leaders have such 
responsibility here," he continues. "If the church cannot talk about HIV, then 
the wrong people will talk about HIV, people who have the wrong information."

To educate faith leaders Pastor Charli encourages them to attend a workshop. 
Pastor Wilson, from the Gospel Pentecostal church, is one of his converts. "I 
used to be against the use of condoms," says Pastor Wilson, "as to me, it 
encouraged promiscuity. But after the workshop I realised I was missing the 
point."

Pastor Wilson now actively encourages his congregation to use condoms and also 
emphasises the importance of HIV testing. He has expelled stigma and 
discrimination from his community and is active in Manerela+ himself.

Also working under the Manerela+ umbrella are members from Muslim communities. 
"As Muslims, from the beginning we were not involved in HIV issues," says 
Mustafa Adda, a Manerela+ representative from the Muslim Association of Malawi. 
"But after attending a workshop we met every Friday to mobilise all Muslims 
after prayer to talk about HIV. We are seeing the change … most of all it is 
important that us leaders, we must act as role models and be the first to go 
for testing."

Faith, and the role it can play in reducing the spread of HIV, as well as in 
supporting those people living with HIV, is very important in a country such as 
Malawi.

Malawi is an exceptionally poor land-locked country, where most people live in 
rural communities. According to UNAids, 11% of the adult population – about one 
million people – is HIV positive and countless more have died.

Without their faith, Malawians have very little hope and some have hidden 
behind it. "I was scared of dying," says Jere, "so I didn't go for the test 
right away in case I found out I was HIV positive. Instead I relied on what the 
reverend had told me about prayer being enough."

It was six years ago that Jere's pastor told her to stop taking her 
life-saving antiretroviral drugs. Today, with the help of a progressive group 
of faith leaders, she explains how she is still alive.

"Three weeks after I had stopped taking the medication I went back to the 
hospital to check if I had been healed as the pastor had said," she explains, 
"but I tested HIV positive once again. I restarted taking the antiretroviral 
drugs immediately."

Jere still has her faith; it remains the source of her hope. But she has 
complemented her faith with education. "I now believe", she says, "that God can 
also work through medicine."
 