
The minister for policing has described the official watchdog’s report 
exposing the Metropolitan police’s failings on tackling child sex abuse cases 
as “the most damning of any report they had ever written on any police force in 
the country”.

Brandon Lewis said the findings of the report by Her Majesty’s Inspection of 
Constabulary were shocking, and said the home secretary,Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>, had ordered the publication 
of quarterly follow-up inspection reports into how Britain’s police were 
tackling the issue.

Lewis was responding to an urgent question in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> by the shadow home 
secretary, Diane Abbott, who said the Met’s failings together with the 
“crumbling” nature of the official inquiry into sex abuse raised serious 
questions about the government’s commitment to tackling child sex abuse.

Met police heavily criticised over child protection failings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/met-police-heavily-criticised-over-child-protection-failings>
The HMIC report said hundreds are children were being left at risk of sexual 
exploitation and rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/met-police-heavily-criticised-over-child-protection-failings>
 because of systemic failings by Britain’s biggest police force. Three-quarters 
of child protection and abuse cases were poorly handled and involved shocking 
failures including errors in leadership, training, organisation and judgment.

Among the worst examples was a failure to interview a 10-year-old girl who may 
have been abused by her father and who had witnessed her mother being raped and 
stabbed with a screwdriver.

In the Commons, Abbott said the report, following another damning review, had 
found numerous errors in Scotland Yard’s Operation Midland investigation, in a 
week in which the largest group of survivors, the Shirley Oaks Survivors 
Association, had withdrawn from the child sex abuse inquiry.

“This is a shocking report. The home secretary cannot hide behind the mayor. 
Looking at child sex abuse in its totality, looking at how the child sex abuse 
inquiry seems to be crumbling, the public would be forgiven for asking how 
seriously does this government really take the issue of child sex abuse.”

But the policing minister insisted in the Commons that ministers were tackling 
the issue. He said the HMIC report was “the most damning report that the HMIC 
has ever written on any police force in the country”.

Lewis told MPs the home secretary had spoken to the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor, Sadiq Khan, on Thursday to 
ensure that “swift action” followed its damning verdict and had asked HMIC to 
publish quarterly reports detailing what, if any, progress was made by the Met 
police. He said it would be a priority for the incoming Met commissioner in the 
new year.

The Met’s assistant commissioner, Martin Hewitt, told the Today programme on 
BBC Radio 4 that the force accepted the HMIC’s findings. “There is no doubt 
that level of inadequacy is something that is really troubling,” he said, 
adding that the report would be a “launchpad for change”.

Matt Parr, lead inspector for HMIC, said his team found shocking failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/met-police-heavily-criticised-over-child-protection-failings>
 and pointed out that in more than 10% of cases problems were so alarming there 
was ongoing risk to child safety.

“We had to send 38 of them straight back to the Met immediately because of the 
severity of what they contained of leaving children at risk,” he told Today.


But Hewitt said none of the 38 urgent cases had resulted in criminal charges. 
“We set a team up as soon as we became of the findings to look at every one of 
those cases. In all of those cases that were sent back that were so worrying to 
the HMIC, we have looked at all of those, and in none of those cases have we 
identified further risk, and we haven’t charged or cautioned anyone,” he said.
 