
From Bewitched to Desperate Housewives, Ferris Bueller’s Day Off to Muriel’s 
Wedding, popular culture has linked the suburbs to conformity, tedium, weird 
goings on and the disaffection of youth. At some point, this might be expected 
to lead to drink. But are the drinking habits of young people living in city 
suburbs different from those of their downtown peers? Apparently so – in 
Melbourne, at least.

A team of Australian researchers compared four urban and six suburban local 
government areas of Melbourne to establish how far a location can affect how 
much 16- to 24-year-olds drink.

Jason Ferris <http://www.issr.uq.edu.au/staff/ferris-jason> at the University 
of Queensland,Michael Livingston 
<http://dpmp.unsw.edu.au/people/dr-michael-livingston> from the University of 
New South Wales and project leaderSarah MacLean 
<http://pgh.unimelb.edu.au/about/contact/allstaff/maclean_sarah> from the 
University of Melbourne combined data from theVictorian youth alcohol and drug 
survey <http://www.health.vic.gov.au/vdapc/downloads/vyads-report-01092010.pdf> 
with their own interviews as part of a project looking at views and use of 
alcohol by young adults in central and suburban Melbourne. (The suburban 
districts used in the study were Casey, Cardinia, Melton, Whittlesea, Wyndham 
and Mitchell; the city-centre wards comprised the City of Melbourne, Port 
Phillip, Stonnington and Yarra.)

Their paper 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/08111146.2013.831758#.U8kzqPldW8A>, 
published in the journal Urban Policy and Research last year, found marked 
differences between drinking culture in the suburbs and the city. While the 
legal drinking age in the state of Victoria is 18, underage drinking is 
widespread – but significantly higher among teens living in the city centre. 
For example, the study found 94% of urban 16- and 17-year-olds said they had 
drunk alcohol in the last year, compared to 82% of those living in the suburbs. 
And of the young urban drinkers, 23% said they were drinking in licensed bars – 
suggesting that either Melbourne has a successful market in fake IDs, or 
bouncers and bartendersaren’t asking to see them 
<http://www.vcglr.vic.gov.au/home/liquor/standard+licence+obligations/under+18+patrons+on+licensed+premises/>
.


Youth drinking brings problems for the city and the drinkers themselves, 
according to official figures. For example, between 2001 and 2005, theVictorian 
Department of Health 
<http://www.teendrinkinglaw.vic.gov.au/young/whats_the_harm.php> recorded that, 
across the state, on average about 30 people aged between 16 and 24 were 
assaulted in incidents involving alcohol each week. In addition, about 25 
teenagers a week were admitted to hospital for alcohol-related issues; 10 young 
adults (18-24) a week were involved in alcohol-related car crashes; and alcohol 
was cited as a contributing factor in the death of one 15- to 24-year-old a 
week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fresearching-cities-melbourne-teenagers-alcohol-city-suburbs-underage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F25%2F1406308943308%2F6487b3b4-22ba-4c2b-b49d-85cbde53151a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Researching%20cities%3A%20do%20Melbourne%20teens%20drink%20more%20in%20the%20city%20or%20suburbs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fresearching-cities-melbourne-teenagers-alcohol-city-suburbs-underage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Researching%20cities%3A%20do%20Melbourne%20teens%20drink%20more%20in%20the%20city%20or%20suburbs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fresearching-cities-melbourne-teenagers-alcohol-city-suburbs-underage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F25%2F1406308943308%2F6487b3b4-22ba-4c2b-b49d-85cbde53151a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In the suburbs teenagers are more likely to buy alcohol from stores and drink 
at home or at friends’ houses. Photograph: Philip Game/Alamy 
The statistics are state-wide, but the new research on urban versus suburban 
alcohol consumption found a marked difference in drinking culture in the 
suburbs. Here, teenagers are more likely to be drinking at home – their own 
home, their friends’ homes, and private parties because, well, there’s nowhere 
else to go. “There are just such a lot of bottle shops [in the suburbs],” 
MacLean said. “This really encourages people in [these] areas to buy cheap 
alcohol and consume it inprivate homes 
<http://www.health.vic.gov.au/aod/alcohol/alcohol-law.htm>, where there might 
not be someone around who is legally required to refuse them another drink if 
they are visibly intoxicated.”

 In Casey, one of the growth areas south-east of the city, while the 
population grew by 42% between 2000 and 2009, the number of licensed alcohol 
stores grew by more than double that rate (89%). This,the report argues 
<http://www.ofsubstance.org.au/component/content/article/55-of-substance/e-bulletin/1330-growing-pains-alcohol-and-the-suburbs>
, is a result of weaklicensing legislation 
<http://www.vcglr.vic.gov.au/home/liquor/standard+licence+obligations/under+18+patrons+on+licensed+premises/>
 and “large supermarket chains with deep pockets” challenging licence refusals 
in the appeals courts, and winning.

Nevertheless, Melbourne’s city centre offers more of an enticement to drink. 
There are 50% more places to buy alcohol downtown than in the suburbs, with “17 
times as many pubs and 25 times as many bars and licensed restaurants”.

Interestingly, according to MacLean, while young city-centre residents drink 
more alcohol overall, for young adults from outer-suburbs: “Going to the city 
is an event marked out as different from everyday life. Their sense of being
hyped up <http://www.ijdp.org/article/S0955-3959(14)00030-9/abstract> in the 
inner city made different sets of practices possible, particularly in relation 
to drinking and being open to new engagements with friends and sexual partners.”

 At which point the city teenagers can crawl home, with or without their new 
best friend/girl/boyfriend – but it’s not that straightforward for the 
suburbanites. Finding your way to your home miles away in the early hours when 
public transport is either shut or on a skeleton schedule is no fun. Young 
women felt particularly unsafe, and some would spend up to A$100 (£55) on a 
taxi home rather than use Melbourne’s night bus system, which has areputation 
for being unsafe 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/young-fear-violence-on-nightrider-buses-20130827-2so01.html>
.

Last month, the Dalgarno Institute <http://www.dalgarnoinstitute.org.au/> – 
which describes itself as a coalition to increase awareness on alcohol and 
drugs – launched a campaign toraise the drinking age 
<http://www.21bethere.org.au/research> in Australia to 21. Victoria would lead 
the charge, said its supporters. “Ridiculous,” responded former premierJeff 
Kennett <http://www.icmi.com.au/jeff-kennett>. “Un-Australian,” shouted others. 


Certainly, existing government campaigns warning of the harm caused by 
underage drinking appear to have made little impact on either study group, 
suggesting that the main challenge remains changing cultural attitudes towards 
alcohol. And nor does MacLean, Ferris and Livingstone’s research support 
raising the drinking age, concluding instead that stricter licensing and 
planning policies would be more effective – together with an improved 
late-night transport strategy for the city. A complete report will be published 
soon byVicHealth 
<http://www.vichealth.vic.gov.au/Publications/Alcohol-Misuse.aspx>.


• What has Toronto learned from five failed Olympic bids? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/20/researching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids>
 