
Toronto regularly ranks as one of the world's best cities to live in – 
recently coming fourth in the annualEconomist liveability list 
<http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report.aspx?campaignid=BestCity2012>. 
Canada’s largest city is rated highly for stability, healthcare, culture, 
environment, education and infrastructure; as well as headline-grabbing 
buildings courtesy ofFrank Gehry <http://mirvishandgehrytoronto.com/>, Will 
Alsop <http://www.all-worldwide.com/what/housing/alaska/> and Daniel Libeskind 
<http://daniel-libeskind.com/projects/royal-ontario-museum/images>, it offers 
the kind of vibrant, walkable downtown of which urbanists’ dreams are made.

But Toronto has always wanted more; in particular, to muscle its way into the 
elite clique of Olympic hosts. In fact, the city has already failed in its bid 
to host the games – not once, butfive times. 

 Not only has Toronto lost out to a clutch of international locations, it’s 
had something of a thrashing at home too. Montreal beat it to the nomination 
for the bank-busting 1976 summer games, and Calgary and Vancouver have both 
recently hosted the winter version.


Ever since Barcelona’s ambitious city-wide plans for Olympic-led urban 
regeneration ahead of the 1992 games, cities bidding for the event have been 
obsessed with replicating the Catalan capital’s success – and academics have 
been obsessed by the bidding process. The spoils afforded a city successful in 
its bid to host the games, from iconic architecture to global media attention 
and a lucrative tourism trade, have been reviewed and dissected with fervour. 
The study of the Olympics has spawned consultancies, academic research centres, 
conferences and university courses.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2Fresearching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403180997081%2F733f2494-435e-464e-b56c-68bdbb9cda12-1020x626.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=City%20research%3A%20what%20has%20Toronto%20learned%20from%20five%20failed%20Olympic%20bids%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2Fresearching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=City%20research%3A%20what%20has%20Toronto%20learned%20from%20five%20failed%20Olympic%20bids%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2Fresearching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403180997081%2F733f2494-435e-464e-b56c-68bdbb9cda12-1020x626.jpeg>
 An artist's impression of the proposed Olympic Stadium for Toronto's 2008 bid. 
Photograph: AP 
Missing from the debate, however, are the cities that have bid for the golden 
prize but lost – because, as the golfing greatWalter Hagen 
<http://www.sportinglife360.com/index.php/walter-hagen-2-50438/> once remarked, 
“no one remembers who came in second”. No one, that is, other than CanadianDr 
Robert Oliver <http://geography.vt.edu/people/oliver.htm>, assistant professor 
at Virginia Tech. Toronto’s failed efforts (for the 1960, 1964, 1976, 1996 and 
2008 Games) became the focus of his PhD at Queen’s University, Ontario, and the 
subject of two published papers.


In his first paper 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0CCoQFjAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Fdoc.rero.ch%2Frecord%2F28649%2Ffiles%2FOliver_Final_Report_2011.pdf&ei=3-KiU5KlM-mp7Aa8_oDwBQ&usg=AFQjCNEka541EVnBmhu9hBDDTpz9p6KLVA&sig2=n80tS_VDjOoYNUW2NPlygQ&bvm=bv.69411363,d.ZGU>
, published in 2011, Oliver focuses on the politics, legal wrangling, community 
protests, media reports and evolution of the plans for theredevelopment of the 
waterfront <http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/> that started in the mid-1950s. 
Like many post-industrial cities, Toronto’s derelict waterfront had long been 
earmarked for redevelopment. The city’s first bid committee suggested that 
achieving the political will, addressing the complex land ownership issues and 
attracting the necessary investment would be a cinch with a successful Olympic 
bid.John Bitove <http://olympic.ca/board-members/john-i-bitove/>, former leader 
of one of Toronto’s many bid committees, remarked: “We’re not just trying to 
get the Olympics … we’re trying to rebuild the city.”


Oliver’s second paper <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17430437.2013.828701>, 
published at the start of this year, reviews the city’s lack of a coherent 
sports policy, funding and facilities, and the frenzied wave of commissions and 
government committees, by-laws and policies that followed each rejection by the 
International Olympic Committee.


After the last bid for the 2008 games failed, mutterings pronounced Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> a “sporting backwater”. Toronto’s 
Department of Parks, Forestry and Recreation joined the chorus. They’d reviewed 
the city’s facilities, from community centres to swimming pools, and concluded 
that the recovery bill would run to more than C$200m (£108m). Comparisons were 
drawn with Melbourne: another high-ranking liveable city, host of the 2006 
Commonwealth Games and home to five major stadiums. The review suggested the 
Australian city could “offers us a lesson: if we build, the world will come. If 
we don’t, our best athletes will leave home.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2Fresearching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403181107628%2F59a08766-3097-4b49-97e9-edb2be9a266e-2060x1289.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=City%20research%3A%20what%20has%20Toronto%20learned%20from%20five%20failed%20Olympic%20bids%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2Fresearching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=City%20research%3A%20what%20has%20Toronto%20learned%20from%20five%20failed%20Olympic%20bids%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2Fresearching-cities-what-has-toronto-learned-from-five-failed-olympic-bids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403181107628%2F59a08766-3097-4b49-97e9-edb2be9a266e-2060x1289.jpeg>
 Architect Frank Gehry designed the extension to Toronto's Art Gallery of 
Ontario. Photograph: Rick D Elia/Corbis 
According to Oliver, the “desire to use the Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> as a vehicle to kickstart the 
comprehensive redevelopment of Toronto’s waterfront” was problematic, 
undermining the contribution recreational sport and its infrastructure could 
have made to the city. Failing to invest in sports infrastructure at both 
grassroots and professional level was the 2008 bid’s downfall, and the 13-acre 
waterfront site is now due to accommodate 1,900 residential units priced 
betweeen C$300,000 and C$2m – with affordable housing, as always, to follow 
later.


Oliver concludes that “Toronto has developed a legacy of Olympic begging, with 
the city consistently asking what the Olympic Games can do for the city of 
Toronto, instead of demonstrating what the city of Toronto could do for the 
Olympic movement.”


What Oliver doesn’t cover in these papers is why Toronto would even 
contemplate another bid for the summer Olympics. Canada is not a nation known 
for its summer sports – think Canadian sports and its ice hockey, curling and 
the vast snow fields of Whistler, not beach volleyball, athletics or fencing. 
But would bidding for the cold weather version bring success?


In January this year, Toronto’s ever-controversial mayor, Rob Ford, confirmed 
that the city would not bid for another Olympics before the 2028 games, at the 
earliest. By accountantErnst and Young’s estimations 
<http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2014/ed/bgrd/backgroundfile-66213.pdf>, 
another bid would cost C$50-60m, a figure the mayor’s office considered too 
costly. In the meantime, though, the city has downsized. Toronto was successful 
in securing the right to hostnext year’s Pan American Games 
<http://www.toronto2015.org/>, and Robert Oliver intends to return this summer 
to consider the preparations.

Kat Martindale is a researcher, urbanist and founder of Cities Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/research>. Follow her on Twitter at 
@KatMartindale and @CitiesResearch #ResearchFriday
 