
A bill for dinosaurs

One of the scariest things about this [digital economy] bill is the apparent 
lack of awareness within government of how web technology and the knowledge 
economy actually works (What's left of Digital Britain?, 22 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/22/digital-economy-bill>). It seems 
to be all about protecting the vested interests of the big established media 
dinosaurs, and to hell with the needs of ordinary voters or small 
entrepreneurs. It's also a damning indictment of the power of lobby groups, and 
the weakness of our representatives. Tragic.

englishtim online

MPs haven't a clue

What exactly do MPs know about running a TV channel? (To survive and prosper, 
Channel 4 needs freedom, 22 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2010/mar/22/channel-4-select-committee-review>
) About as much as they do about running a country. To make complaints now that 
C4's digital channels won't break even until 2012 is rather foolish and I 
suspect if the MPs had the powers, they'd be shutting them down just as they're 
about to turn into profit. In the TV forums I frequent, C4's digital portfolio 
is generally highlighted as one of the best. Its strategy with E4 especially, 
of a few quality, original commissions rather than BBC3's (commission anything 
and everything) is paying off big time.

brekkieboy2001 online

â€¢ Next month we'll find out the size of Mr Duncan's pay-off. Given the money 
C4 lost on Kangaroo and the aborted DAB radio plan, shouldn't he give it back?

jon55 online

A chance for children

BBC radio is barely fulfilling its obligation to children. The main BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> radio channels now transmit nothing 
specifically for them, and what we have are three hours a day on the BBC's 
digital channel Radio 7.

Last year the younger children's show was the subject of a takeover by the BBC 
television channel, CBeebies, and what goes out now at 6am each day is 
essentially an extension of the TV show. The hour of readings for older 
children, transmitted at 4pm under the title of Big Toe Books, is simply 
archive material drawn from the extensive backlist built up during the years 
when The Big Toe Radio Show was a lively interactive children's programme.

When the BBC axes the digital stations 6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> and the Asian Network, digital radio 
bandwidth will be released. No new radio programmes for children are being 
produced, but radio is more popular than ever, the need is great, and the 
opportunity for a dedicated children's radio channel is about to become 
available. The BBC should be urged to seize it.

Neville Teller Edgware, Middlesex
 