
There are pursed lips as Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> returns. 
The great British judges know who makes a good madeira cake – and who instantly 
becomes the bookies’ favourite. After all, they have standards. But here – in a 
swirl of sloppy chocolate mousse – is an abiding problem for all who seek to 
judge anything from gastro-ambition to literary acceptance: where do 
acknowledged rules of excellence chip in? It’s a problem for critics, and for 
the editors who employ them. Is achievement in fiction, drama, poetry, indeed 
all (including culinary) art, a matter of criteria, of overarching standards 
that can be defined and asserted? Or are we talking mere matters of taste? 
Settle down and pass the poppadoms.

Here’s one absolute matter of taste. Is the poshest new restaurant in town “a 
dismal experience” or a glowing “testament to a lifetime of forensic appetite 
and experience”? Do you think it has “far and away the nicest dining room in St 
James’s” or a “terrible” one, “too big, too modern, no soul … properly 
catastrophic?” In short, what happens when the critics you hire, the experts 
who ride high on your menu advising readers, can’t agree? About anything.

Food writing would seem, at first template, to have a common core. Think 
MasterChef <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef> as well as 
Bake Off: this pastry is either cooked, or it isn’t. Think science; think 
history; think academic research; think billions in cash and ambition ploughed 
into restaurant life. And there do seem to be industry standards of a sort: 
Michelin standards in the spirit of Escoffier among other guidebook benchmarks. 
But then see what happens when different reviewers – competing titans of 
national taste – dine at the same table.

Of course different critics have different favourites, and you learn to follow 
those among them who fit your own

You may have noticed the Observer’s own Jay Rayner hymning the launch of a new 
Soho place called Duck and Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/07/duck-and-rice-restaurant-review>
 a few weeks ago. “The prawn sesame toast is the best I have ever tried, the 
butch minced prawn parcels heaped so pillow-like onto the toast you don’t know 
whether to eat it or have a nap on it.The take on crispy shredded beef makes 
every other version feel like a tragic failure.” And so, most succulently, on. 
You also get “a beautiful room, nice staff and a sense that it’s worth dressing 
up for”.

But here, dropping on the same doormat that summer morning, came AA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> in the Sunday Times. “The house 
duck was grey and soggy with fat. The egg foo young with crab was a kitchen 
accident … I took Clare, a co-worker on theST magazine, and she said the char 
sui bun was like eating a diabetic’s nappy… The whole place was alternatively 
disappointing, sad and mildly infuriating. It’s not as if there are anything 
like enough really good Chinese restaurants left in Soho for us to start making 
bad ones on purpose.”

And then the caravan of critical coincidence moved on to Chutney Mary – our 
protagonists this time both from the same Murdoch stable, both queuing to 
collect their expenses at the same cashier’s window.Giles Coren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/giles-coren> from the Times gets a 
“terrible” table in this terrible room. The “ghastly” place is “perishingly 
dark and in no way glamorous”. Its acoustics remind him of “the inside of a tin 
can”. Begin with a “much too sweet” gimlet and mojito. Order a tiny serving of 
“ordinary white burgundy” at £18 a glass. The venison samosa is like “a 
shepherd’s-pie-flavoured Cornetto”. His wife’s butter chicken masala shows “no 
evidence of butter at all, no richness, no comfort, no breadth or depth”. 
Giles’s own Rajasthani laal maas is “equally thin and pitiful”, with a cold 
shank bone protruding from it: and sauce of “rank acidity… a mouthful was all I 
could bear”. Tandoori prawns? OK at £9.33 per prawn. Don’t mention the 
“cataclysmic” pudding.

But turn briskly to AA Gill again to enjoy this “comfortable, modern and 
elegant dining room blissfully free of the tired and threadbare cliches of 
Anglo-Indian restaurants”. To savour the “subtle and assured spicing” in the 
butter chicken. To relish that “lustrous” lamb shank Giles pushed away. To 
salute the Panjabi sisters, owners AA seems to know well, because one of them 
took him on a 90-minute trek through the streets of Mumbai to see where gulab 
jamun was made. They are responsible for bringing “the very best subcontinental 
food to London … If there is a better pan-Indian restaurant in the capital, I 
haven’t eaten in it.”

You can discern no meeting of minds or stomachs here. One critic couple hated 
the new Chutney Mary, another loved it. The couple who loved it spent £84.40 of 
Rupert’s available funds; the couple who didn’t managed to get through a 
stonking £266.63. (Grace Dent 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/restaurants/grace-dent-reviews-chutney-mary-just-the-right-mix-of-capacious-candle-bedazzled-art-strewn-and-10326121.html>
 in theEvening Standard contrived to spend more than £150 in 90 minutes). But 
the basic question remains fatally unresolved.

What’s the point of most newspaper reviews? To tell you, the reader, where’s 
good to go. Reviewing is, in part, a consumer service. Of course different 
critics have different favourites, and you learn to follow those among them who 
fit your own. That’s an essential of film- or theatre-going. But food, with big 
bills attached, isn’t a smörgåsbord of opportunities: the reader needs solid 
advice (often distilled from a whole sheaf of reviews). I’m with the admirable 
Rayner most of the time. He’s great on south London (where my favourite Turkish 
is one he thinks too good to recommend). I don’t do west London (Gill 
territory) or the frozen Coren north beyond Regent’s Park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Frestaurant-critics-serve-dishes-with-little-meat-aa-gill-giles-coren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438949063835%2Fecde8332-c816-4cf5-ae9f-c994039d1370-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Restaurant%20critics%20are%20serving%20us%20dishes%20with%20little%20real%20meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Frestaurant-critics-serve-dishes-with-little-meat-aa-gill-giles-coren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Restaurant%20critics%20are%20serving%20us%20dishes%20with%20little%20real%20meat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Frestaurant-critics-serve-dishes-with-little-meat-aa-gill-giles-coren%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438949063835%2Fecde8332-c816-4cf5-ae9f-c994039d1370-680x1020.jpeg>
 Giles Coren managed to spend a lot more of Murdoch’s money than AA Gill at 
Chutney Mary, but hated the place. Photograph: five 
But, apart from a lot of exhilarating verbal excursions, there’s also a 
question that ought to engage all of them, not to mention Dent,Marina O’Loughlin
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marina-oloughlin> et al. Do you have to 
spend £266.63 (or whatever) to find out who’s right and who’s off the dining 
room wall? O’Loughlin was making the exact point in theGuardian the other day 
when she followed the advice of Gill, “the uncrowned king of our breed, the 
baboon-murdering genius wordsmith” and went to a refurbished Chelsea spot the 
uncrowned one had lauded for “a menu as smart and appetising as I can remember 
in a pub”. Alas, she felt she’d been “led up the ancestral driveway” when they 
served her hotvitello tonnato, “the veal collapsed into greyish mush, its mayo 
split into vomity curds”.

See what happens when one gastro guru disappoints another. The whole feeding 
chain becomes TripAdvisor with added adjectives. Coren made the point himself 
last week when, in true introvert fashion, he reported what a “senior 
restaurant critic” of his acquaintance had told a restaurateur he knows. She 
wasn’t going to review his new place because “it isn’t interesting enough”. And 
Coren only disagrees mildly: “I do not expect restaurants to be interesting. 
It’s a restaurant’s job to serve food and wine. It is my job to be interesting.”

Which is where “the Blonde” and “Esther” and sundry minor characters make 
their review bit-part appearances, along with witty essays on the future of the 
world, kiwi fruit and the northern powerhouse.

Of course there’s a load of experience and expertise on show here. Of course 
you can follow your favourite writer from Durham to Dover if you’ve the time 
and inclination. But restaurant reviewing has also become a series of elegant 
essays too frail to chomp. It’s a style, a prevalent entertainment: but also 
not much of an answer to the most basic question of the lot. No, not could 
Corbyn hack it in Downing Street? Just: was the blinking mousse set, or not?

The Edward Heath moment

Exaro, the tough investigative unit, might have won prizes last year for its 
relentless, brave work on political paedophilia past. It will be in with a 
great shout again this year: much hard work well-researched and well-grounded. 
But there’s always a moment where one thing may not follow another. Perhaps an 
Edward Heath moment – and the trouble with five separate police “operations”, 
not to forget Wiltshire police touting openly for tips, is that tough 
journalists also know (from Elveden and Weeting) how fallible and flatulent 
such ops can be. Juries have learned that lesson well. Journalists take note.
 