
More than £1.6bn has been slashed from the value of the UK’s three biggest 
publicly listed supermarkets after a respected analyst warned thatAsda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> is preparing to fire the first 
salvo in a summer price war that could “wipe out” its rivals’ profits.

Tesco’s shares slid by 8%, Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/j-sainsbury> was down almost 4%, and 
Morrisons fell more than 7%, after the HSBC analystDavid McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/may/03/sainsbury-slips-as-analyst-warns-of-argos-disruption>
 issued a dire warning about supermarkets’ prospects.

McCarthy pointed to comments made by David Cheesewright, the head of 
international operations at the US retail titanWalmart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart>, which owns Asda. Last month, 
Cheesewright told shareholders he would prioritise sales volume over profit, 
signalling that Asda will slash prices in an attempt to keep customers coming 
through its doors.

Since then, it has been announced that Asda’s long-serving chief executive, 
Andy Clarke, will step down at the end of this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
. He is being replaced by Sean Clarke, a former Asda employee who most recently 
ran Walmart’s Chinese business, potentially signalling a change in strategy. In 
a note titled “Defcon 1” issued on Wednesday, McCarthy said: “If Asda decided 
to invest half its margin into price, a competitor reaction could wipe out 
almost all industry profitability and would force an industry restructure.”

Asda enjoys a higher profit margin than most rivals, meaning it can cut prices 
aggressively before it stops making money. This could force other supermarkets 
with smaller profit margins to follow suit and sacrifice profits to maintain 
market share, he said. “IfAsda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> does 
reposition fundamentally, then it could seriously damage sector profitability,” 
said McCarthy.

He downgraded Tesco’s and Morrison’s stock as analysts at Redburn also issued 
a note downgradingTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> shares to 
a sell, after slashing its estimate of the fair value of the supermarket’s 
stock by half. Redburn analysts James Tracey and Emily Want said new analysis 
suggested there needed to be a 20% to 30% cut in store space for the major 
supermarkets to increase their profit margins by the amount currently expected 
by the City.

They said any increase in food price commodities as a result of the falling 
value of the pound following the vote to leave the EU was likely to be offset 
by supermarkets’ need to keep prices low in the face of rising competition from 
cafes and restaurants and a slowing UK economy.

UK food prices set to rise after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/26/uk-food-prices-set-to-rise-after-brexit-vote-farmers-union>
Amid rising competition from discounters Aldi and Lidl and commodity price 
deflation, food prices have beenfalling for more than three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/uk-shoppers-benefiting-from-three-years-of-falling-prices>
. Grocery prices fell a further 0.8% in June, according to the British Retail 
Consortium-Nielsen Shop Price Index.

While some forecasters are predicting that food prices will start rising again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/26/uk-food-prices-set-to-rise-after-brexit-vote-farmers-union>
 due to the pound’s weakness after the EU referendum result, a price war could 
limit the impact on consumers. McCarthy said any price cuts by Asda would be 
aimed at arresting a decline in sales by restoring its image as the value 
option on the high street.

The retailer has found its price position undermined by the fast-expanding 
discounters who offer considerably cheaper prices on the narrow range of goods 
they offer. Asda has also come under pressure from the rise in online shopping 
and switch away from the kind of large supermarkets it operates to small local 
stores.

Asda has cut prices in the past year, but Aldi and Lidl have pledged to 
maintain the differential by cutting their prices too. The two discounters now 
control more than 10% of UK grocery sales andare seeing double-digit sales 
growth as Asda’s sales continue to slide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/aldi-lidl-asda-supermarket-sector>
.

McCarthy, who said he expected Asda to cut prices before the end of summer, 
added that it would be difficult forWalmart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart>, the world’s largest company by 
revenues, to back down. “If Asda does nothing now, and sales continue to 
decline, [Walmart] International management would lose credibility.”

The analysts’ comments come after other analysts suggested any price cuts by 
Asda would only serve to bring it more in line with the rest of the industry. 
“There is as much about catch up than any new industry pricing paradigm from 
Asda to us,” analysts at Shore Capital wrote in a note.

They suggested that Asda’s poor performance relative to its peers was as much 
to do with uninspiring, poor quality groceries as price and that it would take 
time for the chain to improve its overall offer.

Shore Capital added: “We believe that Aldi and Lidl should have more worry 
lines about Asda getting its act together, should it do so, than any other 
organisation in the trade.”
 