
I was up at first light the other day, listening for the ritual morning call 
of birds flying low across the field from theriver Nairn 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/River_Nairn>. Their croaking sounded like 
moorhens, but I knew that these would be themandarin ducks 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/m/mandarin/index.aspx>
 coming in to feed in the garden. These are the birds that bred in this part of 
the strath earlier this year â€“ only about 15 pairs have been recorded in the 
whole of the Highlands.

The females, as usual, led the way, the males close behind. Aix galericulata 
have one of the highest wing/weight ratios of the ducks, and their relatively 
long wings and tail give them great manoeuvrability. When the flock reached the 
paddock, you could see these remarkable wings come into their own, as the birds 
twisted and turnedaround the tall beech 
<http://www.2020site.org/trees/beech.html> and sycamore trees. 

I counted 18 of them coming in to feed on the mixed grain we spread out on two 
ground-level bird tables below the apple trees. This food is intended for small 
birds, mallard and mandarins, though if thebadgers  
<http://www.badgerland.co.uk/>have eaten their peanuts during the night they 
often help themselves too.

Grebe joins dippers in the Highlands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/26/country-diary-collier-highlands-loch-hide-dippers-grebes-goldeneye-ducks>
A window five metres from the tables is ideal for observing, and 
photographing, the mandarins 
<http://www.wildfowl-photography.co.uk/wildfowl/mandarin.htm>. About a third of 
the birds were drakes and the rest comparatively drab-looking females and 
juveniles.

At this time of the year the drakes are very striking, with a green and purple 
crest and a chestnut-orange ruff around their necks, orange-brown flanks and 
dark back. The varying colours blend to create an image of golden plumage 
dramatically offset by the two copper-coloured sail feathers that extend 
vertically 5cm or more forward of the tail; over the years I have made a 
collection of them when they have moulted in the garden.

Feeding was frantic, the mandarins jostling each other as they scooped up the 
grain, pausing only to dart over to the bird bath for a quick drink before 
running back into the melee. Then, as quickly as they arrived, the visitors 
were gone, heading very low over the field towards the river.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 