
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca>, one of 
Britain’s largest businesses, is using a multimillion-pound tax avoidance 
scheme in the Netherlands, set up months after the UK relaxed its tax laws for 
multinationals in 2013.

A Guardian investigation has found the pharmaceutical giant created the scheme 
using $2.7bn (£1.8bn) of internal group loans routed through its Dutch 
subsidiaries.

The company paid no corporation tax in the UK, despite having made global 
profits in 2013 and 2014 totalling $4.5bn. It was legally able to do so partly 
by securing some UK tax deductions from the Dutch lending structure as well as 
by offsetting high running costs and investment at its UK operations and using 
other tax breaks, some relating to new medicine research and development.

AstraZeneca reports strong progress with cancer drugs ahead of results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/17/astrazeneca-reports-strong-progress-with-cancer-drugs-ahead-of-results>
Tax experts asked by the Guardian to review its findings said AstraZeneca’s 
scheme appeared to be constructed solely as a way to avoid tax, and that the 
company could benefit from this in the future.

But AstraZeneca said it has not made savings from the scheme and was winding 
up the Dutch structure ahead of an anticipated tightening of international tax 
rules by the OECD.


Stephen Shay, a senior law lecturer at Harvard Law School who has held senior 
tax roles in the US Treasury and who gave expert testimony in 2013 on Apple’s 
tax avoidance structures in a Senate investigation, said that it was “hard to 
say” how the companies in the Dutch structure “have a real commercial purpose 
other than to achieve the tax outcome”.


Each year in its annual report 
<http://www.astrazeneca.com/cs/Satellite?blobcol=urldata&blobheader=application%2Fpdf&blobheadername1=Content-Disposition&blobheadername2=MDT-Type&blobheadervalue1=inline%3B+filename%3D2014-Annual-report.pdf&blobheadervalue2=abinary%3B+charset%3DUTF-8&blobkey=id&blobtable=MungoBlobs&blobwhere=1285689383569&ssbinary=true>
, AstraZeneca says: “We draw a distinction between tax planning using 
artificial structures and optimising tax treatment of business transactions and 
we engage only in the latter.”

AstraZeneca told the Guardian the promise stood. It conceded its Dutch 
arrangements involved some tax planning but said the main purpose was providing 
financing for overseas acquisitions. Any related tax matters had all been 
approved by HMRC and the Dutch tax office, it added.

Explaining its decision to pour $2.7bn of loans through a Dutch structure, it 
said: “AstraZeneca acted on the UK legislation introduced ... to give companies 
greater freedom in managing overseas financing operations...

“The use of this UK government-sponsored regime for tax planning purposes did 
not produce any tax savings for AstraZeneca. In 2013 and 2014, the AstraZeneca 
UK group of companies was not profitable due to patent expirations and 
continued investment in the research and development of new medicines.”

Independent experts said it was hard to reach a final assessment of the value 
of tax advantages from the Dutch avoidance structure because this depended on 
AstraZeneca’s future ability to make use of certain tax credits it now held. 
“It’s not as though [AstraZeneca] is not going to get a benefit,” said Shay. 
“It’s only a question of the value of the benefit on a present-value basis. You 
can’t say Astra doesn’t have a benefit.”

AstraZeneca to invest £120m in Macclesfield site
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/11/astrazeneca-macclesfield-zoladex-investment-jobs-uk>
AstraZeneca’s Dutch structure was set up less than five months after new rules 
came into effect reining in HMRC powers to combat tax avoidance by 
international businesses.

Richard Brooks, a former HMRC tax inspector, now a journalist at Private Eye 
and author of The Great Tax Robbery, said: “It’s clear from the AstraZeneca 
companies’ accounts and replies to [the Guardian] that this scheme was designed 
to generate a UK tax advantage.”

Richard Murphy, accountant, tax campaigner and the author of The Joy of Tax, 
said: “The structure only appears to exist for tax purposes, to try to secure a 
tax advantage.”

AstraZeneca’s top tax accountant, Ian Brimicombe, sat for several years on a 
Treasury committee advising the government on the changes in the law. Without 
one alteration, which came into force almost three years ago, the group’s 
avoidance structure would not have worked.


Osborne is expected to use a speech to the Conservative party conference 
<https://conservativepartyconference.com/agenda> in Manchester on Monday 
morning to highlight how the UK economy is reaping benefits from the highly 
competitive tax regime he created.

AstraZeneca announces new cancer deals with first-quarter results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/24/astrazeneca-announces-new-cancer-deals-with-first-quarter-results>
Hours later, in Paris, much-anticipated international tax reform proposals by 
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) targeting tax 
avoidance by multinationalswill be published 
<http://www.oecd.org/newsroom/oecd-to-release-beps-package-for-reform-of-the-international-tax-system-to-tackle-tax-avoidance-on-monday-5-october-2015.htm>
.

Senior OECD officials have warned current rules are so abused – both by 
multinationals and by countries competing for investment – that they are close 
to breaking point.


 But British diplomats, while supportive of many OECD reforms, have battled 
behind the scenes to to protect prized tax policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/21/us-official-british-government-undermined-progress-tax-avoidance>
 that helped make Britain a favourable environment for the location of 
international business.

 Pascal Soriot, AstraZeneca’s chief executive, was among more than 100 
business leaders 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/11507586/General-Election-2015-Labour-threatens-Britains-recovery-say-100-business-chiefs.html>
 who signed an open letter in support of Conservative party tax policies during 
the general election campaign earlier this year. Soriot later saidhe had not 
intended to endorse a political party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/02/astrazeneca-and-ladbrokes-withdraw-support-for-pro-tory-election-letter>
 but confirmed: “I support policies that reinforce a competitive tax 
environment and encourage investment in the UK.”

How the tax scheme works
AZ explainer graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/astrozenica-tax/giv-31114Aowi5F4cwj6G/>
In April 2013 AstraZeneca set up its unusual Dutch lending operation – an 
arrangement described as “highly artificial tax avoidance” by independent tax 
experts.


The loan structure, which is within the law, centred around a type of Dutch 
co-operative, an unusual corporate entity first allowed in the mid-19th century 
to assist dairy farmers.

 AstraZeneca’s co-operative is incorporated at the group’s Dutch offices, 
eight miles east of The Hague. Accounts for AstraZeneca Finance Coöperatief WA 
do not show signs of significant business activity: there are no staff on the 
payroll and it has modest operating costs.

Nevertheless the co-operative was packed with loans of $2.7bn from head office 
in the UK, and is charged interest of more than $140m a year.


Tax avoidance by corporations is out of control. The United Nations must step 
in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/30/tax-avoidance-corporations-impacts-the-poor-united-nations-step-in>
Interest flows exploited differences between the way tax codes in the UK and 
the Netherlands apply to Dutch co-operatives. The result was that the two tax 
offices treated the interest as occurring on their own patch, both awarding 
huge tax breaks for the same payment.


In tax avoidance jargon, claiming a tax deduction twice on the same payment is 
called “double dipping”.


Brooks said: “Generating a double tax deduction for a single expense by using 
a strange Dutch entity that one tax authority sees one way, and another as 
something completely different, looks like highly artificial tax avoidance.”

 Under previous versions of HMRC’s anti-avoidance laws – known as the 
controlled foreign companies (CFC) regime – the tax benefit of a double dip 
could be pounced on by HMRC and neutralised. Since tax office powers were 
reduced, however, only about a quarter of the tax advantage can be clawed back.

 * This article was amended on 5 October 2015 to clarify that AstraZeneca 
Finance Coöperatief WA is charged interest of more than $140m a year. 

 