
Some of the most acclaimed individuals from the arts – spanning film, fashion, 
fine art, design, drama, dance and music – have studied in the UK. Not only 
that, but we have also allowed them to stay on and work after their studies, 
enriching the cultural life of the UK. However, this is at risk as a result of 
the UK government’s approach to immigration.

International students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/internationalstudents> currently have to 
earn a minimum salary of £20,800 (considerably more in some professions) to 
qualify for a work visa after their studies. They must also be employed by a 
single employer. These requirements do not reflect the reality of the creative 
and cultural industries, and we support the former universities minister David 
Willetts and the all-party parliamentary group on migration, who both say that 
greater flexibility is needed.

Whatever the makeup of the next government, it must think again about the UK’s 
immigration policy. The rethink should begin with the removal of students from 
any immigration target set for the next parliament and an increase in 
opportunities for qualified international graduates to remain in the UK once 
they finish their degree. Otherwise, if we do not act, we risk losing a 
generation of talented individuals to our competitors.

Sandi Toksvig Writer, comedian and broadcaster and chancellor, University 
of Portsmouth, George Martin Music producer and patron, Liverpool Institute for 
Performing Arts, Bonnie Greer Playwright, author and critic and chancellor, 
Kingston University London, Melvyn Bragg Broadcaster, author and chancellor, 
University of Leeds,Sanjeev Bhaskar Actor, writer and chancellor, University of 
Sussex,Grayson Perry Artist and chancellor, University of the Arts London, John 
HurtActor and chancellor, Norwich University of the Arts, Monisha Shah Trustee 
of Tate and National Gallery,Harry Rich Chief executive, Royal Institute of 
British Architects,Wayne Hemingway Fashion designer, John Sorrell Designer and 
chairman of the Court of Governors, University of the Arts London,Richard Eyre 
Film and theatre director and president, Rose Bruford College,John Rocha 
Fashion designer,Professor Christopher Frayling Writer, cultural historian and 
chancellor,Arts <https://www.theguardian.com/education/arts> University 
Bournemouth
 