
The most pleasurable gifts to give are the ones you would most like to 
receive, but it doesn’t necessarily follow that your favourite books are the 
ones you should give to others. I’ve had to learn this lesson repeatedly, the 
most recent occasion being earlier this year, in my local bookshop, when I 
handed the bookseller a copy of David Foster Wallace’s Infinite Jest.

“Great book,” she said, “you’re going to love it.”

“Oh I’ve read it,” I said, “this copy’s for a friend.”

She paused, the book halfway into a bag. “You’re,” she stammered, her voice a 
mixture of scorn and amazement, “you’re giving someone Infinite Jest as a 
present?”

Her reaction, I soon realised, was entirely justified. Yes, the person I was 
buying Infinite Jest for loves tennis; yes, we met the same year the novel was 
published, as students at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign, where 
David Foster grew up; and yes, I think it’s a book that everyone should read. 
But as a gift idea it was – and is – horrible. If you’re going to embark on a 
1,079-page novel with a difficult reputation and tiny type, you want to do it 
under your own volition. What you don’t want is to have it thrust into your 
hands in a crowded pub by someone who tells you that if you persevere past page 
300 then yes, trust me, the whole thing will click.

This Christmas, to atone, I’m giving that same person Ian MacDonald’s 
Revolution in the Head, a book I know will deliver lasting, but also – 
importantly – immediate pleasure. The book’s concept is simple and ingenious: 
miniature essays about every song the Beatles recorded, from 1961’s My Bonnie 
to 1970’s I Me Mine.

“Close examination in context” is MacDonald’s description of his approach, 
which he delivers on brilliantly. No ploughing through to page 300 here: open 
the book anywhere and you’ll find something fascinating. In fact, you can 
happily start at page 300, with I Want You (She’s So Heavy): “Beneath their 
often viciously hurtful attacks on each other, the Beatles were still 
psychologically locked together at a deep level.” Open at random, get hooked, 
and devour the whole thing in any order you like.

Part of the book’s immediacy is down to MacDonald’s talent for aperçus. 
Consider his description of how Love Me Do’s rawness stood out from quaint 
contemporary British sounds “like a bare brick wall in a suburban living room”, 
or his assertion that Revolution 9, the musique concrète experiment from the 
White Album, is “the world’s most widely distributed avant-garde artefact”. He 
is also capable of analysing songs from an ethical perspective as well as a 
musicological one. Thus the “sour A minor melody” of Glass Onion, a song that 
plays self-referential games with numerous strands of the band’s mythology, is 
one facet of the song’s “unlikeable” attitude: “Whether or not Lennon was fed 
up with being a Beatle, there was no excuse for berating those of their fans 
who had trustingly fallen for the group’s multi-layered conceptual jokes”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Frevolution-in-the-head-by-ian-macdonald-a-song-by-song-history-of-the-beatles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80281db4d2bf1ee611b2b5ec52cebcbb55597c63%2F0_215_1653_1321%2F1653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolution%20in%20the%20Head%20by%20Ian%20MacDonald%20%E2%80%93%20all%20together%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Frevolution-in-the-head-by-ian-macdonald-a-song-by-song-history-of-the-beatles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolution%20in%20the%20Head%20by%20Ian%20MacDonald%20%E2%80%93%20all%20together%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Frevolution-in-the-head-by-ian-macdonald-a-song-by-song-history-of-the-beatles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80281db4d2bf1ee611b2b5ec52cebcbb55597c63%2F0_215_1653_1321%2F1653.jpg>
 Recording of Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band in 1967, with producer 
George Martin (centre). Photograph: BBC/ Apple Corps Ltd/BBC 
In his preface, MacDonald states the book’s aim “to replace gushing 
hero-worship with a detached, posterity-anticipating tally of what the Beatles 
did”, a stance exemplified by his concluding lines on the Lennon ballad 
Because: “Many have admired the song’s mood of visionary detachment without 
taking account of the heroin then flowing coldly around its composer’s body”.

At times, when he’s describing the guitar Paul McCartney used to play the 
“fiercely angular slide guitar solo” on Drive My Car (an Epiphone Casino “first 
used on the coda of Ticket to Ride”), or the exact point on Within You Without 
You that George Harrison can be heard “softly counting in the tabla player” 
(3:46), you sense there is no detail that escaped MacDonald’s attention. 
Perhaps, if his book had not been published in 1994 but a few years later, 
MacDonald might have even had space in the entry for Harrison’s I Want to Tell 
You to note that the song’s lyrics form part of a conversation between Hal and 
Orin Incandenza on page 32 of Infinite Jest.

As it stands, my friend will have to put that one together himself – if he 
ever gets as far as page 32.
 