
I'd always suspected there was more to pushy, hand-washing Lady Macbeth than 
an obsession with revenge and hygiene. And I wait for the day when Guillermo 
del Toro makes a zombie sequel,Ophelia Undead <http://www2.tate.org.uk/ophelia/>
: Scandinavian Revenge, in which Shakespeare's most pushed-around female stumps 
back to court, reeking of seaweed, to demonstrate that there is, literally, 
something rotten in the state of Denmark.

Now Hogarth Press, an imprint of Random House, is turning the plays to prose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/27/shakespeare-reworked-jeanette-winterson-anne-tyler>
, stage to page, by bringing us Jeanette Winterson's take on the Bard's 
intriguing problem play,The Winter's Tale 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Winter%27s_Tale>, while Anne Tyler tackles 
the still-perplexing, PC-or-not-PC romance of antipathy that isThe Taming of 
the Shrew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/17/taming-of-the-shrew-rsc>.

But why does Shakespeare require a "reimagining for a 21st-century audience", 
as Hogarth say in their press release? His work is hardly passé, nor does it 
require any big sell. It's adapted with multiple approaches in multiple art 
forms all over the world. This summer at Edinburgh the experimental theatre 
companyThe Wooster Group are performing a remixed version of Hamlet 
<http://thewoostergroup.org/twg/twg.php?hamlet>, synced with video footage from 
Richard Burton's 1964 Broadway production when it was directed by John Gielgud.
Joss Whedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/02/joss-whedon-reading-comics-pay-off>
's film version of Much Ado About Nothing is out now.

Shakespeare's plays were performed in 38 languages at the Globe as part of the 
2012 Cultural Olympiad, then a few months later some of the history plays were 
given sumptuous television adaptations under the title The Hollow Crown. The 
plays are highly readable and endlessly pliable: the Palestinian Ashtar 
company's Richard II at the Globe depicted a volatile modern Arab despot, while 
Rupert Goold's TV version cast Ben Whishaw as an immature, wistful, delicate 
Plantagenet with a messiah complex.

Perhaps it's a question of inspiration: great art inspires more art, some 
equally great, some dreadful, some satirical, some expedient, some thrilling. 
We want to pay tribute, cash in, make the quiet characters speak, 
overcompensate for the underwritten and give the nice-but-dim some vim. This 
retelling has been done for centuries with unauthored works like fairytales, 
myths, legends and folklore, which morph according to the times and their 
tellers – even to the present day, as withCanongate's Myths 
<http://www.canongate.tv/canongate-myths> series, which boasted contributors 
including Margaret Atwood and AS Byatt.

But writers also seem driven to confront, reinterpret and emend the canon. 
Sometimes, as in Jean Rhys's Jane Eyre prequel Wide Sargasso Sea, it works 
triumphantly; sometimes, as with the official Peter Pan sequel Peter Pan in 
Scarlet, by Geraldine McCaughrean, it doesn't quite fly. Despite the witty 
sacrileges of Pride and Prejudice and Zombies ("It is a truth universally 
acknowledged that a zombie in possession of brains must be in want of more 
brains"), Bridget Jones's Diary (whose plot mirrored P&P) and Lost in Austen, 
sometimes contemporary writers deliver a just karmic kick: in Death Comes to 
Pemberley by PD James, Wickham finally gets what he deserves.

But what happens when you tango with the Bard? Maybe the greatest potential 
for contemporary writers is in the least obvious parts. Tom Stoppard wrote a 
tender comedy about marginality,Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/interactive/2013/may/18/tom-stoppard-rosencrantz-guildenstern-annotations>
, inspired by two minor characters in Hamlet, and created the clever screenplay 
forShakespeare in Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/74517/shakespeare.in.love>, a mashup of 
the rom-com genre Shakespeare himself invented. But the freshest take has got 
to be the sinuous, sexyManga Shakespeare series illustrated by comics megastar 
Emma Vieceli <http://www.mangashakespeare.com/titles/much_ado.html>.

So, I'm intrigued. To appoint acclaimed, fully established writers like 
Winterson and Tyler is hardly some facetious gimmick. It's an opportunity to 
discover what the timeless geniuses of now make of a timeless genius of then.
 