
In spring 2011, when pro-democracy protests in Bashar al-Assad’s Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/25/syria-crackdown-protesters-brutal>
 were met with the crushing violence that would shape five years of conflict, a 
young French cartoonist in Paris decided to help some of his Syrian relatives 
get out.

At the time, Riad Sattouf was well known as a big talent on France’s thriving 
comics scene, drawing funny and scathing works of social observation. He had 
branched into cinema, winning the French equivalent of a Bafta for his first 
filmThe French Kissers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/28/riad-sattouf-draws-on-his-own-multicultural-past-for-the-arab-of-the-future-books>
, a nerdy take on teenage angst. From his comfortable life in Paris, Sattouf 
was convinced that Syria was going to be “completely destroyed”, so he went 
through official French state channels to apply for visas for some of his 
family members.

It proved so maddeningly difficult that he felt he had to write about it. But 
to write about it, Sattouf knew he would have tell his life story, which he had 
kept carefully shut away: his childhood growing up in Libya and Syria with a 
Syrian father and French mother, his parents’ divorce, his teenage years in 
Brittany.

The Arab of the Future 2 – terrifying school days in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/27/the-arab-of-the-future-volume-2-review-raid-sattouf-terrifying-school-days>
Three years later, when he released the first volume of his comic art 
autobiography,The Arab of the Future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/31/the-arab-of-the-future-by-riad-sattouf-review>
, it immediately become one of France’s biggest-selling graphic novels, 
translated into 16 languages and hailed as a work of genius. French comic book 
art, orbande dessinée, is a vast and highly respected literary genre, but it is 
rarely exported or widely translated abroad. Sattouf’s childlike, witty and 
deceptively simple work is part of a growing tradition of comic book 
autobiography that captures dark periods of history – the pinnacle isArt 
Spiegelman’sMaus: A Survivor’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/fiction.art> about how his 
parents survived Auschwitz, but there was also a precedent in France with
Marjane Satrapi’s award-winningPersepolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/nov/07/biography.comics>, about growing 
up in and then fleeing from Iran.

Sitting in his Paris publisher’s office, as the second volume of The Arab of 
the Future is released in English and the third volume comes out in French, 
Sattouf is hesitant about being seen as a voice of the Middle East. He views 
himself as stuck somewhere, neutrally, in the middle of his mixed French and 
Syrian roots and hates any kind of flag-waving or identity politics.

“I waited so long to tell this story partly because when I started to make 
comics I didn’t want to be the guy of Arab origin who makes comics about Arab 
people,” he says. “I didn’t want to be the official Arab comics artist. So I 
made a lot of comics in France which weren’t related to this part of me. I made 
a movie. But even during all that other work, I was thinking I have this good 
story, how could I tell it?”

Sattouf’s story so far – the series will eventually be five volumes going up 
to the present day – is a tiny slice of family life in an authoritarian state, 
first in Libya, then Syria in the late 1970s and 80s; Arab leaders, such as 
Libya’sMuammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/20/colonel-muammar-gaddafi> and 
Syria’sHafez al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/aug/01/hama-syria-massacre-1982-archive>
, father of Bashar, weren’t then regarded in the way they are today. (Sattouf 
recalls magazines such as Paris Match portraying Gaddafi as a kind of seductive 
playboy of the east.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Friad-sattouf-interview-graphic-novelist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff381ef6c854fc4effe8409b42dc11ce835126cba%2F0_0_1711_2472%2F1711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riad%20Sattouf%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20be%20the%20guy%20of%20Arab%20origin%20who%20makes%20comics%20about%20Arab%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Friad-sattouf-interview-graphic-novelist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riad%20Sattouf%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20be%20the%20guy%20of%20Arab%20origin%20who%20makes%20comics%20about%20Arab%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Friad-sattouf-interview-graphic-novelist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff381ef6c854fc4effe8409b42dc11ce835126cba%2F0_0_1711_2472%2F1711.jpg>
 From the second volume ofThe Arab of the Future 
What sets Sattouf apart is that he tells the story through the eyes of a very 
young child. At the start of the first volume, his bouffant blond, eager self 
is aged two. In the second volume he is six, still wide-eyed and cheerful, but 
his sweet ideas and funny jokes deepen the unease at the underlying repression. 
In the first volume, Sattouf’s dad pops a bucket over his son’s head to avoid 
him spotting two men hanging from gallows in a public square. In the second 
volume, it’s the rich-poor divide and the crushing fate of women, including 
“honour” killing, that comes to the fore.

Children’s and teenagers’ innocent yet incisive take on life is a theme that 
runs through all of Sattouf’s work, but he found it essential in describing the 
absurdities of daily life under a dictatorship. “A child’s point of view 
renders things even harsher, I think.”

Sattouf’s parents met at the Sorbonne in Paris when they were students. In the 
books his father, Abdel-Razak, is a pan-Arabist who believes education will 
lift the people (“stupid filthy Arab retards!”) out of religious obscurantism 
and free from the legacy of colonialism. By moving back to the Arab world from 
France, Abdel-Razak hoped to take part in this transformation, and to raise his 
son as an “Arab of the future”.

Sattouf’s father, who died before the book came out, is an awful 
authoritarian, macho and racist, yet also somehow touching. He’s a seemingly 
modern man who went back to live in his tradition-steeped village. But in the 
second volume he’s happy to stand by and do little to challenge the harsh 
injustices there. Sattouf could have simply laid him bare and judged him, but 
instead he shows him from the point of view of a tiny son who idolises him.

“So the reader thinks: ‘My God, this man is saying horrible things in front of 
a child!’” he says. “It’s more sincere ... I wanted to try to describe the dark 
side and the positive side – if there was a positive side – all together ... I 
wanted to express the paradox that was in my father between modernity and 
tradition. It is a very common and human paradox. How can you be modern and 
progressive and still respect ancestral tradition? It generates conflict in the 
mind, I think.”

School, and all its terribleness, is in the foreground of the second book. 
Teachers administer violence that – in comic book style – makes the children’s 
eyes pop out. One female teacher bizarrely shows the young class how to make 
the sound of rain with their hands, and sits hypnotised by the tap-tap of a 
fake storm they create. Yet, in a flash she’s whacking them with a stick. “The 
education system was like that,” Sattouf says. “If you look at videos on 
YouTube made by cellphone before the war, there are Syrian schools where you 
can clearly see a teacher hitting. It was like military methods applied to 
school.”

It’s chance where a person is born. I’m of dual nationality so it's difficult 
to be proud of one side or the other

But he is also making a universal comment on schooling. “It’s still like that 
in a lot of Middle Eastern countries and it was like that in France in the 
beginning of the century.” Older readers at book signings in France tell him 
they recognise scenes from their own childhood. The school in the book is a 
general comment about how the stage is set for society. “I think sad things are 
easier to accept and are even sadder when they’re told with humour. It’s very 
easy to make a drama. I prefer to make something funny out of a drama,” he says.

Right now in Paris, French politicians obsess over national identity in the 
run-up to a potentially fraughtpresidential election race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/french-elections-what-results-mean-for-2017-presidential-race>
 next year; Sattouf sees his mixed Syrian-French roots simply as part of life. 
He prefers to describe his nationality as “cartoonist” than be dragged into the 
identity debate. He says he never suffered racism. He neither looked or sounded 
“Arab”, and as a teenager in Brittany he was never presumed to be of Maghreb 
heritage, which, in France, can be fraught with discrimination.

“I think it’s lucky to be from two different origins. Seeing things from two 
points of view is always enriching,” he says, while warning: “I don’t want to 
be representative of something. This was just my experience when I was young 
... I’m recounting what I have seen in the most honest way I can. I know it’s a 
subjective way. But I won’t be involved in the politics or geopolitics. I don’t 
have the knowledge for that. I’ve seen things in my youth and I’m just telling 
them and I let the reader make their own interpretation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Friad-sattouf-interview-graphic-novelist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f86b1dd8966238676f81d7ce8c54c651c3e584c%2F0_133_5348_3208%2F5348.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Riad%20Sattouf%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20be%20the%20guy%20of%20Arab%20origin%20who%20makes%20comics%20about%20Arab%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Friad-sattouf-interview-graphic-novelist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Riad%20Sattouf%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20be%20the%20guy%20of%20Arab%20origin%20who%20makes%20comics%20about%20Arab%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Friad-sattouf-interview-graphic-novelist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f86b1dd8966238676f81d7ce8c54c651c3e584c%2F0_133_5348_3208%2F5348.jpg>
 Riad Sattouf: ‘I wanted to try to describe the dark side and the positive side 
– if there was a positive side – all together.’ Photograph: Magali Delporte for 
the Observer 
He adds: “I really hate nationalism. And I don’t like it when people express 
their pride in coming from the place where they were born. I’m not at ease 
during the football World Cup, for example. I’m not at ease during the Olympics 
when people represent their country, when they cry when they hear the national 
anthem ... But it’s not specific. I don’t like French nationalism and I don’t 
like the extreme right wherever and whatever they are, but whether it’s 
Egyptian, Algerian, American, Spanish, French, it’s always annoying ... Because 
it’s down to chance where a person is born. And the fact that I’m of dual 
nationality means it’s difficult for me to be proud on one side or the other.”

The blond child in the book with “Hollywood actress hair” is now a dark-haired 
man. Did he deliberately draw himself fairer and cuter? “No, I was really like 
that. I’ll tell the rest of the story of how my hair changed. But this is 
exactly my point: when comic artists draw themselves, I often think they draw 
themselves too kindly, more beautiful than they are in real life. And it’s 
awkward.”

He is fiercely protective over other parts of his story, which will appear in 
later volumes. In 2004, he produced a comic art book about his circumcision – 
but recently withdrew it, buying up every copy from the publishers, because he 
wanted to tell the story properly now as part of theArab of the Future series. 
“I’d made the book when I was younger and I wasn’t really happy with it,” he 
says.

Sometimes in France, people think there are too many foreigners here and that 
it’s too easy to come

He shrugs off the term “graphic novel”, and prefers to call The Arab of the 
Future simply “a book”. While he was writing and drawing it, he started another 
piece of work about children that became a weekly page in the French news 
magazine L’Obs and was published last year as a well-received book,Les Cahiers 
d’Esther. In it he chronicles the life of a 10-year-old girl in Paris, based on 
interviews with a friend’s young daughter.

“I was retelling my youth in Syria and I had this impression of being 10, 
being stuck in my memories. When I met Esther, I felt as if we were the same 
mental age and it would be good to recount a French childhood at the same time 
as mine.”

In her own way, Esther is as much an outsider as Sattouf himself. For nine 
years, he drew a series called “The Secret Life of Youth” for the satirical 
paper Charlie Hebdo, dissecting overheard conversations and scenes on the Métro 
and around Paris, spying on and chronicling the city. Yet he was never a 
political cartoonist, and never drew caricatures or political satire for 
Charlie Hebdo, nor did he ever attend their weekly meetings, preferring to work 
from home.

He left the magazine six months before the 2015 attack in which 12 people were 
killed. He feels that since then, cartoonists have been pushed on to the 
political stage, somewhere he’s not comfortable.

He won’t say what happened to the relatives he tried to help leave Syria 
during the violence of 2011. He’s saving it for the next volumes. “I wanted to 
show how hard it was to bring foreigners to France,” he says. “Because I think 
sometimes in France, people think there are too many foreigners here and that 
it’s too easy to come. I wanted to explain that no, it’s not easy. It’s very 
difficult, in fact.”

• The Arab of the Future 2 is published by Two Roads. To order a copy for 
£15.57 (RRP £18.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/arab-of-the-future.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 