
The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, has said his 
party will not move from its position that offshore processing centres must be 
closed if there are negotiations with the major parties after the election.

He was speaking while campaigning in the Victorian electorate of Batman on 
Thursday, a seat held by Labor’s David Feeney but which the Greens’ Alex 
Bhathal, running for a fifth time, hopes to win.

Distractions aren't helping David Feeney hold off a Greens tide in Batman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/30/distractions-arent-helping-david-feeney-hold-off-a-greens-tide-in-batman>
The day before, Di Natale told reporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/richard-di-natale-stumbles-over-making-deals-on-offshore-processing>
 that although the Greens wanted offshore processing centres closed, that 
position was a “starting point” and that everything was a “negotiation”.

Asked to clarify on Thursday whether the Greens were willing to do a deal with 
Labor, he said: “Our policy will never change. We want those camps closed.

“That is a bottom line that we will never negotiate on. Those camps must be 
closed because they harm and damage people. If we have an opportunity to vote 
against offshore processing, we’ll do that.

“Our policy is rock solid. We will never compromise on an end to those camps. 
We will never compromise on the cruelty and brutality that is offshore 
detention. But that shouldn’t stop us from trying to get the other two parties 
to change their position.”


Di Natale also dismissed claims that Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> strategists believe 
Adam Bandt’s seat of Melbourne, the only lower house seat held by the Greens, 
could go to Labor’s candidate, Sophie Ismail.

“I think Adam Bandt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> 
has done a wonderful job in Melbourne and I’m very, very confident Adam will be 
returned,” he said.

The press conference outside the Commonwealth Bank building in Reservoir, 
where many senior citizens were doing their banking, was interrupted by a 
couple of vocal pensioners.

“It’s all bullshit,” an older man yelled while walking past. Another senior 
man asked “What are you going to do for the pensioners?” before quickly being 
guided out of earshot by a member of the Greens staff.


Reservoir, about 12km north of Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>, is increasingly 
gentrified, attracting young, independent professionals and couples looking for 
housing more affordable than Brunswick and Fitzroy. But there are also many 
people with Italian ancestry and Di Natale spoke to them in Italian, sharing 
jokes and outlining how to vote.

He then moved on to the markets in the neighbouring suburb of Preston, joining 
Bhathal as she talked to storeowners. Bhathal, who has lived in the electorate 
for 30 years, knows many of them well. There was an awkward moment when Feeney 
showed up, shook hands with Bhathal and then moved on. Feeney has a habit of 
showing up “a few minutes after” the Greens do, Bhathal said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Frichard-di-natale-greens-will-not-deal-on-closing-offshore-processing-centres%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc926119ab0b724440432061bc74a27bde9bf49%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Di%20Natale%3A%20Greens%20will%20not%20deal%20on%20closing%20offshore%20processing%20centres&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Frichard-di-natale-greens-will-not-deal-on-closing-offshore-processing-centres%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Di%20Natale%3A%20Greens%20will%20not%20deal%20on%20closing%20offshore%20processing%20centres&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Frichard-di-natale-greens-will-not-deal-on-closing-offshore-processing-centres%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc926119ab0b724440432061bc74a27bde9bf49%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
 Greens leader Richard Di Natale (middle) campaigning with candidate for 
Batman, Alex Bhathal (right), in north Melbourne, Australia, on 30 June 2016. 
Pics by Melissa Davey for The Guardian Photograph: Melissa Davey for the 
Guardian 
The Greens have 600 volunteers on the ground in the Batman electorate, with up 
to 170 people door-knocking at once. Taylor Karney, 21, and Lance Fox, 35, 
voted at a Labor pre-polling visited by Di Natale and Bhathal on Thursday.


They know who Bhathal is. “Her posters are everywhere,” Karney said.

'The tide is turning’: Greens launch campaign with an eye on future polls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/26/tide-turning-greens-launch-campaign-eye-future-polls>
“But they need to talk about more than just the environment and start speaking 
about employment and taxation and other things that also affect people in their 
everyday lives.”

Di Natale spent a lot of time answering questions about Greens policy. He said 
it was frustrating that the Greens policies – beyond the environment – weren’t 
cutting through.

“But it’s changing,” he said. “People see our positions on things like 
renewable energy and our commitment to the NBN; they see how those policies are 
jobs-rich. But it’s a challenge, being a party that’s relatively young compared 
to the two old parties, and being in a party that doesn’t get the media 
exposure of its policies that the other parties do.

“We’ve released a suite of policies around jobs and the new economy.”

The Greens have announced a $400m investment in Tafe to provide skills for the 
long-term unemployed and the elderly. The party’s Renew Australia policy has a 
plan to transition workers in coal to renewable industries through training and 
reskilling programs.

“I’ve made a deliberate effort to focus on our strong position on jobs and 
also economic issues,” he said.
 