
Joe Hockey <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey> is laying 
the ground for the Coalition to promise personal income tax cuts at the next 
election, signalling the government would try to further reduce spending to 
avoid blowing out the budget.

In the latest round of positioning over the yet-to-be-completed tax review, 
the federal treasurer says Australia’s top marginal tax rate is higher than 
that of other comparable countries and the tax burden is too heavily 
concentrated at the top end. He also argues action is needed to stop “bracket 
creep”.

The government has refused to rule out increasing the GST 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/23/coag-tony-abbott-favours-overhaul-of-gst-over-increase-in-medicare-levy>
 as part of potential changes to the “tax mix” and has called for a mature 
debate about reform options – but it has already ruled out some of those 
options including reining in superannuation tax concessions or rethinking 
negative gearing.

The renewed focus on tax has prompted the Greens to call on both main parties 
to avoid “a tax cuts arms race”, warning that the associated spending cuts 
would erode vital public services.

Joe Hockey rules out GST rise to fund states' expenditure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/06/joe-hockey-rules-out-gst-rise-to-fund-states-expenditure>
Hockey outlined “the economic case for personal income tax cuts” in a speech 
to an event in Sydney on Monday organised by theTax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tax-australia> Institute and 
Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand.

“Our existing taxation system is increasingly reducing the incentive for many 
Australians to work harder, earn more, invest and, in the end, give our 
families greater financial security,” he said.

Arguing the tax system represented a structural handbrake on growth, Hockey 
suggested changes were needed to ensure “reward for effort” when people 
achieved higher salaries.

Hockey said the starting point for changes to the personal income tax system 
must be addressing bracket creep – the phenomenon whereby inflation and rising 
wages pushed people into higher tax brackets – arguing this blunted the 
incentive for hard work.

“For the average income earner on around $77,000 each year, they are just 
below the second-highest tax bracket of 37 cents in the dollar, which kicks in 
above $80,000,” he said.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fjoe-hockey-tax-reform-superannuation-income-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1437000049369%2Fjoe-hockey-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Hockey%3A%20Australia's%20income%20tax%20rate%20drives%20'best%20and%20brightest'%20overseas%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fjoe-hockey-tax-reform-superannuation-income-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Hockey%3A%20Australia%27s%20income%20tax%20rate%20drives%20%27best%20and%20brightest%27%20overseas%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fjoe-hockey-tax-reform-superannuation-income-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1437000049369%2Fjoe-hockey-001.jpg>
 Australia’s income tax rate drives ‘best and brightest’ overseas –link to video
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jul/16/joe-hockey-tax-reform-superannuation-income-video>
“At their current wage, they are taxed a marginal rate of 32.5 cents [in the 
dollar] plus the Medicare levy.


“But say they pick up an extra shift, or are tapped on the shoulder for a 
promotion. For every extra dollar they earn, they will be taxed at 39 cents, 
including the Medicare levy, so the reward for effort is to move into a higher 
tax bracket to pay more tax.”

Hockey suggested Australia relied too heavily on income tax, and this was 
reflected in “high rates of tax, particularly at the top level”, which would 
increasingly create an incentive for Australians to live and work overseas.

“In Australia, the highest marginal tax rate is 47 cents for each extra dollar 
earned. To contrast this, New Zealand’s is only 33 cents; Singapore’s is 20 
cents; and Hong Kong’s is only 15 cents,” he said.


“In addition, our top rate kicks in relatively quickly, at $180,000. That is 
only 2.3 times the average full-time wage. This is extremely low when compared 
with other OECD nations.”

Hockey hinted that he believed high-income earners were paying too much tax as 
a share of revenue.

“At the moment, 2.7% of Australian taxpayers fall into the top income-tax 
bracket and they are paying more than 28% of all personal income tax, and the 
top 10% pay almost half of all personal income tax,” he said.

“Back in 1996–97, under the Howard government, the tax burden was less 
concentrated, with the top 25% paying a majority of income tax.”

The Greens MP Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> said Hockey was 
proposing wealthy people pay less tax at the very time that the government 
faced a revenue crisis.

“With the government bereft of any positive agenda, the treasurer is now 
desperately trying to start a tax cuts arms race,” Bandt said.

Labor argued Hockey could not be believed on tax cuts.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said the Coalition had previously “decried 
budget emergencies” but now wanted the Australian people to believe that they 
would deliver “magic pudding tax cuts”.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, suggested the announcement was linked to the 
by-election in the seat of Canning in Western Australia.

Hockey’s second budget, delivered in May, predicted a deficit of $35.1bn this 
financial year. This would be followed by deficits of $25.8bn in 2016-17, 
$14.4bn in 2017-18 and $6.9bn in 2018-19, although these figures assume the 
passage of contentious budget savings that are stalled in the Senate.

The Coalition, when in opposition, placed a high political priority on 
returning the budget to surplus.

Asked on ABC radio in Brisbane on Monday whether his higher priority was 
cutting personal income tax rates or returning the budget to surplus, Hockey 
said: “Well, it’s both … they’re not mutually exclusive.”

In his speech, Hockey said there was “no denying” the fact the government 
still had a budget to repair but this would be “managed through continued 
discipline on spending decisions” and cutting government waste.

And he took a swipe at some state and territory governments that he said 
wanted an increase in commonwealth taxes as a way to get more revenue.

“I confess that I find it unappealing to dress up increased tax and spending 
as tax reform, especially if it’s the commonwealth raising taxes to help states 
increase their spending,” Hockey said.

State and territory governments expressed their anger at the Coalition’s 
decision in its first budget in 2014 to cut about $80bn from long-term 
projected health and education funding, saying it put them in an unsustainable 
fiscal position.

The Liberal premier of New South Wales, Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>, has suggested 
increasing the GST to 15% as a way to meet the growing cost of hospital 
services - aproposal the prime minister, Tony Abbott, praised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/20/tony-abbott-backs-mike-bairds-call-to-raise-gst-to-15>
 as “very sensible”.

But the Labor premier of Victoria, Daniel Andrews, and his Queensland 
counterpart, Annastacia Palaszczuk, have suggested increasing the Medicare levy 
applied through the income tax system as an fairer way to raise the necessary 
revenue.
 