
Richard Dawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins> has had a stroke 
on the eve of his tour of Australia and New Zealand.

Richard Dawkins interview: 'It must be possible to construct life chemically, 
or in a computer'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/11/richard-dawkins-interview-twitter-controversy-genetics-god>
Management for the 74-year-old author of The God Delusion said he had suffered 
a “minor stroke” in the UK last Saturday but had already returned home from 
hospital.

The health scare has caused him to postpone his tour, his management said in a 
message passed on to ticket holders on Friday.

“On Saturday night Richard suffered a minor stroke, however he is expected in 
time to make a full or near full recovery,”the statement said 
<http://www.sydneyoperahouse.com/whatson/richard_dawkins_2016.aspx>. “He is 
already at home recuperating.

“This unfortunately means Richard will be unable to make his planned 
Australian and New Zealand tour. He is very disappointed that he is unable to 
do so but looks forward to renewing his plans in the not too distant future.”

By Thursday he had recovered enough to use Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/697804903163387904>, plugging a book 
called God: The Most Unpleasant Character in All Fiction, for which he had 
written the foreword.
Richard Dawkins (@RichardDawkins) 
My dear friend Dan Barker has written a wonderful book, for which I’ve done 
the forward, that you should read.https://t.co/pnQHaQT7h0 
<https://t.co/pnQHaQT7h0>
 <https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/697804903163387904> February 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/697804903163387904> 
The famous atheist was due to begin his tour at the Sydney Opera House on 28 
February and move on to Brisbane and Melbourne before crossing the Tasman to 
speak at the NZ festival in Wellington on 4 March.

We can save atheism from the New Atheists like Richard Dawkins | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/30/we-can-save-atheism-from-the-new-atheists>
The events were to be centred around his recently published second memoir and 
13th book,Brief Candle in the Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/26/brief-candle-in-the-dark-richard-dawkins-science-review>
. His first book, The Selfish Gene, published in 1976, has sold more than 1m 
copies. The God Delusion, the 2006 book for which he is best known, has sold 
more than 3m copies.

A steadfast critic of religion, who nevertheless recently criticised leading 
UK cinema chains for refusing to screen an advert featuring the Lord’s Prayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/22/richard-dawkins-says-uk-cinemas-should-screen-the-lords-prayer>
, Dawkins has regularly been named one of Britain’s top public intellectuals.

He also coined the term “meme” to describe a self-replicating unit that 
transmits cultural ideas, a rather loftier description than its current 
manifestation as an infinite cascade of sad frogs named Pepe.

Memes, Dawkins told the Guardian in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2013/jun/20/richard-dawkins-memes-cannes-video>
, were “cultural replicators, the cultural equivalent of a gene, the cultural 
equivalent of DNA”, adding “the internet is a first-class ecology for memes to 
spread”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-dawkins-memes-cannes-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F6%2F19%2F1371636247465%2Fdawkins640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Dawkins%20on%20memes%20-%20Cannes%20Lions%202013%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-dawkins-memes-cannes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Dawkins%20on%20memes%20-%20Cannes%20Lions%202013%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-dawkins-memes-cannes-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F6%2F19%2F1371636247465%2Fdawkins640.jpg>
Richard Dawkins on coining the term “meme” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2013/jun/20/richard-dawkins-memes-cannes-video> 