
The US-born architect Rick Mather, who has died aged 75 following a heart 
attack, left a calm mark on many universities, art galleries and museums during 
half a century of working in Britain. When his expansion and reordering of the 
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford was nominated in 2010 for theStirling prize 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2010/jul/21/stirling-prize-shortlist-2010#/?picture=365071407&index=3>
, the judges from the RIBA described it as "a rich spatial journey". The 
commission marked the culmination of work made possible from the 1990s by 
lottery funding and greater private patronage, enabling Mather to demonstrate 
his rare ability to respond creatively to historic buildings.

The reputation of Rick Mather Architects 
<http://www.rickmather.com/article/news/rick_mather#/article/news/rick_mather> 
as international designers was established through the adaptation of three 
London museums:Dulwich Picture Gallery 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/> in the south; the Wallace Collection 
<http://www.wallacecollection.org/>, in Manchester Square, to the north of 
Oxford Street; and theNational Maritime Museum <http://www1.rmg.co.uk/>, east 
along the Thames in Greenwich. At Dulwich, the first public art gallery in 
England when it opened in 1817, Mather could engage with one of his favourite 
architects. Without directly imitating Sir John Soane's design, Mather 
skilfully added circulation space, a cafe, and lecture and educational 
facilities that are informed by the original work.
 Rick Mather at the South Bank in London. His master plan underpins the next 
phase of its recovery. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
A talent for utilising wasted space came into play at the Wallace Collection, 
where Mather put a glazed roof over the courtyard garden to create an elegant 
restaurant and sculpture court. He also created much needed exhibition space 
and a lecture theatre in the basement, ingeniously expanding a building on a 
tight urban site. At the National Maritime Museum, the similarly underused 
Neptune Court was given the largest free-spanning glazed roof in Europe – 
praised as an "effortless intervention in a Grade 1 listed building" by the 
judges who gave it a Civic Trust award.

This flair for reinvigorating distinguished but tired institutions made Mather 
the natural winner of the competition held by the Ashmolean, founded in 1683 
and thus the world's oldest university museum. Mather doubled the display space 
ofCR Cockerell <http://www.dictionaryofarthistorians.org/cockerellc.htm>'s 
neoclassical structure of 1845. The six-storey extension with a superb bridged 
atrium and grand staircase at its heartcompletely transforms the museum 
<http://vimeo.com/14640127>, replacing the late Victorian additions and 
allowing a flood of natural light. A later phase (2011) saw the design of 
discreet new displays of the Egyptian collections in six new galleries. Mather 
proved adept not just as an architect, but also in relating to curators, 
academics, trustees and donors.

A native of Portland, Oregon, Mather had his first architectural experience at 
the age of 11: his father was an engineer, and Rick helped build a family 
summer house in a clearing in the woods. After graduating in architecture at 
the University of Oregon in 1961, he toured Europe, looking at the major 
cathedrals and the works ofLe Corbusier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lecorbusier>, and in 1963 arrived in 
Britain.

A spell with the architectural firm of Lyons, Israel and Ellis gave him 
experience of working on new schools in Yorkshire, and then he enrolled for the 
urban design graduate course at the Architectural Association School in London. 
This was something of a turning point, broadening his interest in master 
planning and urban history. Six years with theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> borough of Southwark gave him hands-on 
urban planning experience.

In 1973 he established his own practice with offices in Camden Town, north 
London. It took a decade of interior designs, house conversions and a gradual 
growth of master planning work for universities before his own urbane 
architectural style came to be recognised. The Anglophile "quiet American" was 
well placed to please what he called "the G and G's" – the great and the good – 
keen to pursue building projects in the educational and cultural worlds.

Mather's talents enabled him recently to expand his work to America, where the 
extension to theVirginia Museum of Fine Arts 
<http://www.vmfa.state.va.us/Default.aspx> in Richmond opened in 2010, and work 
continues on an extension to thePeabody Essex Museum <http://www.pem.org/> in 
Salem, Massachusetts. Hismaster plan 
<http://www.rickmather.com/project/southbank_centre_masterplan#/project/southbank_centre_masterplan>
 underpins the next phase of the recovery of London'sSouth Bank 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/about-us/transforming-southbank-centre>: the 
sensitivity that he brought to his civilising work as an architect was also 
evident in his friendships, his cultural interests, his own houses and gardens 
and his infinite and generous hospitality.

He is survived by his partner, David Scrase, deputy director of the 
Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge.

• Richard Martin Mather, architect, born 30 May 1937; died 20 April 2013
 