
It's a simple question: "Why not try Jesus?" Equally simple is an opposite: 
"Why believe in a god?" Yet in the United States the first question is widely 
viewed as positive, or at least ordinary, while the second can be perceived as 
offensive and even hate speech.

This difference in reaction can't result from the structure of the statements. 
They're the same. Nor can it be the tone. Nope, it's just the message. 
Americans think it's good to believe in a god and bad not to. Furthermore, it's 
good to tell everyone about your belief but bad to be just as open about 
nonbelief or doubt – especially during the winter holiday season.

Clearly, American nontheists can't get a break. 

We in the American Humanist Association found this out first hand when we 
launched ourWashington DC <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc> 
advertising campaign on November 11 with the slogan "Why believe in a god? Just 
be good for goodness' sake." The venue was the sides, rears and insides of 230 
of the city's buses. News coverage of the campaign generated an outpouring of 
phone calls and e-mails, mostly negative. The largest number came directly to 
us but hundreds of complaints also came to Metro, the government entity that 
handles the city's buses and subways. One of the complainers expressed a wish 
(or perhaps a prayer): "May all your atheist buses break down!"

The sudden high volume of visitors to our special campaign website 
www.whybelieveinagod.org <http://www.whybelieveinagod.org> crashed our server 
twice. Soon, the conservative talkshow hosts were clamouring to give us air 
time so they could argue against us and further rouse their audience. And 
conservative Christian organisations not only denounced our efforts but 
encouraged their flocks to come bleat in our ears. All this before our bus ads 
actually started to appear one week later. By the beginning of December we'd 
received 37,742 hits on our campaign website, logged 638 new members and 
received over $6,000 in new contributions.
 An ad from the American Humanist Association inside a bus in Washington DC. 
(Photograph: American Humanist Association) 
Now, it seems, we have a couple of competitors 
<http://voices.washingtonpost.com/commons/?hpid=news-col-blog>. The primary 
one, a local Catholic stay-at-home mother of four, decided to launch a counter 
campaign: same types of bus advertisements, same number of buses, same topic. 
Her slogan?"Why believe? Because I created you and I love you, for goodness' 
sake." 
<http://www.dcexaminer.com/local/Pro-God_messages_to_counter_atheist_bus_ads.html>
 The sentiment is signed, "God". The second competitor, Pennsylvania Friends of 
Christ, announced an ad on 10 buses that will read, "Believe in God. Christ is 
Christmas for goodness sake."

This led to more newspaper stories 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/12/08/AR2008120803404.html?hpid=sec-religion>
 and interviews on radio and television. So much so that the company that 
handles bus advertising for Metro asked us this week if we would be so kind as 
to quantify all our results for them so they can inform would-be clients just 
how effective bus ads can be!

If all this buzz sounds a little familiar, it's because it is. Back in October 
a story in the Guardian went global aboutthe Atheist Bus Campaign 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising> in 
London. The planned adverts, written by comedy writer and Guardian contributor 
Ariane Sherine, were designed to read: "There's probably no God. Now stop 
worrying and enjoy your life." This was in reaction to a widely run Christian 
campaign threatening unbelievers with hellfire. TheBritish Humanist Association 
<http://www.humanism.org.uk/site/cms/> agreed to handle the financial 
contributions for this effort and was able to raise a whopping £120,402 in the 
first month. Yet none of the adverts have actually appeared on buses, being 
slated to hit the streets in January.

Naturally, this excitement affected those of us planning promotional efforts 
for the American Humanist Association. We'd been trying to work up a splashy 
advertising campaign for Washington DC buses since July but hadn't figured out 
an ad slogan we really liked. So, when the news hit about the London plans, it 
became for us like an inspiration, a revelation – dare I say, a miracle?

We accelerated our work, experimenting with a range of slogans, until finally 
settling on the one. Then we contracted for the ad space, designed and printed 
the signs, bought display ads in the New York Times and Washington Post, and 
the rest followed.

The media is still heated up. There's more to come. But we pause amid the 
flurry and fury to reach our hands across the pond in gratitude and solidarity 
with our likeminded friends in the UK. The work of each enhances that of the 
other as we both let millions of atheists, agnostics and humanists know there 
are others like them and organisations to serve their needs and advance their 
ideals.
 