
The Ugandan ringleader of a 2010 bombing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/12/uganda-kampala-bombs-explosions-attacks>
 by the jihadist group al-Shabaab that killed 76 people in Kampala was on 
Thursday found guilty of terrorism, along with six accomplices.

Twin suicide blasts claimed by Somalia’s al-Qaida-linked al-Shabaab targeted 
football fans watching the World Cup final between the Netherlands and Spain at 
a restaurant and a rugby club in the Ugandan capital. They were one of the 
region’s worst attacks in decades.

Of the 13 men tried, seven were convicted and found guilty of terrorism, 
murder and attempted murder, and are expected to be sentenced on Friday. Five 
others were acquitted of those charges, while another was acquitted of lesser 
crimes.

Uganda bomb blasts kill at least 74
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/12/uganda-kampala-bombs-explosions-attacks>
Issa Luyima, a Ugandan, had been shown during the trial to have played a key 
part in planning the attacks.

“Issa Ahmed Luyima, according to the prosecution, planned the attacks but left 
Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> the day before the blasts to 
evade arrest,” judge Alfonse Owiny-Dollo told the court as he read a lengthy 
verdict lasting most of the day.

He added that Luyima then “threw the phone used to coordinate the attacks in a 
pit latrine to evade arrest” but it was later recovered. Prosecutors said 
Luyima had gone to Somalia, where he trained with al-Shabaab.

“The prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that Issa Ahmed Luyima 
masterminded the 2010 bombing and is hereby found guilty of the terrorism as 
charged,” said Owiny-Dollo

The 13 men – from Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania – were tried on a range of 
charges including terrorism, murder and membership of a terrorist organisation.

The men, all of whom pleaded not guilty, were brought to the high court in 
Kampala under heavy security, with roads and shops around the court closed.

Africa targeted once more as rivalry between Islamic militants grows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/africa-targeted-once-more-as-rivalry-between-islamic-militants-grows>
Judge Owiny-Dollo, who began to read the verdicts mid-morning, could apply the 
death sentence to those found guilty.

Two men were already found guilty in 2011 for their role in the attacks.

Edris Nsubuga, who admitted terrorism charges, was spared the death penalty 
because he expressed contrition over the carnage and was jailed for 25 years.

Co-accused Muhamoud Mugisha received five years for conspiracy to commit 
terrorism.

The Kampala trial was delayed after the lead prosecutor was murdered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/uganda-prosecutor-al-shabaab-bombing-case-shot-dead-uganda>
 in March 2015. Joan Kagezi, acting assistant director of public prosecution, 
was shot dead by men on a motorbike as she drove home with three of her 
children.

Al-Shabaab continues to target countries in the region, carrying out the 2013 
assault on the Westgate mall in Nairobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/04/westgate-mall-attacks-kenya> 
that killed at least 67 people, andthe attack on Kenya’s Garissa university 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/07/kenyan-families-mourn-best-brightest-garissa-attack>
 in April 2015, killing at least 148 people.

Although the main al-Shabaab force is Somali-led and operates mainly inside 
southern Somalia, it has since branched out, with franchises operating in 
regional nations.

Thousands of Ugandan troops form the backbone of the African Union Mission in 
Somalia (AMISOM), the UN-backed force established to fight the Shabaab 
Islamists and protect the internationally recognised government.
 