
Spoiler alert: this recap contains details about the first episode of River, 
showing on BBC1 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06jkk8f> on Tuesday nights.

So when did you realise the important fact about Nicola Walker’s character, 
Stevie 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1jSrgR92YHp4zxRRx5q2FYH/jackie-stevie-stevenson>
? OK, it’s been done before in everything from Dead Man’s Shoes to Edge of 
Darkness to Drop Dead Fred, but making one of this country’s best television 
actors, essentially, an imaginary friend is an audacious move byAbi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/07/stellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama>
.

I was both gutted and delighted when the big reveal happened. Yes, it did take 
me that long to figure it out. Not until I saw the gory mess that used to be 
the back of Stevie’s head did I twig that River’s watery eyes and dogged 
pursuit of that young drug dealer were all for her – his recently murdered 
partner.

BBC drama River was chance to explore mental health issues, says writer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/06/bbc-drama-river-abi-morgan-explore-mental-health-issues>
As soon as he spots the car you can see from Stellan Skarsgård’s insanely 
expressive eyes this is more than just a pursuit of a murder suspect. The man 
in his sights is, he thinks, responsible for ripping out his soul.

I also loved the completely unassuming set-up of their relationship in that 
visit to the drive-through burger bar. It gave no hint of the reveal to come 
and allowed us (perhaps rather cruelly) to invest in their relationship: the 
stern, undemonstrative Swede and his clever, funny sidekick. She annoys him but 
he loves her, loves to be annoyed by her. Even the singing in the car and the 
later throwback to it in the karaoke booth had me grinning from ear to ear.

Another writer could have overdone it, made it syrupy, but I think Morgan 
judges their friendship beautifully. She must have done, because I wanted to 
yell when she killed Stevie off.

The shot of the Thames at night and the River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/river> logo over the top gives no 
hint of the emotional wrench that is to come. I like the way it’s branded like 
a traditional cop show but then pulls the rug out from under you quite suddenly.

Once we know that Stevie is dead (but not a ghost, River is clear about that) 
River’s internal world is unleashed on to the screen. His other imaginary 
friends, temporary residents in that rather crowded mind palace, start to pop 
up. When this week’s murder victim (who turned out not to have been murdered) 
sits at his dining table, telling him she needs to pack for university, I 
assumed it was his daughter. And I like that it wasn’t all explained with 
exposition-heavy dialogue. It’s nice to be left to work things out for yourself 
for once.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Friver-bbc-skarsgard-season-one-episode-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444730693641%2Fb7378e71-e5dc-4355-9af4-4eb1455f8107-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=River%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20cop%20show%20full%20of%20enigma%20and%20emotion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Friver-bbc-skarsgard-season-one-episode-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=River%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20cop%20show%20full%20of%20enigma%20and%20emotion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Friver-bbc-skarsgard-season-one-episode-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444730693641%2Fb7378e71-e5dc-4355-9af4-4eb1455f8107-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ranter … Eddie Marsan as Cream in River. Photograph: Nick Briggs/BBC/Kudos/ 
Then we meet the ghastly Thomas Neill Cream, the infamous Lambeth Poisoner, 
played with relish by Eddie Marsan. River’s been reading about him and his 
rather unpleasant ideas, but I’m assuming that this is the last we’ll see of 
him after River decided to silence his angry ranting once and for all.

Back on the balcony, River’s superior, played by Lesley Manville, tells him to 
get counselling, and we find out that Stevie’s murder happened only three weeks 
ago.

For a dour, Scandi-inspired detective drama, the world is actually quite 
colourful – and all the more believable for it. The ghost of Stevie isn’t pale 
or other-worldly: she sits in his passenger seat sucking milkshake through a 
straw, ruminating on the current case as though she is still alive.

At the centre of it all is Skarsgård in the form of his life, internalising 
nearly everything and leaking just enough inner turmoil to utterly convince. As 
if all of this wasn’t enough to take in, unassuming acting powerhouse Adeel 
Akhtar (you might remember him as the conspiracistWilson Wilson from Utopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/utopia-episode-by-episode>) 
arrives asRiver’s new partner Ira King 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/3KbWLnDVSNTfp7Vhx5bS3j5/ira-king>. 
He’s a half-Jewish, half-Muslim detective constable with a nice line in hangdog 
expressions and dry one-liners.

The only clanging howler is River and Ira’s visit to the young murder suspect 
in prison. They interview him without his lawyer present, which no police 
officer would ever do, not even a maverick one. This is the only time Morgan 
falls down, I think. If the facts don’t fit a scene, she just gently pushes 
them aside to focus on the drama.

Abi Morgan has my emotions in a blender, her finger hovering over the button

Despite River’s protestations to the counselor, we know he loved Stevie, 
although what kind of love it was is unclear. At this early stage, I see them 
as father and daughter orthe Doctor and his companion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Companion_(Doctor_Who)>. He’s protective, but 
she’s easily as capable and clever as him.

When he wakes up on Stevie’s bed after going round to feed her cat, we know he 
is grieving as though he’s lost his touchstone in life. For all of the 
imaginary figures we see with him, he is mostly alone and considered a weirdo 
by most colleagues.

That shot of River, perched high in the tree with the “ghost” of the dead girl 
sitting next to him is sublime. Her boyfriend is moved to a holding cell while 
she reads from Romeo and Juliet; Juliet’s dying speech, and River realises he 
is going to make a second attempt at suicide.

When he howled: “You have to live,” at the boy, cutting him down from the 
ceiling, I had something in my eye.

And, instead of ending the episode on his despair, this show does something 
unexpected. It returns you to the warm embrace of his relationship with Stevie. 
That karaoke scene could have been catastrophically schmaltzy, but it is 
joyful. To the sounds of I Love to Love, he sings alone in the booth and we see 
him pin Stevie’s milkshake cup to his wall. And just when you think it’s over, 
we cut to the dead suspect, sitting on the end of his bed, taunting him that he 
didn’t commit the murder.

I am fully and completely hooked. Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan> has my emotions in a blender, her 
finger hovering over the button. This is one heck of a way to jumpstart the cop 
show genre back into life.
 