
The Afon Teifi, one of the most beautiful Welsh rivers, loops round the castle 
at Emlyn <http://www.castlewales.com/newcas2.html>, the bailey of which is 
sentinelled with field maples. The bank is palisaded withfine alders 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/native-trees/alder/>
, hung with purple cones and catkins.

Standing by one of these on an autumn afternoon, I thought about the alder’s 
remarkable qualities: its capacity to fix nitrogen and fertilise the ground 
throughFrankia bacteria in its root-nodules; its red sap, once used as dye for 
those referred to inTrioedd Ynys Prydein 
<http://www.mythiccrossroads.com/triads.htm> (a collection of early Welsh 
verses transcribed in the 13th century but of earlier origin) as “sacred kings 
and warriors of the alder cult”; its wood, which served a variety of purposes 
from clog manufacture to the making of whistles.


Country diary: Norwich, Norfolk: An otter steals the show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/feb/05/norwich-norfolk-otter-steals-show>
 As I looked up into slender branches of the tree’s crown, a piercing note, 
more squeak than whistle, came from the bank right by my feet. It was followed 
by muted huffings and splashings. I looked down, and there, sprawled across 
roots that stretched into the water, was a bitch otter and this year’s cub, 
unaware of my presence, no more than three metres away.

Even in the fading light I could pick out every detail of them 
<http://www.devonmammalgroup.org/devons-mammals/otter/>: the thick, spiked 
guard-hair of their coats; the small rounded ears; the luxurious vibrissae 
(whiskers) of the broad muzzle by which they sense prey underwater; the 
streamlined shape and wide rudders; their wonderful strangeness.

The bitch extricated herself from the playful grasp of her cub, kicked away 
from the bank and with a powerful arch of her back plunged into the deep flow 
of the river, less polluted here than it is a few agrarian miles downstream. 
Hissing strings of bubbles released from her coat rose to mark her progress.


Within a minute she was back, a plump roach in her mouth 
<https://canalrivertrust.org.uk/enjoy-the-waterways/fishing/fish-species/roach>
, her cub whickering at her, tearing at it before she’d deposited it on the 
moss-covered root. The gifts that come, when you move softly within a landscape!

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>


The Hills of Wales by Jim Perrin 
<http://www.gomer.co.uk/index.php/the-hills-of-wales.html> has just been 
published by Gomer Press at £14.99
 