
Say what you like about his productions, but Robert Icke has some nerve. His 
Romeo and Juliet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/feb/08/romeo-and-juliet-review>, 
created for touring troupe Headlong in 2012, boldly gave the play the Sliding 
Doors treatment, full of rewinds and what-if scenes (in one version the 
Capulets and Montagues fail to start a brawl; in another the lovers never quite 
meet). Icke’s breakout production, last year’s searing and surgically precise
Oresteia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/oresteia-almeida-review-lia-williams-angus-wright>
, turned one of the oldest dramas in the western canon into a knuckle-biting 
contemporary courtroom procedural. The evening culminated with the audience 
being asked which way they would vote, as if Aeschylus were The X Factor – is 
the revenger Orestes guilty, or should he go free?

Oresteia review – a terrifying immediacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/oresteia-almeida-review-lia-williams-angus-wright>
For his latest transforming trick, a new adaptation of Uncle Vanya, Icke is 
attempting something that will make a certain breed of Chekhovian blow their 
samovars: Vanya isn’t even in the script. In an office backstage at theAlmeida 
theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/almeida-theatre>, after a long day 
of rehearsals, the director smiles wolfishly. “We’ve called him Uncle Johnny,” 
he declares.

They’ve changed the title character’s name? Alongside him, Paul Rhys, playing 
Vanya – sorry, Johnny – tries to explain. “The names are hugely important in 
Chekhov, but if you leave them in Russian you miss all the nuance. In the text 
he’s actually called Ivan – John – but everyone calls him Johnny. It’s 
dismissive; it tells you so much about his character.” Icke smiles 
triumphantly. “I had a good fight with an American academic who told me your 
audience must be morons if they don’t realise it’s a nickname.” He shrugs. 
“Well, I didn’t. So we’ve changed it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d653a44c53dc77511c0d955b666ce82a0c15f2d%2F14_398_4214_2527%2F4214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Icke's%20new%20revolution%3A%20a%20Vanya%20to%20blow%20Chekhovians'%20samovars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Icke%27s%20new%20revolution%3A%20a%20Vanya%20to%20blow%20Chekhovians%27%20samovars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d653a44c53dc77511c0d955b666ce82a0c15f2d%2F14_398_4214_2527%2F4214.jpg>
 Searing … Luke Thompson, Lia Williams, Annie Fairbank and Jessica Brown 
Findlay in Oresteia, directed by Icke. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
On the face of it, it seems surprising that Icke has decided his next target 
will beChekhov <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Anton-Chekhov>, that 
virtuoso of middle-aged muddle and murk, of love and lingering resentment. But 
this will be the master as he is all too rarely done: stripped to the brutal 
essentials. In Icke’s adaptation Johnny is a small-time farmer struggling to 
make ends meet – openly jealous of his successful, city-dwelling brother-in-law 
and deludedly in love with the brother-in-law’s second wife. Reading the 
script, it’s the play’s fierce contemporaneity that hits: the way it confronts 
depression and anxiety, the terrors and fears that drive families to the brink.


Icke and Rhys are cagey about describing their exact setting, but it’s a 
reasonable bet that linens and parasols, which have become wearily familiar in
British productions of the Russian classics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/18/the-cherry-orchard-review>, will 
not feature. “Rob’s version is the truest to Chekhov’s intention by a million 
miles,” says Rhys. “It’s almost word for word the literal text. Of the 20 
versions I’ve read, it’s the purest. It’s a very sharp instrument.”

The project began in unlikely circumstances, when the teenage Icke spotted 
Rhys on DVD, in the 1997 Channel 4 adaptation of Anthony Powell’s blue-blood 
period sagaA Dance to the Music of Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/oct/04/dance-to-the-music-of-time>
. Years later, Icke tracked the older man down and the pair became friends. 
Deciding to do Vanya was partly sparked by the realisation that, at 47, Rhys 
was exactly the same age as his character.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1a2d8e5cebe3762fc2b936bab9c1ddf5db33b4f%2F143_421_3585_2151%2F3585.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Icke's%20new%20revolution%3A%20a%20Vanya%20to%20blow%20Chekhovians'%20samovars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Icke%27s%20new%20revolution%3A%20a%20Vanya%20to%20blow%20Chekhovians%27%20samovars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1a2d8e5cebe3762fc2b936bab9c1ddf5db33b4f%2F143_421_3585_2151%2F3585.jpg>
 Bold … Daniel Boyd and Catrin Stewart as Romeo and Juliet in the Headlong 
production directed by Icke. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In the hour or so the three of us talk, Icke is forthright on everything from 
the nature of genius (“fundamentally rightwing”) and the desiccation of opera 
(“in its own sealed universe”) to the profile of certain audience members 
(“aristocratic pensioners”). Still only 29, he has had a whirlwind few years. 
After making his reputation with Headlong, he followed artistic directorRupert 
Goold <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rupert-goold> to the Almeida in north 
London when Goold took over the theatre in 2013 – part deputy, part dramaturg, 
part resident wunderkind. Oresteia, part of the theatre’s acclaimed Greeks 
season, was a hit and transferred to the West End. The show Icke did 
immediately before that,an adaptation of Nineteen Eighty-Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/16/1984-review> created with 
playwright Duncan Macmillan, was praised for its wintry portrayal of an 
Orwellian world gone mad, and is currently touring the US.

To date, Icke has only a handful of professional credits to his name. He’s 
adamant that he’s as much a writer as a director (the Icke website features a 
cheeky addendum to his CV: “why label?”). He knows he’s lucky to have got this 
far, this young: a smooth glide from Cambridge University to Headlong, Almeida, 
West End, international tours, all in just over seven years. But he says: “I 
think the fetishisation of age is pathetic. The thing that’s hard is making 
good art.” Doesn’t British theatre have a bit of a boy-wonder complex, though, 
from the days of Peter Brook on? There is a light pause. “Of course it’s 
important that people make diverse work, but it’s about how good the work is. 
It should be an open playing field, but then it should be fucking meritocratic. 
If it isn’t, we’re not properly being custodians of the artform.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1ee217a9c2fd2b3d96968b85c00597501eebdbd%2F1258_818_4718_2831%2F4718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Icke's%20new%20revolution%3A%20a%20Vanya%20to%20blow%20Chekhovians'%20samovars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Icke%27s%20new%20revolution%3A%20a%20Vanya%20to%20blow%20Chekhovians%27%20samovars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Frobert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1ee217a9c2fd2b3d96968b85c00597501eebdbd%2F1258_818_4718_2831%2F4718.jpg>
 Paul Rhys: ‘Rob’s version is the truest to Chekhov’s intention by a million 
miles.’ Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
After Vanya, Rhys is disappearing into filming for Victoria 
<http://www.itv.com/presscentre/press-releases/tom-hughes-star-prince-albert-major-new-itv-drama-victoria>
, an ITV miniseries. (“This play will be my last!” he proclaims Eeyorishly; I 
gather this is a running joke.) Icke, meanwhile, is trying to line up a major 
new production of Shakespeare. (It was reported late last year that the 
Shakespeare would be Hamlet, starring Sherlock’sAndrew Scott 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/westend/article/SHERLOCKs-Andrew-Scott-in-Talks-for-HAMLET-at-the-Almeida-Theatre-20151127>
; Icke won’t deny or confirm.) Eager to pull yet another rabbit out of the hat, 
Icke insists that one thing he’s dying to do is a big musical: in front of me, 
apparently on a whim, he tries to persuade Rhys that he’d make a fine Sweeney 
Todd.

That’s the thing about theatre, says Icke: unless it has the capacity for 
surprise as well as delight, the artform might as well turn up its toes and 
die. “You feel with theatre, when we get it right …” His eyes are blazing. “I 
still think it’s possible to cause a riot.”

• Uncle Vanya is at the Almeida 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/whats-on/uncle-vanya/5-feb-2016-26-mar-2016>, London, 
until 26 March. Box office: 020-7359 4404.
 