
Robert Pattinson may not have made a new fan of Susan Richards. The author and 
widow of late photographerDennis Stock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/21/dennis-stock-obituary> – 
played by Pattinson in forthcoming film, Life – says the actor’s performance 
lacked “the guts, energy and imagination needed to capture such a ferocious and 
remarkable man”.

Richards has been outspoken in her criticism of the film’s depiction of 
Stock’s relationship with 24-year-old actorJames Dean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesdean>, who Stock (then just 26) 
photographed walking through a freezing Times Square in a now-iconic spread for 
Life magazine.

“Pattinson portrayed a man who was very insecure, very low on confidence. He 
wasn’t very bright, he wasn’t talkative. He seemed confused, inarticulate,” 
Richards says from her home in Maine. “I saw a lost soul, with none of the 
confidence, humour, charm or intelligence that drew me, and so many others, to 
Dennis. That wasn’t the man I knew.”

Dennis Stock: the photographer who made America cool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/dec/06/dennis-stock-magnum-american-cool-in-pictures>
Set in 1955, in the lull between Dean’s groundbreaking performance in East of 
Eden and his role in Nicholas Ray’s Rebel Without a Cause,Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/09/berlin-2015-life-review-anton-corbijn-james-dean>
 explores how these now-classic pictures were created. The film shows the 
quasi-friendly dynamic that developed between photographer and performer – both 
of whom thought they were doing the other an undeserved favour.

Stock’s photographs of Dean in rainy New York, collar turned up, cigarette 
defying gravity, were coupled in the film with others of Dean on his family’s 
Indiana farm, playing a bongo by the livestock, or reading children’s stories 
with his nephew. These were the images that embalmed Dean as the doomed symbol 
of the counter-cultural age when he died six months later in a car crash.

But it is the depiction of Dean’s chronicler Stock that has caused concern. 
Richards’ comments may sting Life directorAnton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn>, a deeply reverent admirer 
of Stock’s work who started his own career as a music photographer. “His 
photographs are like documents,” Corbijn says of Stock. “They’re brilliantly 
composed images of a person in a moment, but they’re beautiful examples of 
their era as well.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Flife-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443105643337%2FKP_481714_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Flife-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Flife-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443105643337%2FKP_481714_crop_640x480.jpg>
The film, he says, involved researching Stock’s life, from the photographers 
and editors who worked with him, to his children and former wives. Yet, Corbijn 
says: “We took some liberties in the dramatisation of the film. We had to find 
an arc for their characters. A lot of people who knew Stock at the time are no 
longer with us. The further you go back, the more freedom you have in a way.”

Pattinson joined the project long before Dane DeHaan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/06/robert-pattinson-james-dean-biopic>
, who plays Dean, and the industry press assumed that he was to play the role 
of the actor. Although he had little prior interest in photography, it was 
Pattinson, Corbijn says, who was eager to play Stock. “Robert’s always being 
chased by photographers, and now he plays a photographer himself. There’s a 
kind of perverse pleasure for him there.”

Corbijn’s film is essentially a two-hander. DeHaan’s Dean is portrayed as the 
non-conforming young actor, appalled by the demands of stardom, hiding behind a 
veil of above-it-all insouciance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Frobert-pattinson-life-dennis-stock-lacked-guts-photographer-widow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b8df0e7566fe667ab3dbfc9f682ad8b3e437f4%2F2282_1642_8507_5103%2F8507.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Pattinson%20lacked%20'guts'%20to%20play%20Dennis%20Stock%2C%20says%20photographer's%20widow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Frobert-pattinson-life-dennis-stock-lacked-guts-photographer-widow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Pattinson%20lacked%20%27guts%27%20to%20play%20Dennis%20Stock%2C%20says%20photographer%27s%20widow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Frobert-pattinson-life-dennis-stock-lacked-guts-photographer-widow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b8df0e7566fe667ab3dbfc9f682ad8b3e437f4%2F2282_1642_8507_5103%2F8507.jpg>
 Robert Pattinson (right) with director Anton Corbijn. Photograph: Action 
Press/Rex Shutterstock 
Stock is the photographer with ambitions beyond the press pack, trying to 
convince his editor atMagnum <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magnum>, 
John G Morris – played by Joel Edgerton in a role originally intended for 
Philip Seymour Hoffman – of his worth, while scraping together enough money to 
keep his estranged wife off his case and his largely-ignored son interested in 
him.

“Now that he is gone, I realise that I vastly underestimated the talent of 
Dennis Stock,” Morris toldthe New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/15/arts/design/15stock.html>. “I think it was 
because he was such a pain in the neck to deal with in Magnum. I used to call 
him Dennis the Menace.”

Stock was born in the Bronx, New York, in 1928, to an English mother and a 
Swiss father who died when he was 16. Within a year, Stock had left school to 
fight in the second world war. “He left the army, and had the brashness to 
march into the office of Eugene Smith,” at the time, one of American’s 
celebrated photojournalists, “and ask for a job,” Richards says. “Dennis had 
never taken a picture in his life. It lasted two weeks before Smith fired him. 
He realised Dennis was a complete chancer who didn’t know anything about 
photography.”

Despite this, Stock managed to be invited into the world-famous Magnum photo 
agency in 1951 after becoming apprenticed toLife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/life> magazine photographer Gjon Mili. He 
would go on to photograph Marilyn Monroe and Audrey Hepburn, Billie Holiday and 
Louis Armstrong. He died in 2010 after a short battle with colon cancer.

Berlin 2015: Life review – waxworky piece of American icon worship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/09/berlin-2015-life-review-anton-corbijn-james-dean>
In a scene in Indiana, Corbijn depicts Dean loudly telling a family member 
that Stock is a typical New Yorker: “Prickly, pushy and opinionated”. Yet this 
line doesn’t tally with the film, Richards says. Pattinson depicts Stock as shy 
and diffident, with nervous tics and hesitant mannerisms. It is, by Richards’ 
account, wildly divergent to the reality of Stock.

Richards says she could not imagine that Stock would have been as the film 
portrays him. She didn’t know Stock when he was 26 – they married in 2006, 
making her his fourth wife – but the real Dennis Stock, she says, “grew up on 
the streets of New York. This was not a shy man, but a ferocious man. He was a 
fighter who know how to survive in the bad parts of Manhattan. If he liked you, 
he would clamp himself to your life. If he didn’t like you, he could be a very 
ugly person. But he was a warm man, and that warmth wasn’t in the film at all.”

Asked why she thinks Pattinson played her husband in such a way, Richards 
says: “I think some actors, for fear of overacting, rely on understatement. You 
can do less harm that way. I don’t thinkRobert Pattinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robert-pattinson> had the guts to try and 
interpret someone as complex and powerful as Dennis. He just withdrew.”

But Corbijn’s view? “Robert is not interested in pay checks,” he says. “He is 
a guy who wants to prove himself as an actor, playing a photographer who wants 
to prove himself as a photographer.”

 * Life is released in UK cinemas on Friday 25 September, in the US on 4 
December and was released on 10 September in Australia.
 