
There are moments while talking to Robert Redford when you can see that 1970s 
sex symbol peeking through from a weathered 77-year-old face – starting when he 
rises from a couch in a New York publicist's office, looking amazingly fit in 
jeans, white T-shirt and cordovan cowboy boots. Settling in for a brief 
interview, one's tempted to lean across the coffee table and tuck back a lock 
of his thick, only slightly greying, hair, just like Barbra Streisand did inThe 
Way We Were <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0070903/plotsummary?ref_=tt_ql_6>. 
This smile is still straight out ofButch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jul/11/butch-cassidy-sundance-kid-reel-history>
. The voice as seductive as it was inAll the President's Men 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1fLdCZm7qgs> or Three Days of the Condor 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PBZf7vifXmY>.

In other words, Redford's still got it. And anyone needing proof of that will 
be convinced by his latest movie,All Is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/all-is-lost>, in which he plays a nameless 
character whose sailboat runs afoul of a container carrier in the Indian Ocean. 
The film, written and directed by JC Chandor (Margin Call) chronicles his 
week-long attempt to keep his boat afloat and stay alive. And Redford 
thoroughly dominates the drama, in which he utters just a few words of 
dialogue, putting his body through moments of watery peril, hopelessness and 
existential terror.

For the 106-minute running time of All Is Lost, Redford delivers a masterclass 
in the art of screen acting, using his prime instrument – his body – to deliver 
a galvanising, physically gruelling, deeply emotional performance that would be 
electrifying coming from someone half his age. The fact that it's Redford up 
there, battling the elements, refusing to go gently, embodying the hopes, 
fears, desires and recriminations of the generation of which he's been so 
emblematic, makes All Is Lost not just thrilling, but profound.

On this rainy day in New York, Redford bears not a trace of the stresses he 
went through making All Is Lost, which was filmed in the same Baja, California, 
water tanks as Titanic. He's even getting used to the idea that the movie is a 
success – a fact that first dawned on him at theCannes Film Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, where he saw it for the 
first time at a gala black-tie premiere. "I had not seen anything," he says. "I 
had not looked at the monitor between takes, I didn't go to dailies, I took 
myself out of that. So when the lights came down I didn't know what to expect." 
He was prepared for the worst, he recalls. "And when it went the other way, I 
just didn't know what to do with it. I did not know how to behave."

This is entirely in keeping with Redford's wary, often ambivalent relationship 
with success. He's a man who came to New York in the 1950s to be a painter, and 
instead found himself drawn – despite his inborn shyness and California-bred 
contempt for shallow movie culture – to acting. A man who, when stardom began 
to find him in the 1960s, responded by buying up land in Utah, the better to 
retreat from it. The man who, when he saw the studio culture changing in the 
1980s, didn't "lean in", but built his own nonprofit institute, where he could 
nurture film-makers interested in making the small, independent, often 
subversive films he himself produced whenever the system would let him. This is 
the man whose watchwords have always been: at the height of your greatest 
success, always go back to zero.

"That's right," Redford says today. "Be careful of success, it has a dark 
side." In a way, All Is Lost is a product of the success of theSundance 
Institute <https://www.sundance.org/> and Sundance Film Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival>, which Redford spent 
most of the 1980s and 1990s building and protecting, at the expense of his own 
acting and directing career. "Yeah, I got off my stride a bit with my own 
work," he admits. "I kind of woke up and said, wait a second, I need to go back 
to what it is that I do."
 Directing and starring in the political thriller The Company You Keep. 
Photograph: Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Now he's restoring the balance. Last spring, he directed and starred in the 
political thrillerThe Company You Keep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/20/robert-redford-reinvents-himself>
. He has revived longstanding plans to direct and star in the adaptation of 
Bill Bryson's bookA Walk in the Woods 
<http://www.billbryson.co.uk/index.php/a-walk-in-the-woods/#synopsis>, and next 
year he'll appear in the comic-book action-adventure Captain America: The 
Winter Soldier. With All Is Lost, however, he has tackled something deeper and 
more challenging on any level, aesthetic or physical.

"Its purity is what attracted me," he says of Chandor's script. "It was very 
bold, I was attracted by that. There's no dialogue, I was attracted by that. It 
was not going to have a lot of special effects. Even though we were going to be 
filming in tanks, it was going to be real rain and wind. It was a very pure 
experience that I felt had gone missing [in movies]. It was a chance for me to 
be a part of going back to that."

It was also a chance for Redford finally to work with one of the hundreds of 
promising young film-makers who got their start at Sundance, a roll call that 
includes names likeSoderbergh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevensoderbergh>, Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater> and Tarantino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/quentintarantino>. When Chandor's Margin Call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/08/margin-call-review> made its 
debut at the festival in 2011, he handed Redford the script for All Is Lost 
(which, with no dialogue, amounted to 30-some pages). "JC is the first and only 
film-maker of all the ones I've supported who's ever asked me to be in a film!" 
Redford says, adding that the reason for the reticence is "anybody's guess". 
(He has since agreed to star in The Old Man and the Gun, with Sundance alum 
David Lowery at the helm.)

It took the actor 10 minutes to say yes. He wanted to put himself entirely in 
the service of a director, with no second guessing or kibitzing. "I just want 
to be an actor," he recalls telling Chandor. "I'll put myself in your hands, 
and let's go. There was not one moment where I thought about directing. I never 
gave him any pointers, we never discussed it, because I trusted him."

Chandor notes that Redford had just finished post-production work on The 
Company You Keep when he showed up on the All Is Lost set. The minute he 
arrived, that last project – as well as Sundance and environmental causes and 
Redford's activism in the arts – melted away. "I think he really enjoyed, after 
all those years of trying to wear all those different hats, just absolutely 
closing off and becoming a pure actor again," Chandor says.

The word "pure" comes up a lot when discussing All Is Lost, and rightfully so: 
It is pure visual storytelling at its most compelling and an example of pure 
screen acting at its most physical and expressive. Redford did as many of his 
own stunts as possible, and when it became clear that he could handle them, 
Chandor began to see how far he could push his leading man, who in turn rose to 
nearly every challenge. Aching, wet, cold and bone-tired every night, the actor 
resorted to a time-honoured cure: "Tequila," he says with a laugh. "I'm proud 
of [the movie] because it's a total performance. But it did take its toll."

All Is Lost represents another kind of purity for Redford, one that he thought 
he left behind when he gave up painting for acting, one that he rediscovered 
when he began directing in the 1980s, but that he rarely found as an ambivalent 
actor-for-hire for studios that just wanted him to look good and little else. 
For the first time in decades, the movie star Redford was never comfortable 
being and the artist he thought he'd left behind have fused, in a film that 
works as vehicle and spectacle, but that's also risky, rigorous and deeply 
meaningful.

"I don't know how to express it, I don't know how to describe it, but I agree 
with you," he says softly. "Something seems to be coming together."

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>, 
which incorporates material from the Washington Post
 