
Laura Robson reached today's semi-finals of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> juniors when her 
quarter-final opponent, Elena Bogdan of Romania, last year's runner-up in the 
French Open, was forced to retire with an ankle injury after falling.

Robson, the junior Wimbledon champion, had won the opening set 6-3, but was 
trailing 5-2 0-30 in the second when Bogdan fell. She tried to continue, hoping 
to win the second set, and then getting what might have been a six hours break 
with the extreme heat policy coming into effect, and matches being stopped on 
the outside courts. However the doctor advised her to retire.

"We were both very tired. It was unfortunate that she had the injury. I think 
the referee forced her to stop because she wanted to play on, though I don't 
think she couldn't even walk," said Robson. "After the second set play was due 
to be suspended anyway. But to me it seemed that she couldn't even walk or 
serve or do anything."

It was another brutally hot day. "I was definitely struggling in that second 
set. I could barely breathe. I was cramping and it was unfortunate for her 
because if it had gone to a third set I think she would have had a really good 
chance of winning. It was much hotter that the previous days and it felt more 
humid as well. My coach said after I came off court that at 10.45 it was over 
40 degrees. It's not nice to play in. It also felt like there was a really hot 
wind blowing into my face as well, so it hurt my eyes."

Robson next plays Thailand's Noppawan Lertcheewakarn, the top seed, for a 
place in the final, having beaten her in the final at Wimbledon. The Thai won 
her quarter-final 6-1, 6-0. Ksenia Pervak of Russia, the No3 seed, beat 
Britain's other quarter-finalist finalist, Heather Watson.
 