
Celebrations to mark Freddie Mercury’s 70th birthday received a cosmic boost 
on Sunday night asBrian May <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/brian-may>, 
Queen’s lead guitarist, announced that an asteroid nearly half a billion 
kilometres away had been named after the late singer.

In a move that links one of the most dazzling stars in history to one of the 
darker rocks in the solar system the International Astronomical Union confirmed 
thatasteroid 17473 <http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/sbdb.cgi#top>, a 3.5km-wide ball of 
black rubble on the other side of Mars, shall henceforth be known as 
“Freddiemercury”

May, who has a PhD in astrophysics and an asteroid named after him 
<http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/sbdb.cgi?sstr=52665> already, revealed the name by 
video message to more than 1200 guests at the “Freddie for a Day” party at the 
Montreux Casino on Lake Geneva in Switzerland. Behind the venue is the band’s 
former studio where Queen recorded a host of songs, from Under Pressure with 
David Bowie to Who Wants To Live Forever?

Discovered in 1991 by the Belgian astronomer Henri Debehogne, the 
freshly-named asteroid swings around the sun at 20km per second. Its slightly 
elliptical orbit never comes closer than 350 million kilometres to Earth, 
meaning that the heavenly body called Freddiemercury posesno imminent danger to 
the planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2016/feb/09/european-space-agency-to-join-brain-mays-asteroid-day>
.

The space rock reflects only one third of the sunlight that falls on it and at 
such distance can only be seen with a telescope. “It’s like a cinder in space 
as many of these asteroids are,” said May. “You need a pretty decent telescope 
to see it. It’s just a dot of light but it’s a very special dot of light and 
maybe one day we’ll get there.”

Chris Lintott, professor of astrophysics at Oxford and presenter of The Sky at 
Night said: “I think it’s wonderful to name an asteroid afterFreddie Mercury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/freddie-mercury>. He joins a list including 
all the Beatles, Frank Zappa, Bowie and, weirdly, the band Yes. Pleasingly, 
it’s on a slightly eccentric orbit about the sun, just as the man himself was.”

The list of famous names given to asteroids goes on and on. Kurt Vonnegut, 
Vladimir Nabokov, Douglas Adams and Bruce Springsteen all have space rocks 
named after them, as do the characters Don Quixote, James Bond, Sherlock Holmes 
and Dr Watson.

Another member of the asteroid club is Monica Grady, the Open University 
professor of planetary science, who lends her name toasteroid 4731 
<http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/sbdb.cgi#top>. “It’s very appropriate that the King of 
Rock (or Queen of rock?) is remembered this way, with his very own piece of 
rock memorabilia,” she said.

Freddie’s sister, Kashmira Cooke, was due to attend the Montreux party hosted 
by his former personal assistant and cook Peter “Phoebe” Freestone. Guests were 
encouraged to wear yellow costumes for the night and dined on some of the 
star’s favourite dishes, including Louisianna chicken and onion tart.

Addressing the party, May thanked Joel Parker, astronomer and director at the 
Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, for almost single-handedly 
ensuring the asteroid was named after the Queen singer in time for the 
celebrations. “I’m honoured to have been part of getting the name officially 
recognised in time for Freddie’s 70th birthday,” Parker told the Guardian. 
“It’s wonderful thatBrian May <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brian-may> is 
also an astronomer, connecting the Earth-based Freddie to the cosmos-based 
Freddie.”

Parker said that anyone who wanted to catch a glimpse of Freddiemercury would 
need a telescope as it is only one ten thousandth of the brightness that the 
naked eye can see in a dark sky. “It’s not quite traveling at the speed of 
light,” Parker said. “But from an Earth perspective, this certainly has made a 
supersonic man out of him.”
 