
Rod McKuen, who has died aged 81, was, at his peak, a cultural phenomenon 
whose massive success as a songwriter and singer saw him become America’s most 
popular poet, dubbed The King of Kitsch by Newsweek magazine.

His books of poetry were found both on middle American coffee tables and in 
the bedrooms of adolescents, reflecting their combination of dreamy romantic 
loneliness and uplifting platitudes. It was no coincidence that one of McKuen’s 
biggest hits was thetitle song for the animated Peanuts film A Boy Named 
Charlie Brown, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-JcsDVsCIw8> for which he was 
nominated for an Oscar. A shrewd judge of passing styles and a hardworking 
promoter of his own work, McKuen produced 30 collections of poems and around 
200 recordings of easy-listening music that sold in the millions. But it was 
his songwriting, covered by artists as varied as Frank Sinatra and Madonna, 
Dolly Parton and Chet Baker,Johnny Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/13/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 and Barbra Streisand, that made his fortune.

McKuen was born in a charity hospital in Oakland, California; his mother had 
been abandoned by his father. His stepfather beat him regularly and he was 
sexually abused by relatives, which was even more damaging. “Physical injuries 
on the outside heal,” he said, “but those scars have never healed and I expect 
they never will.”

He ran away from home at 11, drifting through a series of later-romanticised 
labouring jobs. By the age of 15 he was back in San Francisco with a late-night 
radio show. After army service in Korea, he returned to San Francisco and began 
singing in clubs and with Lionel Hampton’s band. He had a brief spell as a 
contract player at Universal Studios, read poetry with Jack Kerouac and Allen 
Ginsberg, and in 1959 recorded his first album,Beatsville 
<http://www.discogs.com/Rod-McKuen-Beatsville/release/3481952>, speaking poems 
with jazzy music behind. The cover photo might be seen as symbolic of his 
career and life: a black-haired woman looks at the camera while McKuen stares 
morosely into his wine glass.

“I tried to be a good beatnik, but it’s hard,” he said. McKuen moved to New 
York – and pop music.The Mummy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=boMW2kVgk34>, a 
single recorded with Bob McFadden under the pseudonym Dor, was a top 40 hit in 
1959; another novelty song,Oliver Twist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIIOKgyZIVQ>, recorded under his own name, 
charted in 1961. On tour promoting the song, McKuen shattered his voice, 
turning it from syrupy tenor to deep rasp.

Frustrated, he moved to Paris, where his career path was changed by his 
friendship withJacques Brel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2013/oct/13/jacques-brel-theatrical-singer-poet>
. McKuen began translating Brel’s songs into English. Ne Me Quitte Pas becameIf 
You Go Away <http://www.glennyarbroughsinger.com/> and was a hit for Damita Jo 
in 1966, while Les Biches became The Women for the country-singerGlenn Yarbrough
 <http://www.glennyarbroughsinger.com/>. Yarbrough also used McKuen’s poem 
Stanyan Street and Other Sorrows <http://www.keourazy.com/mckuen/stanyan.htm> 
for a song, and McKuen then rushed to publish his first popular poetry 
collection by that name.

Two more poetry collections, Listen to the Warm (1967) and Lonesome Cities 
(1968) followed quickly; a recording of the latter won a Grammy for best 
spoken-word album of 1968. His music exploded in popularity too; he had nine 
records in Billboard’s Hot 200 over the next three years, including six 
collaborations with the arrangerAnita Kerr <http://www.anitakerr.com/> and The 
San Sebastian String 
<http://www.discogs.com/artist/990048-San-Sebastian-Strings-The>s, starting with
The Sea <http://www.discogs.com/San-Sebastian-Strings-The-Sea/master/299470>. 
Sinatra admired McKuen’s material so deeply that he commissioned him to write 
an entire album.A Man Alone 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/a-man-alone-other-songs-of-rod-mckuen-mw0000318826>
 (1969) included the hitLove’s Been Good to Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9pLpzNPiB48>, whose ironic self-pity perfectly 
suited Sinatra.

That year McKuen sold out Carnegie Hall for a 36th birthday concert and 
received an Oscar nomination for the songJean 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJZQz5U0el0>, which he sang over the closing 
credits of the 1969 filmThe Prime of Miss Jean Brodie 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0064840/>. Released as a single, it did not sell, 
but soon afterwards, recorded by the American singerOliver 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/oliver-mn0000888612/biography>, it was No 2 in 
the US charts. In 1974 Terry Jacks’s cover ofSeasons in The Sun 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-tPcc1ftj8E>, McKuen’s version of Brel’s Le 
Moribond, became a huge worldwide hit.

McKuen’s orchestral piece, The City: Suite for Narrator and Orchestra, with 
echoes ofAaron Copland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/friday_review/story/0,3605,388222,00.html>, was 
nominated for a Pulitzer prize, a serious counterpoint to his pop music, which 
switched outward styles, from singer-songwriter pop to psychedelia, culminating 
in the album McKuen Country (1976), for which he posed, bearded, in denim and 
checked shirt. He was touring 280 days a year, but found time to write a memoir,
Finding My Father 
<http://www.amazon.com/Finding-My-Father-Search-Identity/dp/0698107748> (1976), 
about his search for the father who abandoned him and the painful upbringing 
that followed. The book influenced debate on the rights of adopted children to 
learn about their biological parents. Ironically, although McKuen fathered two 
sons during his stay in Paris, he left them, admitting that his career was more 
important.

When Brel died in 1978, McKuen said he locked himself in his bedroom “and 
drank for two weeks”. By 1981 he was exhausted and suffering from clinical 
depression, so he retired from touring. He lived in a massive Beverley Hills 
mansion remodelled by his half-brother, Edward Habib; they shared it with a 
collection of 500,000 records. Apart from occasional appearances, McKuen then 
did voiceovers, including for the animated film The Little Mermaid and the 
television series The Critic. In 2001 he published a new collection of poetry, 
A Safe Place to Land, coincidentally just as Madonna used his song Why I Follow 
the Tiger in her single Drowned World/Substitute for Love, for which McKuen and 
Kerr shared a writing credit. “I think Madonna’s lyric is terrific and, by the 
way, so are the royalties,” he said.

One of his most famous lines was that “it doesn’t matter who you love, or how 
you love, but that you love”.

• Rodney Marvin McKuen, songwriter, poet and singer, born 29 April 1933; died 
29 January 2015
 