
After almost 50 years as rock royalty, Rod Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rodstewart> has been honoured by the real 
thing, receiving a knighthood from the Queen in her birthday honours.

Stewart, 71, was recognised not only for a 45-year career in which he had sold 
more than 100m albums worldwide, but also for his long commitment to several 
charities.

On Friday night, the singer said he had “led a wonderful life” and had enjoyed 
a “tremendous career thanks to the generous support of the great British 
public. This monumental honour has topped it off and I couldn’t ask for 
anything more”. With a nod to one of his songs, he added: “I thank Her Majesty 
and promise to ‘wear it well’.”

The musician topped a list of honorees that also included the Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> actor Penelope Wilton, 
who received a damehood, footballerAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer>, who was awarded a CBE for 
his charity work with disabled people, and the astronautTim Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/tim-peake>, who received a CMG, or 
companion of the order of St Michael and St George, a diplomatic honour granted 
for overseas service, which was awarded for the first time to a recipient in 
space.

Since no one has previously been in orbit when they were given an award, Sir 
Simon McDonald, permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office, asked the 
European Space Agency to set up a special phone line to the International Space 
Station to ask the astronaut if he would accept it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefc225ca3824965645393117805b70f288119c14%2F0_0_4940_3292%2F4940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rod%20Stewart%20knighted%20in%20Queen's%20birthday%20honours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rod%20Stewart%20knighted%20in%20Queen%27s%20birthday%20honours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefc225ca3824965645393117805b70f288119c14%2F0_0_4940_3292%2F4940.jpg>
 Astronaut Tim Peake has received a CMG for his charity work. Photograph: 
Picasa/ESA/Nasa 
Peake, who was due to return to earth next week, said the honour was not for 
him, but for “the hundreds of dedicated staff … all working in pursuit of one 
of the greatest scientific and technical challenges of our time – exploring our 
solar system for the benefit of people on Earth. This award is for them.”

Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly, otherwise known as the TV presenters 
Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>, each 
received OBEs for services to broadcasting and entertainment. In a joint 
statement, the pair said that as “two ordinary lads from the west end of 
Newcastle” they were “shocked but incredibly honoured” to receive the awards.

“We hope us receiving this honour can inspire young people to chase their 
dreams and believe that anything is possible. This will definitely be the 
proudest our mams have ever been,” they added.

Also recognised was the tennis player Jamie Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/23/jamie-murray-interview-donald-mcrae-davis-cup-final>
, who joins his brother Andy as an OBE, and Leon Smith, captain of Great 
Britain’s triumphantDavis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
 team. England’s cricket captain,Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook>, meanwhile, will be 
celebrating his CBE on Saturday at Lords, where the third Test against Sri 
Lanka continues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8802d0a8a0501b5a79e2f360e4e566d033bc9d74%2F79_238_1287_1608%2F1287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rod%20Stewart%20knighted%20in%20Queen's%20birthday%20honours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rod%20Stewart%20knighted%20in%20Queen%27s%20birthday%20honours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8802d0a8a0501b5a79e2f360e4e566d033bc9d74%2F79_238_1287_1608%2F1287.jpg>
 Janet Street-Porter has become a CBE. Photograph: Tim Ireland/PA 
The broadcaster Janet Street-Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/janet-street-porter> has become a CBE and 
the actor Brian Blessed an OBE, while the wartime singer Dame Vera Lynn was 
made a companion of honour, one of the highest awards to be granted. The 
Shakespeare scholar Stanley Wells was knighted, as was the philosopher Roger 
Scruton, whileLouise Casey <https://www.theguardian.com/society/louisecasey>, 
who has held a number of government roles involving homelessness and antisocial 
behaviour, becomes a dame.

In total, 1,004 people received awards, 47% of them women, the lowest 
proportion since 2012, when just 41.5% of honorees were women. The proportion 
of ethnic minority recipients, 8.2%, hit a record high, while 5.2% of 
recipients considered themselves to have a disability.

Alongside the high-profile names, the largest proportion of those honoured 
were individuals working in their communities, either in paid or voluntary 
roles: 70% of those on the list fall into this category. Sir Jonathan Stephens, 
chair of the government committee that oversees the awards, said he was eager 
to encourage more nominations from members of the public, particularly from BME 
communities. “We are very keen that people realise that anyone can nominate and 
be nominated, in any walk of life.”

Among those receiving awards was Hilda Lyons, who celebrates her 96th birthday 
on Saturday and was given the British Empire Medal for her work since the 1970s 
with Redbridge Dippers, a swimming club in Essex for disabled adults. She told 
the Guardian it was “lovely” being honoured on her birthday, “but I have 
enjoyed every minute of the work I have got the award for”. She no longer 
coaches from the pool, but has certainly not retired from the club, saying she 
was still very much involved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12d3d059363c644c14c2d7c44746ce8f0c7f44da%2F0_301_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rod%20Stewart%20knighted%20in%20Queen's%20birthday%20honours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rod%20Stewart%20knighted%20in%20Queen%27s%20birthday%20honours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Farise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12d3d059363c644c14c2d7c44746ce8f0c7f44da%2F0_301_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Martine Wright, Team GB athlete and now MBE. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
for the Guardian 
Also recognised was Martine Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/mar/20/martine-wright-london-bombing-paralympics>
, who lost both legs in the 7/7 bombings before going on to represent Team GB 
at the 2012 Paralympics in the sitting volleyball. She described her MBE as 
“one of the most extraordinarily, unbelievably honourable things to have been 
bestowed on me”, adding she had agreed to accept it only as a recognition of 
the health professionals and others who had saved her life, and the volunteers 
who make amateur sport possible.

The youngest honoree, at just 21 years old, was Gary Doyle, a plumbing 
apprentice from Castlewellan, County Down, who was given a British Empire Medal 
for “services to skills” after winning gold at the world plumbing and heating 
championships in Brazil last year.

Myra Brodie, a school crossing warden from Leicestershire, became an MBE, as 
did Valerie Johnson, director of Frankie’s fish and chips shop in Brae, 
Shetland, and Shahzada Saleem, a taxi driver and competitive strongman from the 
west Midlands, who was honoured for services to the Asian sport of stone 
lifting.
 