
The talented and idiosyncratic character actor Roger Lloyd Pack, who has died 
of pancreatic cancer aged 69, achieved national recognition, and huge 
popularity, as Colin "Trigger" Ball, the lugubrious Peckham road sweeper inJohn 
Sullivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/24/john-sullivan-obituary>'s 
brilliantly acted comedy series Only Fools and Horses. He appeared alongside 
David Jason's Del Boy and Nicholas Lyndhurst's "plonker" Rodney from 1981 for 
10 years, with many a seasonal "special" for another decade.

This success cemented a career in which, up to that point, he had played 
important roles at theRoyal Shakespeare Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, the National Theatre and the Almeida 
theatre in north London – he was a notably anguished Rosmer in Ibsen's 
Rosmersholm at the National in 1987, opposite Suzanne Bertish – without 
recognition any wider than usually appreciative reviews.

His enhanced status led to another hugely successful BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> television comedy series, The Vicar of 
Dibley (1994-2007), written by Richard Curtis, and starring Dawn French as the 
ecclesiastical new broom, Geraldine, in a sleepy Oxfordshire parish. He played 
Owen Newitt, the local farmer with a suspiciously ambiguous relationship with 
his own animals, who lusted after the breezy cleric and was not averse to 
misinterpreting her exiguous signs of encouragement.

Lloyd Pack described Trigger as both a blessing and a curse, as it made him 
susceptible to cheerily sarcastic greeting on the streets. This was not false 
modesty. The actor lived a full life in his local communities in north London 
and Fakenham, Norfolk, and was highly visible in all sorts of political and 
charitable activities, where his good nature and deep feeling about issues such 
as schools, the ambulance service and integrated traffic policies engaged him 
fully.

On stage he was very good at looking as though he would not hurt a fly, but 
his last work, in Mark Rylance's all-male company at Shakespeare's Globe (and 
in the West End) in 2012 revealed other facets in his apparent equability: he 
played the "deep, revolving" Duke of Buckingham to Rylance'sRichard III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/26/richard-iii-review-shakespeare-globe>
 with sudden revelations of shark-like attack; and paired this with a 
definitive Sir Andrew Aguecheek, the dim-witted, lovelorn sidekick ("I was 
adored once, too") of Toby Belch inTwelfth Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/nov/18/twelfth-night-richard-iii-review>
.

Roger's father, the actor Charles Lloyd Pack, was proud of his working-class 
origins in Wapping, east London. His mother, Elizabeth Ulrike Pulay, was a 
Viennese Jewish refugee, worked as a travel agent and later founded a 
kindergarten because she disapproved of what was available. Roger was born in 
Islington, north London. After prep school he was packed off to Bedales, in 
Hampshire, trained at Rada in London, made his stage debut in The Shoemaker's 
Holiday by Thomas Dekker at theTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal, Northampton, and joined the 
RSC.

Lloyd Pack made his television debut in The Avengers in 1965, subsequently 
appearing in many established series in the 1970s such as Jason King, Crown 
Court and Softly Softly: Taskforce. Still, he seemed doomed to the periphery, 
even when he made a film debut in Guy Green's The Magus (1968), based on the
John Fowles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/nov/08/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
novel and starring Michael Caine and Anthony Quinn, and had a minor role in 
Joseph Losey's The Go-Between (1970), adapted byHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
 from LP Hartley's novel and starring Julie Christie andAlan Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/dec/29/guardianobituaries.filmnews>.

In the mid-1970s he was a committed member of the Joint Stock Theatre Company, 
formed by William Gaskill and Max Stafford-Clark. Other notable theatre 
appearances included Alan Bennett's Kafka's Dick (1986), directed at the Royal 
Court by Richard Eyre, and, 10 years later, as Albert Parker, one of the 
blind-sided town stalwarts, in a delightful revival by Jude Kelly of JB 
Priestley's When We Are Married at the Chichester Festival theatre (and the 
West End), both of these productions also featuring his great friend Alison 
Steadman.

Actually, Roger's friends were legion. Not only was he immensely respected in 
the theatre, he was immensely popular, and his enthusiasms for cricket (he was 
a member of the MCC), Tottenham Hotspur and (until recently) the Labour party 
defined, to a large extent, his attitude to work. Another friend, Stephen 
Frears, directed him in the film Prick Up Your Ears (1987), written by Bennett, 
about the playwright Joe Orton (played by Gary Oldman) and his lover, Kenneth 
Halliwell.

Even quirkier, and darker, was Peter Greenaway's dream-like The Cook, the 
Thief, His Wife and Her Lover (1989), which contains an amazing roster of the 
finest British actors led by Helen Mirren, Alan Howard and Michael Gambon. In 
one of the many take-over casts of Yasmina Reza's Art in the West End, he 
appeared alongside Nigel Havers andBarry Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/12/guardianobituaries> in 2001. In 
that play, Havers and Foster were witnesses to his own character's off-stage 
marriage and Lloyd Pack, on a sudden whim, decided to cast his colleagues in 
those roles in real life when he married his partner of over 20 years, the poet 
and dramatist Jehane Markham (herself of some theatrical pedigree: daughter of 
the actor David Markham and sister of the actors Kika and Petra).

He then joined forces with the director Mike Newell, another friend and 
neighbour, on Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (2005), the fourth film in 
the series, in which Lloyd Pack was Barty Crouch, and pulled another big 
surprise in playing a pantomime dame, Sara the Cook, inDick Whittington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/dec/06/theatre.pantoseason>, written, 
just as surprisingly, by Mark Ravenhill, at the Barbican in the City of London. 
This was not a huge success, but Lloyd Pack's view was that the critics who 
delivered mixed notices (all of them) had momentarily forgotten that panto was 
for the kids.

He had a good deal of fun as John Lumic on the reappearance of Doctor Who on 
television in 2006, playing opposite David Tennant, and returned to the stage 
in a revival of Patrick Marber's gambling classic,Dealer's Choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/oct/05/theatre2>, at the Menier 
Chocolate Factory in 2007. He was much praised, too, for a growly old Davies in 
Pinter's The Caretaker at the Nuffield, Southampton, and a fierce and 
transported Prospero in The Tempest at the Edinburgh festival.

His last films included Nigel Cole's Made in Dagenham (2010), about the strike 
at the Ford car plant in Essex in 1968, and a nice cameo as Inspector Mendel in 
Tomas Alfredson's Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy (2011), starring Oldman. And some 
of his last television, in 2009-10, was The Old Guys, in which he and Clive 
Swift played two ageing has-beens, focusing their attentions on the hopeless 
cause of Jane Asher's disobliging neighbour.

Lloyd Pack was married first in 1967 to Sheila Ball, with whom he had a 
daughter, the actor Emily Lloyd, and from whom he was divorced in 1972. He and 
Jehane had three sons, Spencer, Hartley and Louis. They, and his brother, 
Christopher, a stage manager, all survive him.

• Roger Lloyd Pack <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/roger-lloyd-pack>
, actor, born 8 February 1944; died 15 January 2014
 