
When Andy Murray reflects on why he could not quite get over the line in the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final it 
will not take him too long to figure it out. His serve, which is such a weapon 
when it is firing, deserted him in the first set and a half, effectively giving 
Roger Federer a two-sets-to-love lead.

Considering that Federer has only lost once from that position in his career – 
and that in a Davis Cup tie – it was a tall order, but Murray can be well 
satisfied with how well he played in the third set, even if he will be kicking 
himself for not taking the match to a fourth.

Federer's serve must be the most under-rated shot in the game. His forehand 
gets all the plaudits but his serve, when it matters most, is second to none. 
Every time he is in trouble, he finds a first serve. If you go back through the 
Swiss's 22 grand-slam finals, you will find that more often than not he has 
out-aced his opponent.

• Kevin Mitchell's match report from Melbourne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2010/jan/31/andy-murray-roger-federer-australian-open>
• In pictures: The best images from the final 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/gallery/2010/jan/31/australian-open-andy-murray-roger-federer>
• Read Scott Murray's game-by-game report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2010/jan/31/andy-murray-roger-federer>
• Five reasons why Andy Murray lost the final 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2010/jan/31/andy-murray-resons-lost-australian-open>


It's not just the aces, though. Time after time Federer produces a first serve 
under pressure and over the past five years, when he has served well, he has 
been nigh on unbeatable. It is only on the odd day when his serve malfunctions 
that he becomes vulnerable and cracks appear in the rest of his game.

Murray's first-serve percentage ended up at 57%, which is not great (though 
not terrible), but it was a lot better than it had been in the first set and a 
half. In the first set, he found the mark with only 45% of his first serves and 
Federer took advantage.

In the third set, by which time his serve had picked up, Murray was playing 
well and having led 5-2 he should have closed it out when he served for the set 
at 5-3, let alone on the five set points in the tiebreak. He led it 6-4 but the 
forehand he hit into the net at 6-5 may haunt him for a while – if he had it 
again he may well have gone cross-court – but apart from a missed backhand 
volley the other three set points were saved by Federer's brilliance. There was 
little Murray could do about them.

In their past two matches Federer has come out cracking winners, getting on 
top of Murray's second serve and coming to the net regularly. Today he did none 
of that, instead focusing on playing controlled, near-perfect tennis, never 
making the mistakes that would allow Murray to settle.

Murray's tears at the end showed how much emotional energy he had put into the 
fortnight and if he continues to play as well as he did here, then more grand 
slam finals beckon. It was his bad luck that he ran into Federer playing his 
best, but that's not the first time we've said that.
 