
Roger Federer drank champagne and partied until dawn in Melbourne as he 
savouring winning theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Sunday, the 16th grand 
slam title of his career. The 28-year-old Swiss defeated Andy Murray in the 
final 6-3, 6-4, 7-6. Looking fresh despite only a few hours of sleep, the 
father of six-month-old twin girls said he has no plans to slow down and that 
he still has plenty to prove.

"I think I played some of my best tennis these last two weeks, especially 
against Murray," he said. "The win was exceptional and the performance from my 
side, so it makes me very happy and eager to await what's to come this year. As 
you grow older you enjoy the victories even more. You try to savour them as 
long as possible because you never know when it could be your last, even though 
I'm sure I have much more left in me."

After celebrating with a few dozen friends at his hotel until sunrise, Federer 
was delighted to return to his room to find one of his daughters awake. "I 
quickly was able to see Myla. Even though she has got obviously no clue what 
has happened and couldn't care less, I still felt it was a special moment to 
hold her in my hands, and in my arms, after what happened."

Federer's brilliant win at Melbourne Park quashed doubts about the world No1's 
hunger for success and he rejected any notion he might take a break from the 
game, like Belgians Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin. "That's not realistic or 
feasible for me," he said. "Maybe [I could] take a few months off, but that 
doesn't mean half a season off. I just think it's too tough to come back after 
that. I don't know, the men's game's different, I think. It's brutal, the 
margins are so small."

Federer has enjoyed a largely injury-free career and rejected concerns about 
his fitness as one of the older players on the tour, saying he understood his 
body "more and more" as time goes by. "I remember in the beginning here in 2004 
when I won the first time, I couldn't move the next day. I was so tired, the 
whole pressure. Now I'm like 'it's over, perfect, what's next?' Obviously with 
the family now and everything there is no time to be tired â€¦ I'm not allowed to 
show any fatigue!"

Although his triumph at Melbourne Park has set up the possibility of a 
calendar grand slam, Federer has no new goals. "I hope I can now defend my 
French Open crown obviously," he said. "But first things first, vacation, 
practice and then the Dubai [Championships] again."
 