
12.23pm GMT 

Federer wins 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 6-3

Tsonga, with nothing to lose now, is swinging freely, firing from corner to 
corner. 0-15. A mis-hit approach from Federer but he survives at the net, 
15-all. Tsonga lets rip, 15-30. Unreturned Federer serve, 30-all. Federer 
threads a backhand down the line, 40-30.Match point No5. But this time it's on 
Federer's racket. Tsonga puffs out his cheeks but can do little with the 
return, giving Federer the initiative, as he charges forward, before finishing 
things off at the net. The pair embrace warmly. A stunning, explosive match 
from both players, but it's Federer who survives after three hours and 34 
minutes. Now he has the small matter of a semi-final against Andy Murray on 
Friday (his33rd grand slam semi). Can't wait. Thanks for reading/emailing etc. 
Bye.

Updated at 12.25pm GMT

12.15pm GMT 

Fifth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 5-3 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Tsonga's level has dropped. Two unforced errors bring up two match points, 
15-40. Tsonga mutters, but then it's Federer's turn to stutter, 30-40. A big 
serve down the middle, deuce. That was some second serve on match point. A game 
of cat and mouse on the next point, both spin and slide around the court, 
Federer emerges victorious.Match point No3. And what a point! Tsonga, already 
at the net himself, draws Federer in, Tsonga then somehow controls his forehand 
volley. Deuce. Advantage Tsonga. Deuce. Advantage Tsonga. Deuce. Advantage 
Federer,match point No4. Federer nets! Deuce. Advantage Tsonga. Game Tsonga. 
He's not done yet.

12.06pm GMT 

Fifth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 5-2 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

From 15-all, Tsonga goes for a drop shot, which doesn't come off. Probably not 
the right choice of shot there, a sign his focus – so strong for three and a 
half hours – is now waning. No such problem for Federer. He's in the zone. 
30-15, 40-15, game, rounded off with a delightful forehand volley. "Am I alone 
in thinking that the arty shot of Roger looks a wee bit like a view out of a 
pair of nostrils?" muses Michael Hunt.

12.02pm GMT 

Fifth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 4-2 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

0-15. Federer now has a stranglehold; he's won 12 of the last 15 points. 
Sensing the kill, he pounces to make it 0-30. 15-30. A huge slice of luck for 
Federer on the next point, his backhand slice clips the net, before trickling 
over and landing on the line. Tsonga can't get there in time. 15-40, two break 
points to surely settle this match. Tsonga is there for the taking, Federer 
sends Tsonga one way, then goes the other but somehow misses with the drive 
volley! 30-40. The match was on his racket there. Tsonga makes the most of his 
reprieve, getting to deuce, before walloping a forehand down the line. 
Advantage Tsonga. Game Tsonga! Federer will hope that miss doesn't come back to 
haunt him.

11.57am GMT 

Fifth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 4-1 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

The last two times Federer has broken, Tsonga has broken straight back. But 
not this time. Federer gets to 40-15 by plucking a smash out of the air, is 
briefly inconvenienced as an attempt to serve and volley backfires, but then 
it's Federer's turn to jog back to his chair as he holds to 30. Surely this is 
the end game for Tsonga if he doesn't hold now. A crucial game coming up.

11.53am GMT 

Fifth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 3-1 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

A chance for Federer at 0-30. Tsonga scrambles back to 15-30, but then sends a 
loose backhand long, 15-40. What he'd do for a first serve now. He gets it, but 
Federer stays with him, and again the backhand breaks down! Federer fist pumps, 
Mrs Federer nods appreciatively.

Updated at 11.55am GMT

11.50am GMT 

Fifth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 2-1 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

Federer holds to love. Not that you'd know it, as Tsonga skips and dances to 
his chair, perhaps to send out a message to Federer. Mind games.

Updated at 11.54am GMT

11.47am GMT 

Fifth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 1-1 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

This time his answer is a 212kph serve, one of his fastest of the night. He 
throws in another ace too to make it 17 for the match. Make that 18. Both are 
serving so well, this is so tough to call. These two have duked it out over 
five sets once before, Tsonga coming from two sets to love down to beat Federer 
in the 2011 Wimbledon quarter-finals. Federer will be desperate to settle the 
score.

11.44am GMT 

Fifth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 1-0 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

Federer tries to put Tsonga in his place with a hold to love. Though the way 
Tsonga's been playing today, it probably won't deter him one jot. Every time 
Federer's come at him, he's had an answer.

11.42am GMT 

Tsonga wins the fourth set 6-3

Tsonga finds himself in a bit of bother at 15-30, but then makes the most 
unlikely pass. Federer glares at Tsonga as if to say "How dare you do that to 
me". Tsonga refuses to be intimidated, the pair slug it out from the baseline 
on the next point, and Federer blinks first, 40-30, set point. And Tsonga 
settles things with an ace out wide! We're into a fifth set. Andy Murray has 
got his wish.

Updated at 11.43am GMT

11.39am GMT 

Fourth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-5 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A crowd-pleasing rally on the third point, both go at each other and back at 
each other, before Tsonga eventually dumps a volley into the net. 30-15. Tsonga 
lets rips with a ridiculous backhand cross-court winner. 30-all. He then throws 
missile after missile at Federer at the net. Federer can't withstand the 
barrage, 30-40. And Tsonga takes the break with a delightful backhand volley! 
This is Jekyll and Hyde from Tsonga, who will now serve to take this into a 
final set.

11.32am GMT 

Fourth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-4 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

But then Tsonga immediately finds himself in a spot of bother. 15-40. A strong 
first serve staves off the first, but he succumbs on the second. Tsonga will be 
kicking himself, that was sloppy, after all of his hard work they're back on 
serve. And Federer didn't have to do too much to restore parity.

11.29am GMT 

Fourth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 2-4 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

"Hey just wondering how many aces Tsonga has slammed today?" asks Peter McCoy. 
"Missing what sounds like a brilliant game, but hey people need plastering 
doing." Selfless Peter. Though how about a sneaky tea break? I make it 13 aces 
for the match so far. Back on Federer's serve, meanwhile, Tsonga pushes and 
probes his way to deuce, but he doesn't quite have the flexibility on the next 
point to prevail. Advantage Federer. Deuce. Advantage Tsonga. That's 50 winners 
for the Frenchman now, compared to Federer's 38. Remarkable over two hours and 
40 minutes of play. Tsonga is throwing absolutely everything at Federer, he's 
pushing, pushing and pushing. He breaks!

11.21am GMT 

Fourth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 2-3 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

This is high-quality shot-making from both players. Ominous for Murray in the 
semi-finals? Perhaps, though it's hard to gauge exactly where Murray's game is 
at considering the way the draw has opened up for him. Tsonga holds to 15, the 
game reaching a brutal denouement with a punishing rally, which eventually ends 
when Federer drives a backhand into the net.

11.18am GMT 

Fourth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 2-2 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

This is so focused and mature from Tsonga. There's plenty of showmanship from 
him while the points are going on, but very little afterwards. Gone are the 
celebratory pumps and jumps of a few years ago, he'll save that for if he wins. 
15-40, two break points to Tsonga. Federer wrong-foots Tsonga on the first, 
hitting deep to Tsonga's forehand wing and then going back behind him as Tsonga 
was trying to scramble back to the centre. Federer repeats the trick on the 
second. Deuce. Advantage Federer. Game Federer. Now it's Federer's turn to get 
himself out of a service predicament.

11.14am GMT 

Fourth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 1-2 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Wow. Strike after strike after strike from Federer gives him three break 
points, 0-40. He misses the first after a bit of tête-à-tête at the net (I'm 
getting into this French speaking now), he misses the second when a backhand 
flops into the net, and there's nothing he can do about the third because 
Tsonga slams an ace down the T. A fourth break point comes and goes as Tsonga 
swats away the danger with a venomous forehand, the power he generated was 
incredible considering his position behind the baseline. Deuce. Advantage 
Tsonga. Game Tsonga. A huge hold.

Updated at 11.14am GMT

11.09am GMT 

Fourth set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 1-1 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

The standard is being cranked up as every set goes by. Both players are 
hitting winner after winner right now. Federer holds to 15, Tsonga has a little 
monologue in French, though I'm afraid my linguistic skills are such that I 
can't tell you what he said. Je suis désolé.

11.06am GMT 

Fourth set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 0-1 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Credit to Tsonga. After the disappointment of being denied in that third set, 
he comes straight back at Federer, with all his energy, athleticism and power. 
The pick of the points sees him hurtle into the net to pull off a bit of a 
trick shot. Lovely stuff. He holds to love. Tsonga isn't willing the concede 
this one yet.

Updated at 11.06am GMT

11.02am GMT 

Federer wins the third set tie-break 7-4

"LET'S GO TSONGA, LET'S GO," scream the Frenchman's fanclub. Even some of the 
Swiss are getting a bit rowdy too. An unbelievable return from Federer, backed 
up with a viciously spun forehand winner, gets him to 4-3. Then 5-3. Some 
wonderful play. Tsonga then commits to a second-serve return, before putting 
away a tricky volley with aplomb. 5-4. 6-4. Federer has two set points, and he 
takes the set at the first time of asking when Tsonga this time fluffs his 
lines at the net, though admittedly under much pressure from Federer. Superb 
from the Swiss, who found his best form when it mattered. The crowd stand to 
salute the maestro.

Updated at 12.29pm GMT

10.55am GMT 

Third set tie-break

Two comfortable service holds make it 1-all. But then Tsonga, a little flat 
footed, becomes a sitting target at the net. 2-1 Federer. A big gasp from the 
Melbourne patrons on the next point, Federer opts to go for a drive volley 
rather than let the ball bounce, and he flunks it into the net. 2-all. 3-2 to 
Federer courtesy of an inside-out cross-court missile. Make that 3-all at the 
changeover ...

10.53am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 6-6 Tsonga

Tsonga, serving with the new balls, sends a searing forehand deep to Federer's 
left side. But Federer grapples back the initiative, 15-all, then 15-30, with a 
quite ridiculous return. Mats Wilander calls it as the shot of the tournament. 
Tsonga reverts to his go-to shot, the inside out forehand, 30-all. Federer goes 
long after a lengthy exchange, 40-30. Federer challenges, perhaps only to buy 
himself a few seconds breathing space, it was always out. Tsonga holds. We're 
into another breaker.

10.48am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 6-5 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

But Tsonga isn't just about raw power. A clever backhand slice teases the 
error from Federer, 0-15. Federer, for all the world, looks like he'll bury a 
forehand on the next point, but it's an ugly, ugly error. 0-30. But the beast 
turns back into the beauty on the next, as Federer arrows a darting backhand 
down the line. 15-30. 30-all. 40-30. Game. Four points on the spin and Tsonga 
must once again hold serve to stay in this set. The crowd rises.

10.45am GMT 

Third set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 5-5 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Bang, bang, bang, bang. Another love service game for Tsonga, who's at the top 
of his powers right now.

10.44am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 5-4 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A straightforward hold for Federer, to 15, the highlight a lovely backhand 
volley on the stretch which gets him to 40-15. With all the baseline tennis 
these days, we should admire the net prowess of these two. This is superb stuff.

Updated at 10.44am GMT

10.40am GMT 

Third set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 4-4 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Tsonga holds to love with a skip and a hop. Back to you Federer ...

10.39am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 4-3 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

Perhaps the hardest two-handed backhand Tsonga has hit comes back at him with 
interest, 30-0. Make that 40-0 when Federer fires down an ace. Make that game 
as Federer smashes down an overhead, which crashes into the service box. "If it 
carries on like this, Andy Murray might just get his wish of a five-hour 
match," emails Peter Foster. "Sounds as though Federer is not fully on his game 
yet, but Tsonga can do that to anyone with his power and energy." Talking of 
Murray, Peter, we know his semi-final will be the night match on Rod Laver on 
Friday evening Melbourne time, so Friday morning UK time.

10.36am GMT 

Third set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 3-3 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Tsonga again chips, chips, chips away at the Federer backhand, a tactic which 
is serving the Frenchman well. 30-15. Again Tsonga strikes at Federer's 
backhand wing, Federer, stretching every sinew, nets. 40-15. The pair duke it 
out from the middle of the court on the next point, before Tsonga mixes things 
up with a cross-court swat, leaving Federer stranded.

10.32am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 3-2 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

The standard of play is probably higher than it has been at any other stage of 
the match. Federer steps up to the plate with four service strikes, holding to 
love.

10.29am GMT 

Third set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 2-2 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

A game which ebbs and flows, ebbs and flows. From 15-all, Federer has Tsonga 
on the back foot with a probing cross-court forehand, and he then charges into 
the net to settle matters, 15-30. But that soon becomes 30-all, which soon 
becomes 40-30, courtesy of a brave second serve from Tsonga that jammed right 
into Federer's body. Federer forges his way to deuce, before Tsonga steps round 
his backhand, picking Federer off with a brutal forehand down the line. Federer 
barely moves. Advantage Tsonga. Deuce. Advantage Tsonga. Deuce. Advantage 
Federer. Deuce – with a cross-court scorcher from Tsonga. And Tsonga comes 
through to hold, to prevent a third successive break of serve. 

10.19am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 2-1 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

At 30-all, a big decision by Tsonga. The Frenchman thinks Federer's shot was 
out, the linesman didn't call it, neither did the umpire. Tsonga stops playing 
and raises his hand to Hawk-Eye. If he's wrong, he'll concede the point. But 
look, he's right! Break point. And Tsonga breaks back.

Updated at 1.24pm GMT

10.17am GMT 

Third set: *Federer 7-6, 4-6, 2-0 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Tsonga looks to have got himself out of a bit of a hole when he rounds off the 
rally of the match with a forehand winner, 30-all. But a slam-dunked smash from 
Federer makes it 30-40, break point. His first break chance for a long while. 
Will he capitalise? Yes he does, as Tsonga can only slap a backhand volley into 
the net. Tsonga looks mad with himself, Federer looks like Federer usually does 
whether he's winning or losing, fairly serene. Well played by the world No2, 
and he'll now serve with the new balls at the perfect time.

Updated at 10.23am GMT

10.11am GMT 

Third set: Federer 7-6, 4-6, 1-0 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

I'm not entirely sure what to make of this match so far. There have been some 
fantastic points, but some fairly average ones as well. Especially from Federer 
towards the end of that second set. Federer regroups with a quicker than quick 
service game, holding to 15. A wicked kick on his second serve leaving Tsonga 
stretching, spinning and sliding on the final point.

Updated at 10.12am GMT

10.06am GMT 

Tsonga wins the second set 6-4

Tsonga gets off to the best possible start with a 135mph ace, his fastest of 
the day. Federer has a chance to pass on the next point, but goes about 1cm 
long. That was a chance. 30-0. Federer then slaps the net with a mistimed 
backhand, 40-0. He's all at sea right now. Three set points. Tsonga misses with 
a wild and wayward forehand on the first, but makes no mistake on the second, 
firing down another service Exocet. Game on.

Updated at 10.13am GMT

10.03am GMT 

Second set: Federer 7-6, 4-5 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A wonderful running pass from Tsonga gets the crowd going, 15-all. Federer 
then throws in another unforced error, his 21st of the match, 15-30. But 
Federer chips and chops, leaving Tsonga bamboozled, 30-all, before a nerveless 
drive volley makes it 40-30. Tsonga's return goes well wide, game. Tsonga must 
serve this one out.

9.59am GMT 

Second set: *Federer 7-6, 3-5 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

So can Tsonga hold his nerve? The answer seems to be yes. Some strong, solid 
hitting from the Frenchman gets him to 40-0. Nothing fancy, mind. It doesn't 
need to be. Federer's lost his range, he's going for his shots just a little 
bit too much, and he's in danger of losing this second set.

9.56am GMT 

Second set: Federer 7-6, 3-4 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A collective gasp at 15-all as Federer's forehand clips the top of the net. It 
looks like it might trickle over, but after what feels like an age the ball 
slumps into the net. A glimmer for Tsonga, 15-30. And the glimmer quickly 
becomes a break point at 30-40. Suddenly this set springs into life. The pair 
trade baseline blow after baseline blow, and Federer ends up flooring himself 
by hoiking a forehand into the tramlines! Federer held serve 57 successive 
times coming into this match, he's now been broken twice.

9.52am GMT 

Second set: *Federer 7-6, 3-3 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

You already know how this one goes, right? A sixth ace from Tsonga, 15-0. 
Unreturned serve, 30-0. Unreturned serve, 40-0. Netted Federer backhand, game. 
Tsonga's in his serving groove, but so is Federer. Who will blink first?

Updated at 9.52am GMT

9.50am GMT 

Second set: Federer 7-6, 3-2 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A little more subtlety in this game, including a delightful touch volley from 
Federer to make it 15-all, but the majority of these points are so brief. This 
set has been dominated by serve, there are few nuances here. Bish, bash, bosh. 
From 15-all, Federer rattles off the next three points.

Updated at 9.52am GMT

9.46am GMT 

Second set: *Federer 7-6, 2-2 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Service bomb, 15-0. Shanked Federer backhand (it's nice to know he's human), 
30-0. Service bomb, 40-0. Service bomb, game. And that's about that.

9.44am GMT 

Second set: Federer 7-6, 2-1 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A fourth ace of the day brings up game point for Federer, 40-15. He's found 
his serving range now. Tsonga provides some brief resistance as he net charges 
once again, 40-30. But Federer averts the danger.

Updated at 9.44am GMT

9.41am GMT 

Second set: *Federer 7-6, 1-1 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Tsonga does just that. Boom, bang, boom, bang. A comfortable hold.

9.40am GMT 

Second set: Federer 7-6, 1-0 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

Federer, with the wind in his sails, holds to love, the highlight a great 
serve-and-volley point to get to 40-0. He then settles the game by coming in to 
dispatch an overhead. Tsonga must find a way of keeping pace with Federer now, 
who's looking calm, relaxed and in the zone. That's what sneaking the first set 
will do to you.

Updated at 9.41am GMT

9.37am GMT 

Federer wins the first set tie-break 7-4

... and a big slice of luck gets Federer to 5-2. A 207kph serve out wide from 
Tsonga, wow. That's three aces apiece now. 5-3. Federer looks to have the 
better of Tsonga on the next point, pushing and pulling and probing, but Tsonga 
somehow darts a forehand passing winner down the line. 5-4. Federer will still 
have two serves to settle this set, though. And that's all he needs. By far 
Federer's most testing set of the tournament so far, in which he was broken for 
the first time, but he's edged through. Tsonga will be disappointed, the way he 
came back at Federer in that set he will feel it was there for the taking.

9.31am GMT 

First set tie-break Federer 4-2 Tsonga

Tsonga thinks he's opened the breaker with an ace, but the umpire Jake Garner 
overrules, and Hawk-Eye confirms it was out. Federer goes on to get the 
mini-break and then consolidates it to go 2-0 ahead. The pair duke it out from 
the back of the court, but Tsonga, under little pressure, loses his footing and 
his forehand drops into the net. 3-0. Make that 3-2 after two explosive points 
from the Tsonga. You've got to love his showmanship. Federer then decides to 
get in on a bit of net-rushing action himself, 4-2. The pair change ends ...

9.27am GMT 

First set: Federer 6-6 Tsonga

Federer is starting to find a little more rhythm on his first serve now, as 
his percentage nudges over 50 for the first time. 15-all. A whipped Federer 
inside-out forehand leaves Tsonga skidding and sliding, 30-15. Another vicious 
inside-out forehand, another error from Tsonga, 40-15. And Federer then rounds 
things off with an ace out wide. A tie-break it is, then.

9.24am GMT 

First set: *Federer 5-6 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

A game of cat and mouse on the second point, Tsonga comes into the net before 
drawing in Federer too and emerging the victor. 30-0. Tsonga then puffs out his 
cheeks before firing a ferocious forehand down the line. 40-0. Such firepower 
from the Frenchman. And he then unleashes a bit more to take the game. "I am 
very impressesd with jo-willy game plan so far can he do this for the the whole 
match?" asks Brad Gilbert on Twitter.

9.21am GMT 

First set: Federer 5-5 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

15-0, 30-0, 40-0, game. Back to you, Mr Tsonga ...

9.21am GMT 

First set: *Federer 4-5 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

The commentators on Eurosport are debating how much of a factor Federer's lack 
of a warm-up event could be now he's at the business end of this tournament. 
His last competition was at the O2 back in November. If he hadn't met some 
tough opponents already in Bernard Tomic and Milos Raonic, you'd say maybe yes, 
it could harm him. But he's already been tested. And there's no doubt he's 
being tested here. Plenty of oooohs and aaaahs at 30-all, as Federer somehow 
retrieves a smash, leaving Tsonga bamboozled. 30-40. Federer sees a gap down 
the line, unwinds on the forehand, but nets. Deuce. And Tsonga then squeaks 
through. Federer must serve to stay in the first set.

9.14am GMT 

First set: Federer 4-4 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

With a hold to 15, but it's not entirely convincing. Federer's struggling to 
make his first serve, with his percentage down at 44%. He throws in a first 
double fault. But comes through nevertheless.

Updated at 9.14am GMT

9.11am GMT 

First set: *Federer 3-4 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Federer, having been broken, decides to change his racket. There's probably 
not much to read into that, though. He's most likely preparing himself for the 
new balls which will be coming up in a game's time. What looks like a routine 
hold for Tsonga at 40-0 suddenly becomes a bit more complicated as Federer gets 
to 40-30, with the longest rally of the match so far, 17 shots. But Tsonga then 
slams down a smash to hold to 30. He's ahead for the first time and is cranking 
up the pressure. How will Federer respond?

Updated at 1.21pm GMT

9.07am GMT 

First set: Federer 3-3 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

A few careless points from Federer. He concedes the first with a volley he 
probably didn't need to make, and the second with a miscued backhand. He glares 
at a camera which was apparently distracting him. See, it wasn't his fault. He 
regroups, as 0-30 quickly becomes 30-all which quickly becomes 40-30. A 
wonderful point then ensues, which Tsonga finishes off by coming into the net 
and dispatching a backhand stop volley. Great precision, the ball was coming at 
Tsonga fairly fast. Deuce. And then Tsongaabsolutely rips a winning forehand 
return to give himself break point. And this time he takes it. Fantastic 
hitting from the Frenchman.

9.02am GMT 

First set: *Federer 3-2 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

The pair trade cross-court backhand after cross-court backhand, Tsonga 
prevails, 30-0. He certainly seems to be picking on Federer's backhand side 
early on. From 40-0, Federer's best shot of the match so far, as he pings a 
forehand winner down the line on the run and on the stretch. 40-15. But that's 
as far as Federer gets as Tsonga holds to 15.

8.59am GMT 

First set: Federer 3-1 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

Tsonga is already so far behind the baseline, almost on a piece of string, 
being dragged from side to side and back and forth by Federer. But then he cuts 
himself free, and at 30-all, Federer completely shanks a backhand, which ends 
up in row Z. 30-40, break point. Federer dismisses the danger with a nonchalant 
swat. It looks like Tsonga might have twinged something in his back there, he's 
grimacing and clutching it. Deuce. Advantage Tsonga. Deuce. Advantage Federer. 
Game Federer.

8.54am GMT 

First set: *Federer 2-1 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

A game of fluctuations. Tsonga steams 40-0 ahead. Federer finds a way back to 
40-30. But Federer then goes for broke on the return, and it skips just long. A 
crucial hold for Tsonga, even so early in this match.

8.50am GMT 

First set: Federer 2-0 Tsonga* (*denotes next server)

Move on ladies and gents, there's little to see here. 15-0, 30-0, 40-0, game. 
These two have history, by the way. Federer surely hasn't forgotten his 
five-set defeat against Tsonga in the 2011 Wimbledon quarter-finals. It was the 
first time Federer had lost a grand slam match from two sets up. But the 
four-times champion has accounted for Tsonga in eight of their 11 past 
meetings, including a straight-sets defeat in theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> quarter-finals three years 
ago.

Updated at 1.24pm GMT

8.49am GMT 

First set: *Federer 1-0 Tsonga (*denotes next server)

Tsonga steps up to serve first in front of a packed Rod Laver Arena. His first 
serve goes well long, his second is slightly soft, and Federer is able to take 
command in the point before Tsonga goes wide. Tsonga restores early parity with 
a lovely backhand volley, expect plenty of forays to the net from the Frenchman 
today. 15-all. But then Federer charges ahead with two lightning points to 
bring up two early break chances, 15-40. Tsonga saves the first with a 130mph 
serve bomb, but is unable to fend off the second. The Frenchman bravely opts to 
serve-volley, but the volley sails into the tramlines. Game and break Federer.

8.41am GMT 

Tik, tok, tik, tok, tik, tok, the players are warming up. Both are wearing 
grey shirts and shorts, Tsonga's have a flash of yellow, while Federer is once 
again wearingthose pink shoes.

Updated at 8.42am GMT

8.38am GMT 

The players are winding their way through the corridors and on to court, 
Tsonga about 10 steps ahead, not wanting to make eye contact with Federer. And 
here's Clive Darwell, who reckons the bookies have got it right: "The 
bookmakers along with other sports fans know that early form counts for very 
little in major tournaments – and Fed's done it before, started well and then 
come unstuck especially in recent years." True. It's the business end that 
matters. And encouragingly for Murray, he did step it up a notch against Chardy 
earlier.

8.25am GMT 

This shows how good Federer was against Raonic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t5EX8YuIsik>. The audacity of it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5EX8YuIsik&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5EX8YuIsik>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5EX8YuIsik&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5EX8YuIsik&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5EX8YuIsik>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5EX8YuIsik&media=>
close 
8.10am GMT 

Preamble

Morning all. Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> 
could be forgiven for wondering what he needs to do to shake up the odds. The 
second seed started this Australian Open in the slightly skewed position of 
being the third favourite, and it’s a status he still has with the bookmakers 
despite his imperious form. While Novak Djokovic has already been taken to the 
brink and Andy Murray has taken a while to find his A game, Federer’s been in 
sublime touch from the off. He’s won all four of his matches in straight sets, 
hasn’t dropped his serve and dealt with the dangermen Bernard Tomic and Milos 
Raonic with frightening efficiency. The game’s greatest will perhaps feel he 
deserves more respect.

The question of R-E-S-P-E-C-T has been on Jo Wilfried-Tsonga’s mind too. "I've 
got a lot of respect for Federer outside of the court,” the seventh seed said 
ahead of their quarter-final, “but on the court, I have to – how you say – 
unrespect him? Because if you respect him too much, then for sure you lose. We 
have a good relationship in the locker room, but it's different on the court. 
On the court, I will try to beat him and I'm sure it's going to be the same 
thing for him."

This match-up is the statesman versus the showman, the 17-times grand slam 
champion against the explosive, unpredictable and flashy Frenchman. A few 
Melbourne loyalties may be divided; Tsonga is held in great affection in 
Australia after his breakthrough run to the final five years ago, while Federer 
is, well, Federer, revered wherever he goes. At least he’s got the crowd’s 
respect.

The winner will meet: Murray in the semi-finals.

The players will be on court at: 8.30am GMT.

Which gives you enough time to: Read up on Murray's 6-4, 6-1, 6-2 win over 
Jérémy Chardy, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/23/andy-murray-chardy-australian-open>
and the upset to gazump all upsets so far,Serena Williams's defeat 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/23/serena-williams-out-australian-open>
 to the 19-year-old American dubbed the "new Serena", Sloane Stephens.

Updated at 8.31am GMT
 