
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jo-wilfried-tsonga> 
provided little more than a sparring session for Roger Federer before the Swiss 
turns his guns on Andy Murray â€“ and the exciting young Frenchman does not think 
much of the Scot's chances.

Federer was so totally in control after a brief tussle at the start that the 
scoreline of 6-2, 6-3, 6-2 disguised his dominance. He outserved Tsonga, he 
toyed with him from deep and at the net, he found little challenge in any but 
his few brief attacks in the first set and, generally, left feeling as good 
about his game as it is possible for the world No1 to feel.

If he played like that in the final, Tsonga was asked, was there anyone who 
could beat him? "I think ... nobody," he said.

What could Murray do to stop Federer? Longish pause, then: "I don't know, I 
don't know."

Did he have any advice for Murray, then? "Advice? Be ready to run."

If that is not a depressing report card for Murray as he works out a game plan 
for Sunday, nothing is. It reflected reality, too.

Federer was, as the Australians say, awesome. And he barely got out of third 
gear. From the moment he broke Tsonga in the first set the match turned from 
contest to punishment. Tsonga developed a stitch or some sort of stomach 
complaint when he found himself stuck deep in the trenches, but Federer was not 
concerned about the quality of his opponent or his hunger for the fight. This 
was a result, pure and simple.

"I didn't expect something even close to this kind of scoreline," Federer 
said. "The crowd was rather on the quiet side towards the end because they were 
also a bit surprised how fast it went."

The great man was fed a couple of sycophantic lines, and bit. Yes, he agreed, 
that he might be at "Federer-plus" now. "I'm hitting the ball well. I'm not 
panicking. Jo is a talented player, with a lot of potential. I'm sure we're 
going to see much more of him in the future. This is probably the last easy 
match I have against him.

"[There was] no wasted energy, that's for sure. I was very surprised the way 
the match went. He's got great potential, but tonight maybe he let his head 
hang a bit."

What of his motivation, though? With a record 15 grand slam titles to his 
name, would it be an effort to get himself up for a 16th? "I spent three weeks 
here," he said, "and I don't want to just give away a match. So, I will make it 
as hard, as tough as possible, for my opponent. I'm really where I want to be. 
Being back in a grand slam final is always an amazing thrill for me."

En route, it provided a frisson for Tsonga, one that passed in the blinking of 
an eye as a genius blurred in front of him. Federer's tennis is in phenomenal 
shape. He has struggled briefly earlier, but this semi-final fine-tuned his 
tennis to threatening levels of all-round competence. Murray has his work cut 
out.
 