
Two sets of high-definition images of Myanmar taken from outer space: both are 
shot in the morning, both show the same villages populated byRohingya Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> of Rakhine state. The first set, 
collected from 2014, displays a small collection of homes where the virtually 
stateless minority has settled. The buildings, lying between trees and set back 
from dirt roads, number more than 100. In the second set of images, taken in 
the past two months, the homes have vanished, and all that remains is square 
patches of burnt earth.

Provided by Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/supporting_resources/hrw_burmadestruction_assessment_10nov2016_v3.pdf>
, the images reveal 430 buildings that have been destroyed in three different 
villages, and support the claim from aUnited Nations official 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-38091816> that Myanmar is seeking the 
“ethnic cleansing of the Muslim Rohingya” from its territory.

After nine border officers were killed 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/10/attack-kills-myanmar-police-bangladesh-border-161010132157512.html>
 on 9 October, the region’s Muslim minority – already excluded, impoverished 
and persecuted – has once again fallen victim to a sharp increase in targeted 
violent attacks. Over the past two months, around 10,000 Rohingya Muslims have 
fled to Bangladesh <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-38168917> and, 
according toAmnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/11/bangladesh-pushes-back-rohingya-refugees-amid-collective-punishment-in-myanmar/>
, eyewitness accounts from those refugees suggest that “Myanmar’s security 
forces, led by the military”, are “torching hundreds of homes”.

The human rights group has also accused the Myanmar military of “firing at 
villagers from helicopter gunships,” carrying out “arbitrary arrests” and 
“raping women and girls”. TheUN 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=55595#.WFrJ0TaLRyp> has added 
torture, summary executions and the destruction of mosques to this list.

In Rakhine state, the camps where Rohingya Muslims had been forced into living 
were horrific

There are an estimated 1 million Rohingya Muslims – just one of many ethnic 
minorities groups – living in Buddhist-majority Myanmar. Despite living in 
Rakhsne state for generations,Rohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> Muslims are seen by many in the 
country not as fellow citizens but as illegal immigrants from Bangladesh.

A series of violent clashes 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/96801/briefing-myanmars-rohingya-crisis> in 
2012 left 100,000 displaced. The following year I visited Myanmar with Refugees 
International and the Burma Campaign UK. During this trip we heard stories of 
how Rohingya communities had fled from violent attacks to the remote areas of 
the countryside. In Rakhine state, the camps where Rohingya Muslims had been 
forced into living were horrific, and in many cases people were cut off from 
life-saving humanitarian aid and access to healthcare.

I travelled by boat to a UNHCR-supported camp in Pauktaw, and have vivid 
memories of the shores near the camps being covered in faeces, with dead rats 
floating just metres from where children were bathing to keep cool in the 
unbearable heat. I can also remember the exhaustion, the trauma and the fear on 
the faces of so many who had only known lives ofsegregation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/jun/03/burma-rohingya-segregation>
and are subjected to racial discrimination everyday. I also remember being told 
of stories of loved ones being killed, of children dying for lack of access to 
healthcare, and of women dying at child birth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frohingya-muslims-myanmar-aung-san-suu-kyi-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2afc12a6c8374ade72c2374561f1300b77ad8c50%2F0_277_5125_3075%2F5125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rohingya%20Muslims%20in%20Myanmar%20are%20suffering.%20The%20world%20mustn%E2%80%99t%20look%20away%20%7C%20Rushanara%20Ali&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frohingya-muslims-myanmar-aung-san-suu-kyi-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rohingya%20Muslims%20in%20Myanmar%20are%20suffering.%20The%20world%20mustn%E2%80%99t%20look%20away%20%7C%20Rushanara%20Ali&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frohingya-muslims-myanmar-aung-san-suu-kyi-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2afc12a6c8374ade72c2374561f1300b77ad8c50%2F0_277_5125_3075%2F5125.jpg>
 Rohingya children attend school in the Dar Paing unregistered internal 
displacement camp in Sittwe, Myanmar. Photograph: Lauren DeCicca/Getty Images 
Since Myanmar passed the citizenship law in 1982, full citizenship in Myanmar 
is based, according toBurma Campaign UK 
<http://burmacampaign.org.uk/media/Myanmar%E2%80%99s-1982-Citizenship-Law-and-Rohingya.pdf>
, on being a member of the “national races” – a category awarded only to those 
who are “considered to have settled in Myanmar prior to 1824, the date of the 
first occupation by the British”. In Myanmar’s national census of 2014, the 
Muslim minority group was initially allowed to self-identify as “Rohingya”, but 
the government later reversed this freedom and deemed that they could only be 
identified as“Bengali” 
<http://www.cfr.org/burmamyanmar/rohingya-migrant-crisis/p36651>.

This has left the Rohingya open to discrimination and mistreatment. Denied the 
right to education and equal employment, and given only limited access to 
healthcare, they have endured intolerable conditions. InMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> in 2013, I walked around hospital 
wards that segregated the sick by their religion.

Many Rohingya Muslims flee Myanmar by boat from the Bay of Bengal in the hope 
of reaching Bangladesh, Thailand, Malaysia or Indonesia. As their situation has 
continued to deteriorate over the last year, thousands have attempted to cross 
a stretch of water that isthree times more deadly 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53298#.WFrKgjaLRyq> for refugees 
than the Mediterranean. According to the UN, they are often “stranded at sea on 
overcrowded boats, controlled by traffickers and people smugglers”, with many 
“beaten and held hostage for ransom”.

Myanmar's Rohingya campaign 'may be crime against humanity'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/myanmars-rohingya-campaign-may-be-against-humanity>
Despite last year’s historic elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/aung-san-suu-kyi-wins-myanmar-landmark-election>
 – which supposedly began the end of 50 years of military rule – the rights and 
freedoms of Rohingya Muslims have not improved. Eight months before polling 
day, the president of Myanmar revoked all temporary registration cards, leaving 
many Rohingya Muslims without any form ofidentity document 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/asia-and-the-pacific/myanmar/report-myanmar/>
 and hence unable to cast their vote.

Despite her election victory, human rights campaigner Aung San Suu Kyi – who’d 
been under house arrest for 15 years – was prevented from becoming president 
and instead assumed the role of “state counsellor”. There was a great sense of 
hope that once in office, the Nobel peace prize winner would stand up against 
any rights violations against Rohingya and other persecuted minorities. 
However, with control over national security still in the hands of the 
military, not much has changed – in fact the treatment, support and defence of 
Rohingya Muslims has deteriorated. Journalists arenot allowed to enter 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/11/17/burma-allow-access-investigate-abuses-rakhine-state>
 the region.

Two weeks ago, 70 British parliamentarians 
<http://www.rushanaraali.org/letter-calling-for-the-protection-of-rohingya-muslims/>
 wrote to the UK foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, urging the government to 
intensify its pressure on the Myanmar government to allow full humanitarian aid 
and access to Rakhine state. We are still waiting for a reply. Britain, along 
with the international community, needs to urgently listen to these voices and 
increase its efforts to ensure that alleged abuses are investigated, and that 
the violent campaign against Rohingya Muslims is ended. Minorities in Myanmar 
deserve the chance to live in peace.
 