
On Wednesday evening, my new novel, Merivel: A Man of His Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/14/merivel-rose-tremain-review> 
failed to win the handsomeWellcome Trust book prize 
<http://www.wellcomebookprize.org/>, open to both fiction and non-fiction, and 
founded to celebrate "medicine in literature".Merivel tells the story of a 
roguish 17th-century doctor's attempts to anatomise his own life.

The prize went to Thomas Wright for his historical biography of William Harvey,
Circulation.

Over a lifetime in writing, I've had numerous opportunities to perfect the art 
of not winning. I've been shortlisted for but not won theMan Booker prize 
<http://www.themanbookerprize.com/people/rose-tremain>, the Whitbread book of 
the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/culturevultureblog+books/rose-tremain>, 
the Costa novel prize, the Orange prize (won at the second attempt in 2007) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/05/orangeprizeforfiction2008.orangeprizeforfiction>
the Frank O'Connor short story award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/frankoconnoraward>, the Impac award 
<http://www.impacdublinaward.ie/>, the Galaxy "Book of the Year" award and the 
Radio 3 short story award. These ubiquitous non-wins meant that, last night, my 
facial muscles were so well practised in the "non-winners smile" that it could 
be summoned in a nanosecond.

My mind, too, has become nicely obedient to correct "non-winning thought", 
which is a slightly more difficult and complex thing. I could compare it to a 
military operation in which defeat appears to loom, but where the wise general 
decides to retreat, in order to protect the forces that remain. Those remaining 
forces are the book itself. It's still there, after all. It hasn't even 
suffered the wounding that can sometimes be inflicted by critics. It has just 
"not won". It has almost won, but not quite. It is evidently vain to see this 
as a catastrophe.

Some measure of depression, however, almost always creeps in. A "non-win" is 
of course a loss. My hero, Robert Merivel reflects "how astonishing it is that 
Man attempts any Thing of Significance … when part of him knows that if he 
fails, all his former contentment will be lost." I think that he, who dreams of 
presenting learned monographs at the Royal Society, would agree that being 
shortlisted for a major prize is a Thing of Significance, even if, we, the 
authors didn't precisely "attempt it" – our publishers attempted it, but it was 
the book that failed. And here arises the further difficulty to be surmounted 
by correct non-winning thought: the non-winner is inclined to feel guilty at 
letting the publishers down.

We feel it because we know how much they care about it, or at least about the 
enhanced sales that prize-winners trail in their wake. I was slightly amazed, 
for instance, at last year's Booker dinner, by how choked with dread were the 
Cape contingent at the idea of a non-win for Julian Barnes for The Sense of an 
Ending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/26/sense-ending-julian-barnes-review1>
. I suspect that, cool and clever as he is, he would have coped better with 
this outcome than his publishing team, on whose behalf he might well have felt 
guilty. (He won, right? So he didn't have to endure this.) But author/publisher 
guilt is, in my view, strenuously to be fought. Although it is certainly 
self-imposed, having to suffer it doesn't seem fair or just.

Assume, then, that the non-winner can lay this aside, there is a yet third 
hurdle to be scrambled over. The most significant hurdle of all is finding the 
resources to defeat the almost inevitable 48-hour blues that follow the 
non-win, and the energy to return to the work in hand, unaffected by what's 
just happened to a different book. Every writer I know feels more or less 
contented or discontented with day-to-day life according to how his or her 
writing is going. Many, many things will affect this, but I know that the 
non-win of a prize can seem to infect the ongoing work with a badness-virus and 
lay the author low. What's on the page or screen – in which there had been 
stubborn belief, perhaps even garlanded a bit with excitement – can suddenly 
appear less than first-rate. Sentences crease and bend. Dialogue sounds wan. 
Even the ideas which inform the book can buckle at the knees.

The art of surviving this is simply the art of keeping on. Time and hard work 
will heal the poor ravaged thing. In the work lies the future. In the future 
may lie other shortlists and other wins or non-wins. And so the whole darn 
desperate process begins again …

My greatest ally in the art of not winning is the late HarperCollins editor 
and humourist, Patricia Parkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/30/patricia-parkin-obituary>. It 
was her amused ghost I summoned on Wednesday to keep my smile in place and my 
mind steady. She was among a group of close friends who attended the Frank 
O'Connor award non-win with me in 2005. (The prize was deservedly won by the 
marvellous Chinese writer, Yiyun Li 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/apr/13/yiyun-li-life-writing-interview>
.) My contingent had flown to Cork, Patricia's cancer notwithstanding, put up 
at a hotel where a water-feature cascaded down the walls of the bar, changed 
into smart clothes, drunk some Guinness, and climbed unsteadily into a people 
carrier. By this time, we were all definitely in the mood for winning.

The event took place in a part of the town hall that seemed to resemble a 
school gymnasium. Laid out on tables was a buffet, whose principal offerings 
were plates of potato sandwiches. And when my non-win was announced, Patricia 
brought me some of these. "Look! A potato sandwich, Rose!" she said. "What 
greater compensation could you ask for?" Since then I've always referred to my 
numerous non-wins as "potato sandwiches". In my family, the "potato sandwich" 
has become a code for failing to get what the world of football calls a 
"result", and it is very useful in the disappointment arena because it never 
fails to make us all smile. But on that distant evening in Cork I also remember 
Patricia's silently-mouthed fury on my behalf: "B*****! S***! F***! And B***** 
again!" Quite so. And that's the delirious, uncool version of the non-winning 
response, to which – despite all the rationalisation I've just indulged in – I 
can so easily give way.
 