
 Rowan Atkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/Film/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,45355,00.html> is 
reportedly in negotiations to play the role of the villain Mondavarious in the 
forthcoming Scooby-Doo film, according to theHollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com>. The much-anticipated film (see earlier story
 <https://www.theguardian.com/Film/News_Story/Exclusive/0,,424925,00.html>) 
will starSarah Michelle Geller 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Gellar,+Sarah+Michelle> as Daphne, alongside 
real-life boyfriend Freddie Prinze Jr who will play Fred. The production starts 
filming in Australia on February 13.

 Full Monty star Mark Addy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/Film/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,37769,00.html> has 
signed up to star opposite Guy Pearce in The Time Machine, based on the classic 
novel by HG Wells about an inventor who creates a machine that allows him to 
travel 800,000 years into the future. According to theHollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com>, Wells's great-grandson, Simon Wells, will 
direct the project from a script by Gladiator scribe John Logan. Filming begins 
on February 4.

 R&B singer, Aaliyah <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Aaliyah>, who made her 
acting debut in last year's Romeo Must Die, has been added to the cast of the 
sequels toThe Matrix <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0133093>, reports Variety 
<http://www.variety.com>. Aaliyah will play a character named Zee who is likely 
to become more prominent in The Matrix 3 which is due to be shot immediately 
after the second instalment. Original cast members Keanu Reeves, Carrie-Anne 
Moss, Laurence Fishburne and Hugo Weaving are back on board for the sequels, 
and Jada Pinkett Smith has been added to the cast as Niobi, the love interest 
for Fishburne's character.

 The solo film debut of former Spice Girl Geri Halliwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/geri-halliwell> has been delayed for more 
than a year due to an unworkable script. Halliwell is due to earn $1.6m 
(£1.09m) for the lead role in Therapy, a drama about a girl who has an affair 
with her shrink. Filming, which was due to start in September last year, now 
looks unlikely to go ahead until at least 2002. A spokesman for the singer told 
reporters: '"The script is currently undergoing its sixth or seventh rewrite. 
There are usually up to 15 rewrites and movies can take up to four years from 
start to finish. Filming might not even start this year. We can't say for sure 
when filming will start as the process of script development and pre-production 
takes so long."
 