
Two of the Royal Court's bestselling productions in recent years are to be 
remounted in theWest End <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> this 
summer.

Posh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/16/posh-royal-court-billington> and 
Jumpy <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/20/jumpy-review>, written by 
Laura Wade and April de Angelis respectively, will play consecutive limited 
runs of three months each at the Duke of York's Theatre from May. Both plays 
enjoyed sell-out runs on their first outings at the Royal Court.

Posh, which shows an Oxbridge drinking society not dissimilar to the infamous 
Bullingdon club, first played at the Court in 2010, coinciding with the last 
general election and achieving 100% capacity. Lyndsey Turner will direct a new 
cast and previews start on 11 May.

It will be immediately followed by last year's hit Jumpy, with Tamsin Greig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tamsin-greig> returning as Hilary, a 
mother struggling with middle age and an unruly teenage daughter. Nina Raine's 
production, further casting for which has not been announced, will run between 
16 August and 3 November.

Dominic Cooke, the Royal Court's artistic director, said the two plays were 
linked by "searching questions about who we are in Britain today, about the 
relationship we have to our traditions and the forces that shape our lives".

The season, which will overlap with the London Olympics, marks the 
continuation of the Royal Court's relationship  
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/about-us/timeline/>with the Duke of York's 
Theatre and its owners Ambassador Theatre Group, who will co-produce. In 1996, 
the Court relocated its operations to the West End venue for three years while 
its Sloane Square home was being refurbished. Since then, the Duke of York's 
has hosted a number of Royal Court transfers, including Tom Stoppard's Rock 'n' 
Roll and Polly Stenham's That Face, as well as a revival of David Eldridge's 
Under the Blue Sky in 2008, starring Catherine Tate.

Posh and Jumpy will be the sixth and seventh Royal Court productions to 
transfer to the West End under Cooke â€“ one for each year of his tenure as 
artistic director,which will end next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/dec/19/royal-court-director-step-down>. 
The theatre will also present an off-Broadway production of Mike Bartlett's 
Cock later this year.

Howard Panter, joint CEO and creative director of Ambassador Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Group, said: "With Dominic Cooke at 
the artistic helm the Royal Court has been responsible for some of the best 
theatre that has ever been produced in the UK, and under his inspired 
leadership the Court has enjoyed a golden period."

Cooke added: "As the world focuses its attention on London for the Olympics, 
it's a great moment for the Royal Court to mark its groundbreaking contribution 
to British culture, and the leading role British playwrights take in theatre 
across the world, with a season in the West End."
 