
Royal Dutch Shell <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royaldutchshell> have 
announced they will end their membership of the far-right American Legislative 
Exchange Council (Alec) because of its continuing denial of the science of 
climate change.

In a statement released on Friday, a Shell spokesman said: “Alec advocates for 
specific economic growth initiatives, but its stance on climate change is 
clearly inconsistent with our own.”


Shell joins fellow oil major BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/23/alec-bp-british-petroleum-companies-conservative-lobbyist>
 in a corporate exodus from the conservative, free-market lobby group. Shell’s 
decision comes after sustained pressure from campaign groups, in particularthe 
Union of Concerned Scientists 
<http://blog.ucsusa.org/shell-promises-climate-risk-disclosure-to-shareholders-but-what-about-its-political-spending-607>
 (UCS), for Shell to stop funding Alec. The group’sposition statement 
<http://www.alec.org/position-statement-renewables-climate-change/> on climate 
change calls it an “historical phenomenon”.

“The debate will continue on the significance of natural and anthropogenic 
contributions,” it reads. Alec has lead anassault on renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/04/alec-freerider-homeowners-assault-clean-energy>
 that observers are concerned could significantly hamper the industry.

The move was flagged by Shell CEO Ben van Beurden in an interview with the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/22/shell-boss-endorses-warnings-about-fossil-fuels-and-climate-change>
 in May when he was confronted over the company’s continued funding of climate 
denial. He defended Shell’s membership on the grounds that Alec worked on a 
broad range of policy issues, but “watch this space”, he said.

Shell’s spokesman said: “We have long recognised both the importance of the 
climate challenge and the critical role energy has in determining quality of 
life for people across the world. As part of an ongoing review of memberships 
and affiliations, we will be letting our association with Alec lapse when the 
current contracted term ends early next year.”

Shell’s departure from the controversial lobbying network comes at a time when 
several major companies linked to fossil fuels have been quietly severing ties. 
The Guardian has learned that the Canadian National Railway has similarly 
pulled its membership, albeit without making any public announcement about it.

The railway company is a major carrier of coal in Canada as well as in the US. 
A spokesman for the firm confirmed the break in relations with Alec but 
declined to comment.


Environmentalists were quick to point out that leaving Alec was not synonymous 
with positively contributing to the challenge of climate change. Last week Shell
recommenced drilling in the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/31/portland-bridge-shell-protest-kayaktivists-fennica-reaction>
, a programme the company hopes will open up ten of billions of barrels of new 
oil reserves but theInternational Energy Agency says 
<http://www.iea.org/newsroomandevents/speeches/150420Norway_BarentsSeaConference.pdf>
 is unnecessary to secure global energy supply.

Charlie Kronick, a Greenpeace senior programme adviser, said: “Shell is being 
dragged kicking and screaming out of Alec due to investor and public pressure. 
But they have a long way to go to bridge the massive gap between the reality of 
their business plans, most notably their catastrophic plan to drill in the 
Arctic, their other anti-climate lobbying, and their claimed leadership on 
climate change.”

Nick Surgey, director of research at the Center for Media and Democracy, said: 
“It’s obviously a positive step for Shell to stop funding Alec and its climate 
change denial. Other oil companies should join them. Unfortunately this is 
another occasion when Shell’s positive language about climate change doesn’t 
match their actions. Drilling for oil in the Arctic might turn a profit for 
Shell, but it must be stopped if we want to avoid catastrophic climate change.”

Alec is reportedly facing a funding crisis after losing many of the world’s 
biggest corporations from its stable in recent years. Amazon, Coca-Cola, 
General Electric, Kraft, McDonald’s, Walmart, Google, Yahoo, Facebook, eBay and 
Yelpall left the group after its stand-your-ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/alec-funding-crisis-big-donors-trayvon-martin>
 campaign on gun control after the 2012 killing of teenager Trayvon Martin.

Angela Anderson, director of UCS’s climate and energy programme, said Shell’s 
public position on climate change and advocacy for a carbon price had been 
undermined by its membership of Alec.


Shell maintains its membership of the American Petroleum Institute, an 
organisation that hasfunded the production of doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/27/what-happened-to-lobbyists-who-tried-reshape-us-view-climate-change>
 about climate science. US oil giants Chevron and ExxonMobil remain members of 
Alec.

“It’s simply untenable for companies to ask policymakers to adopt a carbon 
price while supporting groups that fight climate and clean energy policies and 
spread misinformation about climate science,” she said.

News of the Shell move comes four days after Barack Obama announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obama-epa-carbon-emissions-cuts-power-plants-climate-change>
 his “clean power plan” that would impose sweeping curbs to emissions from 
power plants. The job of implementing the target of reducing overall carbon 
emissions by 32% below 2005 levels by 2030 will fall to the federal agency the 
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Alec is a leading antagonist of the EPA, and as such is at the forefront of 
lobbying efforts to undermine Obama’s ambition to combat climate change. In 
October, Alec’s energy, environment and agriculture sub-committee discussed a 
proposal to lobby Congressto eliminate the EPA altogether 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2191173-alec-oct-2014.html> and 
delegate its powers to individual states.

At its most recent summit in San Diego last July, Alec launched a new 
initiative <https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2191172-alec-san-diego.html>
 that encourages the creation of litigation funds by state attorneys general. 
The funds, which could be injected with capital from corporations, would be 
used by state officials to issue legal challenges to Obama’s new climate 
change, thus clogging them up in the courts.

 