
1813 was an auspicious year for music. Not only were Wagner 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/richard-wagner> and Verdi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/giuseppe-verdi> born, but in London a group of 
musicians met to form a society with what was then a radical vision: "To 
promote the performance in the most perfect manner possible, of the best … 
instrumental music, and to encourage an appreciation by the public in the art 
of music." Two hundred years later, the Royal Philharmonic Society (the royal 
moniker was awarded on their centenary) has stayed remarkably true to those 
founding principles and next year celebrates its bicentenary.

Royal Philharmonic Society chair John Gilhooly announced plans on Wednesday 
for celebrations in the UK and the US. At their heart will be Beethoven. The 
society's most famous commission is the composer's 9th symphony, and tribute 
will be paid to this extraordinary and revolutionary work on two occasions next 
summer. On 8 August theNational Youth Orchestra <http://www.nyo.org.uk/>, 
National Youth Choirs of Great Britain <http://www.nycgb.net/> and young 
singers from across Ireland will perform it at theDerry-Londonderry City of 
Culture 2013 <http://www.cityofculture2013.com/> celebrations, while at the BBC 
Proms <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/proms-2012>, the NYO will again perform 
the piece alongside the premiere of a major new orchestral work co-commissioned 
by the RPS, the BBC and theNew York Philharmonic <http://nyphil.org/>. And a 
rarely seen 19th-century bust of the composer 
<http://www.royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/rps_since_1813/key_moments/beethovens_bust/>
 that was presented to the society on the centenary ofBeethoven 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/ludwig-van-beethoven>'s birth will be dusted 
off to take pride of place at celebrationary concerts nationwide throughout the 
year – as it used to.

New commissions will, of course, be a prominent feature of the celebrations: 
the society has commissioned works from 16 different composers – more than in 
any other year. These includeHarrison Birtwistle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/14/contemporary-composers-guide-harrison-birtwistle>
,Wolfgang Rihm 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/sep/24/tom-service-guide-wolfgang-rihm>
 andJudith Weir 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/28/judith-weir-contemporary-composers-guide>
, three of the six composers co-commissioned by the society and the
Britten-Pears Foundation <http://www.brittenpears.org/> to write a work in 
response toBenjamin Britten <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/benjamin-britten>
's music in what will be a double celebration of the RPS and the centenary of 
Britten's birth.

The actual 200th anniversary of the society's founding – 24 January – will be 
marked by a concert at the Royal Festival Hall at which thePhilharmonia 
Orchestra <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/philharmonia-orchestra> will perform 
works by Mendelssohn,Dvořák <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/antonin-dvorak> and
Brahms <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/johannes-brahms>, three of the many 
composers who have been associated with the society over the past 200 years.

Speaking at the launch, RPS gold medal-holder Alfred Brendel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/alfred-brendel> urged the society to continue 
to "grow old disgracefully". "Please keep commissioning composers, keep 
supporting musicians, keep talking about music and keep championing 
excellence," he said.

An exhibition, a dedicated website <http://www.rps200.org> and even an iPad 
app will all help explore the society's rich musical history.
 