
Companies with Scottish links have moved sharply higher in early trading as 
the stock market gave the thumbs up to the outcome of the referendum vote, 
albeit perhaps not as enthusiastically as expected.

With the financial sector a key area for Scotland, Royal Bank of Scotland is 
leading the way and has risen 12.7p or 3.5% to 369.9p,Lloyds Banking Group is 
up 1.33p to 77.20p or 1.8%,Standard Life has added 6.4p to 422.1p or 1.6%.

Ian Gordon at Investec said:
 RBS shares have already enjoyed a moderate (4.4%) rally in anticipation of 
Scotland's historic reaffirmation of the Union with England, Wales and Northern 
Ireland. Following confirmation of a decisive "No" vote (around 55%-45%), we 
expect a broad-based relief rally this morning, to include the three UK banks 
with actual or perceived Scottish exposure. Thereafter, we see little further 
upside for RBS or TSB (hold), so close our trading buy on both names. On 
fundamentals, Lloyds (buy) remains our preferred "Scottish" bank.

Aberdeen Asset Management has added 8.1p to 443.6p while St James Place - one 
of the wealth management companies with clients in Scotland - is up 27.5p at 
727.5p.

Elsewhere SSE is 48p higher at £15.69 while and Babcock International is 35p 
better at £11.BAE Systems has climbed 6.6p to 474.2p. Sash Tusa, analyst at 
Edison Investment Research said:
 Scotland is hugely important for the naval industry and BAE, Babcock and 
Serco would have taken the brunt of the anticipated Scottish spending cuts so 
we expect to see a recovery in their share prices today. 
Companies with exposure to the North Sea oil industry have also moved higher. 
Liberum analysts said:
 The Scottish no vote should address market concerns over the future of the 
North Sea fiscal regime and many exploration and production companies should 
bounce today. 
So Petrofac has put on 30p to £10.79 while pump maker Weir is up 68p at £26.98.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 44.62 points at 6863.91, compared to a 
futures forecast of around 81 points. Trevor Greetham at Fidelity Worldwide 
Investment said:
 With the way clear for Bank of England rate hikes once more it is no surprise 
that sterling is rallying. The impact on the overall stock market isn't as 
large as you might expect as the many exporters in the FTSE stand to lose out 
from a stronger currency even as the financials with Scottish links bounce back. 