
The RSA boss, Stephen Hester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stephen-hester>, said the ball was in 
Zurich’s court over any potential bid for the UK insurer as he reported 
better-than-expected half-year results.

But shares in RSA dropped as Zurich warned it would not overpay.

With Zurich considering whether to make a formal offer which could value RSA 
at £5.5bn, Hester said: “The prospects for RSA as an independent company are 
strong but we will be professional in examining in other alternatives should 
they occur.”

Hester, who took the helm 18 months ago in the midst of accounting 
irregularities at RSA’s Irish arm, said his was “a company that is getting more 
valuable” and it was up to the Swiss rival to make its intentions clear.

Zurich has until 25 August to table a bid for RSA and Eamonn Flanagan, analyst 
at brokers Shore Capital, said the “gloves have come off and the bidding 
process can start in earnest”. Flanagan listed the major continental European 
insurers Allianz and Generali as potential bidders.

Zurich’s interest was flushed out last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/28/zurich-insurance-rsa-bid>, 
bolstering RSA’s share price amid expectations that it could table 550p a 
share. However, Zurich’s boss, Martin Senn, expressed caution about the value 
of any offer. “Any capital deployment would need to meet the same hurdles that 
we apply to any other investment,” Senn said, as Zurich disappointed investors 
with its half-year results.

However, RSA could “bring significant benefits to us and to our investors”, 
Senn said.

RSA’s shares jumped almost 20% to518p on hopes of the bid approach, although 
they dipped 2.6% to 510p on Thursday afternoon.

The Telegraph reported 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/banksandfinance/insurance/11785771/Zurich-homes-in-on-lower-price-for-possible-RSA-bid.html>
 that Zurich could be planning to lower its bid to about 525p a share, although 
Zurich would not comment on any potential price.


The stockbroking firm Panmure Gordon said: “Whilst we think that an offer by 
Zurich is likely, given comments by Zurich today that any offer would have to 
meet its investment hurdle rates, we believe that it would be prudent to 
tactically ‘take some money off the table’ in case a deal is not agreed.”

RSA’s combined ratio – a measure of payouts compared with premiums – came in 
at 96.9%, better than the 100.3% recorded for the same period last year.


Pre-tax profits in the first six months of the year were £288m, much higher 
than the £69m for the same period last year and better than the £235m expected 
by analysts.


Hester said they were “excellent results” and that RSA had moved from the 
bottom to the middle of the class, although there was still room for 
improvement.

“The dunce’s cap can be passed to someone else,” he said. “We feel we are back 
in respectable territory with our financial results.”

The RSA boss pointed to the combined ratio of 93.1% posted on Thursday by rival
Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> as the direction in 
which he wanted the company to travel.

Hester said RSA was running ahead of schedule with its drive to cut costs by 
£250m by 2017. Results had also been aided by better weather in the UK compared 
with 2014.

The UK accounted for £144m of the £259m group operating profit, which was up 
by £118m, or 84%, on the back of sharply higher underwriting profits and stable 
investment income. Profits for Canada were £92m and £55m in Scandinavia. RSA 
reinstated the interim dividend at 3.5p.

Hester joined RSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/04/stephen-hester-rsa-insurance-ceo-rbs>
 in February 2014, six months after leaving Royal Bank of Scotland abruptly as 
the bailed-out bank geared up for privatisation. The first sale of the 
government’s 79% stake took place this week, reducing the stake to below 73% but
securing a £1bn loss on the shares sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/04/rbs-sell-off-george-osborne-defends-1bn-loss>
.

Hester said he was thrilled for his former colleagues. “In a sense we had 
started this some years ago but I’m also realistic that the obstacle was a 
political one and it needed a change in the political strength of the 
government to take the step of selling below the in price,” he said. RBS would 
fare better with less government involvement, he said.

Zurich reported a second-quarter business operating profit of $943m (£604m), 
which analysts at Citi said was 18% lower than estimated. Citi said a 
worse-than-expected general insurance result was not helped by higher than 
usual large and attritional losses in the UK and other markets.

“These are clearly disappointing results. However, for us the key driver 
remains the potential RSA bid and the possible synergies this may entail,” Citi 
said.



 