
In the midst of writing a completely different column about rather dull 
figures and charts and what they might mean for the future of the media 
industry, a tweet caught my eye containingAlan Rusbridger’s farewell to readers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/29/farewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian>
 after 20 years of editing the Guardian. At the risk of being lambasted as a 
toady, I would urge others to read it, as it gives a tremendous sense of what 
all media companies have grappled with over the past 20 years; namely 
preserving cultural value and institutional strength while changing at the 
lightning speed required by the adoption of new technology.

For those of us who, like Rusbridger, might be looking forward to putting our 
feet up and watching the latest series fromAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> or Netflix, the next 20 years 
look no less frenetic but really quite different. We are going from a building 
phase to a buying phase of media growth.

Twenty years ago was perhaps one of the most significant phases in modern 
communications as consumer access to the internet was in its infancy.Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> was just launching its first 
web browser, Internet Explorer, the global penetration rate of mobile phone 
ownership was 1%, and the world’s largest internet company was Netscape valued 
at more than a whopping $5bn. Amazon was starting life as a bookseller in Jeff 
Bezos’s garage, and Larry Page had just enrolled in the Stanford PhD programme 
where he would bump into fellow student Sergey Brin and write a thesis paper 
which became Google.

The story of the past two decades for almost all media companies has been 
dictated by scale. Those who could achieve it, the Amazons and Googles (and in 
a different sphere even the Guardian) and those that couldn’t, or that lost it, 
in a new global market for information. Google’s market capitalisation now of 
$373bn makes it just about half the size ofApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, another beneficiary of the 
internet age, but so much larger than anyone would have thought possible only 
two decades ago.

Last week, the annual presentation by influential Silicon Valley venture 
capital investor Mary Meeker on Internet Trends 
<http://kpcbweb2.s3.amazonaws.com/files/90/Internet_Trends_2015.pdf?1432738078> 
outlined this huge growth trajectory, but suggested that the rocketing growth 
of the first 20 years is now slowing, as we run out of digital worlds to 
conquer. Of course less than 40% of the world’s population have an internet 
connection, but 5 billion have mobile phones.

The pace of change is taking a new direction, powered by the mobility of 
information and data, but the achievement of scale is beginning to shake out 
what was once a very fragmented media world into a more consolidated set of 
businesses, as low interest rates and a sense of nervousness about future 
revenues is pushing a significant wave of mergers and acquisitions.

Media headlines have been devoted over last week to the relatively smaller 
potatoes oftech journalism start-up Re/Code being acquired by another new media 
company Vox Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/26/vox-media-to-take-over-tech-site-recode-amid-digital-media-shakeup>
, which in turn might, if rumours are correct, be swallowed by the decidedly 
larger potato, Comcast.

Media owners and pundits shook their heads rather dourly at the figures which 
revealed that Re/code has a staff of 44 and “only” 1.5 million unique visitors 
a month on the web. One might think 1.5 million people reading nerdy stories 
about technology businesses on a monthly basis is quite large, but on the web, 
where advertising is a fraction of the value of print and on mobile where 
advertising is a fraction of the value of the web, it isn’t adequate.

Although Kara Swisher and Walt Mossberg’s well-respected site found the 
majority of its revenues in conferences, the conclusion most reached was that 
these web numbers were simply not big enough. Next on the block we might see 
Huffington Post and other media assets caught up in the Verizon $4.4bn purchase 
of AOL.

‘Farewell, readers’: Alan Rusbridger on leaving the Guardian after two decades 
at the helm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/29/farewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian>
The plankton-to-whale acquisition trail is likely to see any smaller media 
companies in the digital realm seek either scale through partnership, merger or 
acquisition, and the upstream distributors, like phone companies and cable 
networks in turn swallowing these media or “content” companies in order to own 
the whole pipeline of services to consumers.

Charter Communications we learnt last week is paying $57bn for Time Warner 
Cable, after Comcast was thwarted on competition grounds by the US regulator, 
the Federal Communications Commission, from pursuing a similar deal.

Twenty years ago we had no idea really where the internet would take us, many 
thought a utopia of a thousand flowers blooming, others, perhaps more 
accurately saw its progress towards becoming a giant shop. The next 20 years 
are similarly unknowable, but one thing is becoming clear; whatever it is, is 
going to have to be big.
 