
Russia’s liberal opposition has been subjected to all kinds of pressure in the 
last few months, from leaked clandestine sex tapes to dubious court cases and 
physical violence. As parliamentary elections approach in September, the 
authorities appear to be throwing every dirty trick in the book at them. But 
the opposition is also engaged in a fight with enemies who are proving even 
more destructive than the Kremlin: each other.

Parliamentary elections on 18 September will set the tone for a presidential 
election in 2018, in which Vladimir Putin is expected to stand and win another 
six-year term in office. Currently, the Russian Duma is made up of just four 
parties: the pro-Kremlin behemoth UnitedRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, and three smaller parties known as 
the “systemic opposition”, which provide a semblance of competition but do not 
oppose the Kremlin on any substantive issues.

Violence against Russia's web dissidents raises fresh fears for internet 
freedoms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/23/violence-against-russias-web-dissidents-raises-fresh-fears-for-internet-freedoms>
Lying outside the system are the other opposition parties, ranging in spectrum 
from liberals to nationalists. They are not given airtime on television and are 
often struck off the ballot in elections. With the political system carefully 
controlled and state television only ever covering the opposition in negative 
terms, there is little public support for rocking the boat. However, when the 
anti-corruption campaignerAlexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny> was allowed to stand for 
mayor of Moscow in 2013, he won 27% of the vote, showing there is appetite for 
new faces among a certain section of urban Russians.

Since then, the screws have tightened, and the Kremlin is determined not to 
allow any opposition parties to gain the 5% of the vote that would see them 
into the Duma and risk argument and controversy in the parliament. It would 
prefer the Duma to remain a rubber-stamp mechanism with almost no dissent. 
Authorities are also determined to avoid a repeat of the parliamentary 
elections in late 2011, when allegations of electoral fraud led tohuge protests 
across Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/04/anti-putin-protests-moscow-russia>
.

“The Kremlin is taking a careful line: it has shown a small amount of 
tolerance but has also used violence and threats to warn people they really 
could lose their freedom if they protest too much,” said the political analyst 
Masha Lipman.

Navalny’s brother was jailed in a case that many saw as a way to get leverage 
over the opposition leader, and Boris Nemtsov, one of the better known and more 
charismatic of the opposition leaders, wasgunned down outside the Kremlin last 
February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/02/boris-nemtsov-never-know-who-killed-moscow-vladimir-putin-russian-opposition>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F268de0159dd51d5361bb77d5950a1df3001cbbf7%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia's%20opposition%20descends%20into%20infighting%20before%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%27s%20opposition%20descends%20into%20infighting%20before%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F268de0159dd51d5361bb77d5950a1df3001cbbf7%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Opposition supporters hold portraits of Boris Nemtsov after he was killed last 
year. Photograph: Olga Maltseva/AFP/Getty Images 
As the parliamentary elections approach, the petty nastiness of the attacks on 
the liberal opposition has increased. State television aired a documentary 
smearing Mikhail Kasyanov, a former prime minister who is now one of the 
leaders of Parnas, Nemtsov’s former party. The programme showed footage of 
Kasyanov in a sexual encounter with an opposition activist, Natalia Pelevina, 
and the pair could be heard allegedly discussing other opposition leaders in a 
derogatory manner. It appears the audio and video recording devices were placed 
illicitly in the apartment, suggesting collusion between the television station 
and the security services.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfc5d7471d4c670a9e203ff0e06bc762a11aeb22%2F0_1943_3170_1901%2F3170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia's%20opposition%20descends%20into%20infighting%20before%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%27s%20opposition%20descends%20into%20infighting%20before%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfc5d7471d4c670a9e203ff0e06bc762a11aeb22%2F0_1943_3170_1901%2F3170.jpg>
 Mikhail Kasyanov. Photograph: Sergey Ponomarev/AP 
In the wake of the film, many others in the opposition said it was untenable 
for Kasyanov to have the number one spot in the party list for the elections, 
while Kasyanov said to change the game at this stage would mean to bow to 
Kremlin pressure.

“There will be many more provocations. If you can’t put up with the 
authorities’ provocations and make concessions to them every time, it shows you 
are weak,” Kasyanov told the Guardian. He denounced criticism from other 
members of the opposition as “irresponsible statements by people who don’t 
understand anything”.

Ilya Yashin, another Parnas leader, fell out with Kasyanov over the incident, 
and also hinted that Pelevina could be an FSB plant. After much online rancour, 
Pelevina agreed she would not stand in the elections, but wrote on Facebook 
that Yashin was a “simple liar, petty and vengeful, and simply an indecent 
person”.

Following the scandal, a fragile opposition coalition of Parnas and Navalny’s 
Progress party collapsed in bad blood. Navalny is banned from running for 
office due to a conviction in a court case widely seen as politicised, and his 
party is not officially registered. Recently he called on the authorities to 
register his party and allow him to stand.


“Their strategy is to not let the really dangerous people take part, and then 
destroy the others using pressure and their own stupidity,” Navalny said. He 
insisted that Parnas would not pass the barrier required to enter parliament, 
whereas his own Progress party would have had a chance. Others are sceptical 
about this claim, but Navalny points out that he received more than a quarter 
of the votes in the Moscow mayoral elections with little publicity, showing 
that he can win support among urban elites.

“They expected I’d get 8% and disappear, but it turned out we were able to win 
votes. So after that, my legal conviction was activated and now I can’t take 
part in any elections, and I’m even officially banned from campaigning.”

In May, Navalny and supporters were physically attacked by a group of Cossacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/cossack-comeback-fur-flies-fake-groups-spark-identity-crisis>
 during a visit to the southern Krasnodar region, while the police did nothing. 
A “documentary” on state-controlled television claimed Navalny was a British 
agent codenamed Agent Freedom, and had been tasked by MI6 with working to 
destroy Russia. The “secret MI6 documents” presented on the programme were 
written in semi-coherent English. Such programmes are augmented by Kremlin 
tales of western plots to destroy Russia, painting the opposition as pawns of 
Russia’s enemies.

Chechnya’s controversial leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, posted a photograph of 
Kasynanov on Instagram, with the politician’s head pictured in the sights of a 
sniper rifle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/ramzan-kadyrov-video-opposition-mikhail-kasyanov-rifle-sights>
. Kadyrov later claimed it was a joke, but given Nemtsov’s murder a year 
previously, nobody found it particularly amusing.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8c19c2abab888831c1c57d3f2bb54158a339a30%2F0_172_1947_1168%2F1947.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia's%20opposition%20descends%20into%20infighting%20before%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%27s%20opposition%20descends%20into%20infighting%20before%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Frussia-opposition-infighting-parliamentary-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8c19c2abab888831c1c57d3f2bb54158a339a30%2F0_172_1947_1168%2F1947.jpg>
 Vladimir Putin with Ramzan Kadyrov in 2011. Photograph: Alexei Nikolsky/AP 
“We don’t know how ugly it will get and whether these people in the regions 
are acting on their own or acting on orders,” said Lipman. “But as the economic 
situation continues to be difficult we could see more and more violence.”

Kasyanov said he believed that even without access to television his party 
could win 20% in big cities, which would be enough to even out to 10% across 
the country and make it into the Duma, but most analysts say this scenario is 
unlikely: even if the opposition did get the votes, the “administrative 
resource” would be used to make sure they did not pass the barrier. With all 
these obstacles, the infighting among the opposition does nothing to help.

“We’re weak as it is, and to have these problems inside is pitiful and 
shameful,” said Pelevina. “It should be about survival for all of us. They 
killed Boris [Nemtsov]. They’re constantly jailing people. They’re doing things 
all the time. We should be working together and instead we’re doing the 
opposite.”
 