
Russian Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> has blocked 
a page inviting people to attend a rally in support of an opposition politician.

On Friday a page for was created for an event on 15 January, the day that 
Alexei Navalny, a critic of President Vladimir Putin, will hear the verdict in 
a controversial embezzlement case that could see himsent him to prison for 10 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/19/jail-russian-activist-alexei-navalny-10-years-prosecutors-demand>
.

A spokesman for Russia’s internet regulator, Roskomnadzor, said on Sunday that 
the page was blocked on the orders of the general prosecutor.

The prosecutor “demanded to limit access to a number of resources calling for 
an unsanctioned mass event, including social networking groups. The demand has 
been fulfilled,”RIA-Novosti <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RIA_Novosti> news 
agency quoted Vadim Ampelonsky, a spokesman for Roskomnadzor, as saying.

The Facebook event <https://www.facebook.com/events/417200101767938>, called 
“Public gathering to discuss the verdict”, had over 12,000 people signed up at 
the time it was blocked and now opens only through a non-Russian IP and only 
for non-Russian users.

Navalny – whose leadership role in the opposition was built up over years of 
writing a popular anti-corruption blog and through carefully managed online 
campaigns – criticised the social network for bending under pressure from the 
Kremlin.

“It’s a rather unpleasant and surprising behaviour by Russian Facebook. I 
thought they would at least demand a court order rather than rush to block 
pages as soon as crooks from the Roskomnadzor ask,” he wrote onhis personal page
 <https://navalny.com/>.

A former US ambassador to Moscow, Michael McFaul, wrote on his Twitter blog 
<https://twitter.com/McFaul/status/546372096876486656> that the block set a 
“horrible precedent” and that Facebook should correct its “mistake” as soon as 
possible.

Supporters quickly signed up to newly created event pages and made some 
blasting Facebook’s “censorship”.

A Facebook spokeswoman told The Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/facebook-blocks-russian-page-supporting-navalny-putins-biggest-critic/2014/12/20/a8c782b8-8877-11e4-abcf-5a3d7b3b20b8_story.html>
 that the company was investigating the matter.

Navalny, a 38-year-old lawyer, is accused with his brother Oleg of embezzling 
nearly 27m roubles (more than half a million dollars at the exchange rate at 
the time) when a cosmetics company,Yves Rocher Vostok 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yves_Rocher_%28company%29>, used their delivery 
firm.

The case is only one of many brought against him by the Russian authorities. A 
previous investigation of embezzlement at a state timber company saw him 
sentenced to five years in prison, though the sentence was later suspended.

Navalny, who has spent nearly a year under house arrest, said the case is 
based on “utter lies”.
 