
The London-listed company controlled by Russia's richest man, Alisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, has taken advantage of 
the recent rise in Facebook's share price to sell its remaining stake in the 
social network.

Mail.ru said on Thursday it had sold 14.2m Facebook shares for $528m (£338m). 
The firm first bought into Mark Zuckerberg's digital venture in 2009, spending 
$200m for a small stake when Facebook was valued at just $10bn.Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> today has a stock market 
value of $102bn.

The shares were sold in July and August after Facebook's stock had finally 
returned to its initial public offering (IPO) price. The gain brings to an 
estimated $1.7bn the revenues Mail.ru has netted from its holding.

Facebook's stock has surged 57% this year and is now trading comfortably above 
its debut price of $38. Investors cold-shouldered Facebook after a rocky stock 
market listing in May 2012, but a strong performance on mobile phones and 
healthy advertising has lured them back.

Mail.ru sold 20m shares at the time of the IPO, netting $745m, and divested a 
further 23m shares in October; the price was not disclosed but Facebook's 
shares then traded at around $20, which means Mail.ru could have netted around 
$460m. Its final holding was sold this summer after the relevant lock-up 
period, which dictates when portions of the stock can be sold by early 
investors in the company, expired in May.

Usmanov has benefited many times over from Facebook's success. He also 
invested through the Russian tech investment fund Digital Sky Technologies, 
which sold a $1.7bn stake during the IPO last May. That disposal earned Usmanov 
about $1.4bn, according to Bloomberg.

A spokesperson for Usmanov said his USM Holdings still holds its remaining 
stake in Facebook - but has not disclosed its size and value.

With a £48m mansion in north London, Usmanov was recently identified in the 
Sunday Times Rich List as Britain's richest man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shortcuts/2013/apr/22/alisher-usmanov-britains-richest-person-russian>
. He is now using some of those funds to bet on an Apple recovery: in April, 
following a crash in Apple's share price, he said he had invested $100m in the 
iPhone maker.

"I believe in the future of this company even after Steve Jobs," Usmanov told 
Bloomberg. "When the company lost $100bn of its market value, it was a good 
time to buy its shares, as the capitalisation should rebound."

• This article was amended on Friday 6 September 2013 to make clear that 
Mail.ru has sold its last shares, rather than Alisher Usmanov.
 