
The European court of human rights has ruled that Russia’s conviction of 
opposition leader and bloggerAlexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny> on charges of embezzlement 
was “prejudicial”, saying he had been deprived of a fair trial.


The court in Strasbourg said on Tuesday the 2013 conviction of Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/18/alexei-navalny-found-guilty-embezzlement>
 and co-accused Pyotr Ofitserov, a businessman, was based on an “arbitrary 
application of the law”.

“The trial court convicting the co-accused had worded its judgment in a manner 
that could only be considered prejudicial as regards alleged involvement in the 
crime,” it said, noting that the courts involved had found them “guilty of acts 
indistinguishable from regular commercial activities”.

Putin's nose bloodied by Russia's rival mayoral candidates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/08/russia-opposition-mayoral-candidates-vladimir-putin>
The court also ordered Moscow to pay damages of €8,000 ($8,800) to Navalny and 
Ofitserov, and to cover their court expenses.

Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has three months to ask for 
another review of the case, but the European court is not obliged to grant it.

Navalny, 39, who has repeatedly denounced the corruption of Russian elites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/08/russia-opposition-mayoral-candidates-vladimir-putin>
, lauded the decisionon his blog <https://navalny.com/p/4735/>.

“The truth is with us and we will win,” he wrote, adding that he wanted to 
“defend the country from the thieves and villains who seized power in Russia”.

The activist was convicted for embezzling €400,000 during a 2009 timber 
business deal for which he was acting as a consultant for the Kirovles 
corporation.

At the time of the deal Ofitserov was head of the trading company that 
allegedly sold the timber at below market rates.

Investigators initially said there was no case but several months later 
another investigation was opened into Navalny and Ofitserov’s roles, with the 
courts convicting them one day after Navalny registered as a candidate for the
Moscow mayoral elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/05/putin-opponents-electoral-challenge>
.

An appeals court eventually granted the two men suspended prison terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/30/kremlin-critic-navalny-given-suspended-sentence-brother-jailed>
.

Navalny began crusading against corruption in 2007. His internet-driven 
projects – Rospil.info and later theAnti-corruption Foundation (FBK) 
<https://fbk.info/> – have exposed suspicious state contracts and the luxurious 
mansions of public officials both in Russia and abroad.
 