
Rwandans have voted overwhelmingly to allow President Paul Kagame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paul-kagame> to extend his term in office, 
official results released yesterday showed, prompting international criticism 
and expressions of concern from human rights charities.

The controversial vote on the country’s constitution means that Kagame, 58, 
can stand again in 2017 after his second mandate ends. In effect it authorises 
him to stand for another term of seven years and two more after that of five 
each, meaning that Kagame could be in power until 2034.

The popular president has held office since 2000, but has effectively been in 
a position of control since his rebel forces took over the capital, Kigali, in 
1994, ousting Hutu extremists and ending thebrutal genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/apr/07/rwandan-genocide-20th-anniversary-thousands-mourn-stadium>
.

Along with the European Union, the US state department has condemned the vote, 
saying Kagame should step down and “foster a new generation of leaders in 
Rwanda”.

But Kagame has insisted the constitutional changes were put to a referendum 
because of the four million signatures on a petition that was raised by his own 
people to allow his programme of economic development to be sustained. “What is 
happening is people’s choice,” he said, adding that Rwandans “have their future 
in their own hands. Ask people why they want me.” As he cast his own vote on 
Friday, he denied he wanted to be president for life. “No, I don’t want it,” he 
told reporters at the polling station.

Kagame is credited with engineering Rwanda’s turnaround from a war-ravaged, 
ethnically divided country to a united and successful nation. Yesterday the 
Rwandan electoral commission said 6.16 million Rwandans – 98% of voters – had 
voted in favour of the changes in what was an orderly election.

But campaign groups including the New York-based Human Rights Watch  
<https://www.hrw.org/> accuse the Rwandan government of stifling free speech, 
dissent and political opposition. The tiny opposition Democratic Green party 
claimed it had been prevented from campaigning against the change. HRW said it 
believed some Rwandans censored themselves out of fear of the government, which 
has jailed several opposition politicians and journalists on what HRW has 
called “spurious” charges. “No suspense in Rwanda referendum when so many 
dissidents silenced, civil society stifled,” tweeted HRW executive director 
Kenneth Roth after the result.

Kagame said again this weekend that he would make his decision shortly on 
whether to stand for re-election in 2017, but it is widely expected he will.

The extension is seen as a setback to progress in African governance by the 
international community. United Nations secretary generalBan Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon> issued a plea earlier this year 
to African leaders not to cling to power. Although it was interpreted as being 
a message to Zimbawe’s 91-year-old PresidentRobert Mugabe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/zimbabwe-robert-mugabe-tells-potential-successors-stop-infighting>
, who has held power since 1987, UN insiders say that in fact there is enormous 
concern over the unpicking of constitutions presently going on in several 
nations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Frwanda-vote-gives-president-paul-kagame-extended-powers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51ffd5cec6b39ba8630af8ac303b5c02bbbcbc68%2F0_0_5285_3622%2F5285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rwanda%20votes%20to%20give%20President%20Paul%20Kagame%20right%20to%20rule%20until%202034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Frwanda-vote-gives-president-paul-kagame-extended-powers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rwanda%20votes%20to%20give%20President%20Paul%20Kagame%20right%20to%20rule%20until%202034&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Frwanda-vote-gives-president-paul-kagame-extended-powers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51ffd5cec6b39ba8630af8ac303b5c02bbbcbc68%2F0_0_5285_3622%2F5285.jpg>
 Newspaper headlines in Burkina Faso proclaim the victory of a new 
president-elect, Roch Marc Christian Kabore, earlier in December. The country 
had been ruled for nearly 30 years by Blaise Compaoré. Photograph: Issouf 
Sanogo/AFP/Getty Images 
The debate over extending presidential terms has led to instability and 
violence this year in theDemocratic Republic of the Cong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>o and Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/01/burkina-faso-elections-roch-marc-kabore-named-new-president>
 – where efforts to allow Blaise Compaoré to contest elections ended in the 
president being forced from power – and is causing ongoing bloodshed in 
BurundiBut it has not caused significant unrest in Rwanda.

Countries including Benin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/01/benin-forest-food-security-nutrition>
 andCongo-Brazzaville <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo-brazzaville> are 
also considering change to allow their leaders a third term, while changes 
benefiting incumbents have been passed inAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/angola-letter-dos-santos-rafael-marques-de-morais>
,Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, Chad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad> and Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/30/uganda-presidential-elections-february-2016-apathy-scepticism-yoweri-museveni>
.

“People around the world have expressed their concern about leaders who refuse 
to leave office when their terms end,” Ban Ki-Moon told anAfrican Union 
<http://www.au.int/> summit. “I share those concerns. Undemocratic 
constitutional changes and legal loopholes should never be used to cling to 
power,” he said. “I urge all leaders, in Africa and around the world, to listen 
to your people. Modern leaders cannot afford to ignore the wishes and 
aspirations of those they represent.”

Mo Ibrahim <http://www.moibrahimfoundation.org/>, whose foundation monitors 
good governance across the African continent and awards an annualIbrahim prize 
for achievement in African leadership 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZC-SUMZQh6M>, told the Observer earlier this 
year that Kagame’s efforts to achieve a third term were a “pity”, but that the 
trend towards extension was in no way a reversal of the enormous gains made 
across the continent in terms of emerging democracies and good governance.

“There is nothing that can stop the emerging power of entrepreneurship, energy 
and new political forces across this continent. Change is happening and no one 
leader trying to hang on to an extra few years of power can stop this change.”
 