
Michael O’Leary’s pledge to stop Ryanair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> “unnecessarily pissing people 
off” does not seem to extend to the lord mayor of Copenhagen or the German 
courts.

The Danish capital’s Frank Jensen has banned staff from flying with Ryanair on 
official business because he dislikes its employment practices. The airline 
responded by tweeting a picture of Jensen’s face superimposed on Marie 
Antoinette’s body alongside the words “Let them eat cake!” and “Let them pay 
high fares!”

Meanwhile O’Leary has reportedly declined to appear at a German labour court 
in July relating to a complaint about its recruitment policy brought by a 
former pilot.
Ryanair (@Ryanair) 
Here are the Low Fares #Copenhagen 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Copenhagen?src=hash>'s High Fare Mayor 
@FrankJensenKBH <https://twitter.com/FrankJensenKBH> doesn't want you to book! 
http://t.co/4qBo0gtRof <http://t.co/4qBo0gtRof> pic.twitter.com/OOF6dDYrY3 
<http://t.co/OOF6dDYrY3>
 <https://twitter.com/Ryanair/status/601073013623234560> May 20, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Ryanair/status/601073013623234560> 
But its new strategy – more carry-on baggage, allocated seating, schedule 
changes to accommodate business travellers – has given the airline a lift. In 
its full-year results, due on Tuesday, it is forecast to report a rise in net 
income from €523m to around €865m (£615m). Analysts expect a number of high 
profile airports to be added to its route map by next year, with Paris Charles 
de Gaulle one possibility.

Barclays said: “Ryanair’s strategic transformation continues to be one of the 
most impressive we have seen in any airline... [It] is expanding capacity by 
7%, with growth focused on Stansted, Dublin and its new primary airport bases 
(Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece). Aided by a strong pound, we expect Ryanair to 
give an upbeat view of the summer when it reports, albeit accompanied with 
highly conservative assumptions for next winter’s yields.”

Meanwhile O’Leary continued his new customer-friendly image in a recent French 
interview by saying Ryanair would cut fares by 10-15% over the next two years, 
as it passed on the benefits of lower oil prices.

Only a pawnbroker in their game


Mondaysees what is routinely billed as the richest game in football – the 
£120m battle to gain promotion to the Premier league via theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> playoff final.

A lot will be riding on the outcome for supporters and teams, and for the 
sponsors of the two clubs concerned.Aviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness>, backer of Norwich City, 
probably does not need more publicity, especially with the ubiquity of those 
awful Paul Whitehouse ads. But Ramsdens, the northern pawnbroker whose brand is 
on Middlesbrough’s shirts, will no doubt be elated at the prospect of seeing 
its name blazing from global TV screens next season. After all, knowing where 
in Stockton-on-Tees to sell, say, a mobile phone or a bit of gold could be very 
useful to viewers in the Far East.

But sponsorship can be a mixed blessing. Newcastle United, with all their 
existing problems, probably did not want the extra controversy associated with 
payday lender Wonga. And Zoopla was quick to distance itself from West Bromwich 
Albion following Nicolas Anelka’s infamousquenelle gesture.

So a word of caution to Ramsdens – be careful what you wish for.

Tate ready for a sucralose rush


Tate & Lyle unveiled a major restructuring last month, including a plan to 
close its Singapore sucralose factory and concentrate production of the 
artificial sweetener in the US.

Moving all the business to Alabama seemed to be vindicated when drinks giant 
PepsiCo subsequently announced it was planning to replace aspartame sweetener 
in Diet Pepsi with sucralose.

Liberum analysts said: “We believe this could be a positive for Tate & Lyle as 
we expect they would win the business over commodity Chinese suppliers. A 
sucralose contract with PepsiCo could further explain Tate’s decision to 
combine all sucralose production in its Alabama plant as the US is the largest 
market for Diet Pepsi.”

Tate has also decided to sell most of its European bulk ingredients businesses 
to its joint venture partner, to move away from commodity products to more 
specialist ingredients, and will receive around €240m when the deal completes 
in the summer.

Meanwhile the legacy of its old structure will be seen this week when it 
unveils full-year profits expected to fall from £322m to around £200m. Analysts 
at Canaccord say: “We believe the cleaner operating structure… makes a 
potential acquisition of Tate by [US peer] Bunge, as speculated in the press, 
easier to accomplish. We had pointed to the joint venture structure inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as a possible hurdle 
complicating the deal; this hurdle has now been removed.” Sweet.
 