
As Olympians return victorious from Rio 2016, it’s likely that many will be 
offered lucrative sponsorship packages from brands eager to harness Olympic 
glory. As advertising is increasingly avoided and ways of talking to consumers 
proliferate, celebrity sponsorship is set to continue its meteoric growth.

If it works, the sponsorship route can cut through the clutter of today’s 
marketing. Take Dove’s association with the Wales rugby team. Dove Men+ Care’s 
Twitter account has 32.4k followers; meanwhile Wales International’s George 
North has an impressive 325k. So when he tweets“Thanks Dove Men+Care” 
<https://twitter.com/George_North/status/767998916742774785> alongside a 
picture of the product (as he did only recently), the brand not only gains far 
more exposure, but the message is delivered through a trusted, respected 
source, meaning it’s likely to have far more impact.

Immersive storytelling is everywhere and there’s no going back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/may/31/immersive-storytelling-360-vr-technology-marketing>
However, this kind of endorsement very much relies on the integrity of both 
parties. Earlier this month, for example, the Kardashian clan was called out by 
nonprofit consumer group Truth In Advertising (TINA) for failing to indicate 
that over 100 product placements on their Instagram accountswere actually paid 
for 
<http://www.thedrum.com/news/2016/08/23/kardashian-family-accused-deceptive-marketing-over-paid-instagram-endorsements>
. In this case, both the Kardashians and the brands in question neglected to 
disclose their commercial relationship, proving that trust needs to go both 
ways in influencer marketing.

Of course, the Kardashians aren’t the only brand ambassadors to compromise 
their integrity. When it was revealed last week that US Olympic swimmer Ryan 
Lochte hadlied about being robbed at gunpoint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/25/ryan-lochte-charged-rio-police-false-report>
, several brands were faced with a major trust issue, ending in the retraction 
of lucrative sponsorship deals including Speedo and Ralph Lauren, reported to 
have beenworth an estimated total of $1m (£758,000 
<http://news.sky.com/story/speedo-usa-ends-sponsorship-deal-with-us-swimmer-ryan-lochte-10547895>
). Speedo quickly disassociated itself from Lochte when his misdemeanours were 
exposed, saying: “We cannot condone behaviour that is counter to the values 
this brand has long stood for.”

This situation, of course, isn’t new; from Pepsi’s withdrawal of its Michael 
Jackson sponsorship 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/michael-jacksons-sponsorship-deal-with-pepsi-goes-flat-1504383.html>
 toChanel distancing itself from Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/sep/22/drugsandalcohol.vikramdodd>, 
celebrity association has always been a risky business. So what makes this 
incident with Lochte different?


In the past, messages could be carefully controlled and cultivated. Bad news 
could be hidden, rumours silenced by smart crisis PR teams. But in the age of 
digital democracy, where consumers are only ever three or four clicks away from 
finding out anything about a brand, mistakes will be outed. Through social 
media, consumers now influence opinion much more than any brand or institution. 
Mistakes are not only revealed, but rapidly amplified.


What has also changed is how the public responds to different types of 
misdemeanour. Brands need to take note – and monitor this on social media – 
before diving into kneejerk reactions, such as Speedo’s.

First, there’s the genuine mistake, which is almost always forgiven. Tennis 
star Maria Sharapova was given a two-year suspension earlier this year when it 
wasrevealed she’d failed a drugs test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/08/maria-sharapova-banned-two-years-failing-drugs-test-meldonium>
. Her major sponsors (Nike, Head and Evian) stood by her. When the failed drugs 
test came to light, Sharapova apologised for her mistake straight away, and her 
racket supplier Head emphasised how she was a “role model and woman of 
integrity”. The balance of social media agreed. By standing by Sharapova, Head 
actually improved its reputation. Had it not, it would almost certainly have 
been vilified for cowardice or lack of constancy.

The second level of misdemeanour is lying, which is the category Lochte falls 
into. From Bill Clinton to Tiger Woods, this is nothing new. What can now be 
observed, however, is that if the reason for the lie is explained and 
understood, if the perpetrator appears genuinely contrite, then the public can 
be remarkably forgiving.According to research 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/online-backlash-sponsors-endured-dropping-lochte/1406471>
 by marketing technology company Amobee, who analysed over 600,000 sites, the 
majority of social comment around Lochte was actually neutral or even positive. 
So should Speedo have reflected public opinion, created a platform for Lochte 
to express his contrition and stood by him? Would that have made Speedo appear 
more human and more in touch with the public?

This leads us onto the third, and ultimate misdemeanour: hypocrisy. Brands 
need to tread carefully when it comes to “behaviour that is counter to the 
values this brand has long stood for”, as Speedo puts it. Hypocrisy is not 
tolerated by the public and rouses genuine feelings of anger on social media.

The end of big, bold brand promises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jul/12/end-big-bold-brand-promises-marketing>
Conversely, what does generate criticism and a true breakdown of trust, is 
when celebrities or brands do act hypocritically. I wouldn’t be surprised to 
hear if there was now an army of citizen journalists trying to find out 
instances where Speedo has acted controversially. At the 2008 Olympics swimming 
records were being broken by improbable margins with the swimmers having one 
thing in common – FastSkin – one of Speedo’s performance–enhancing swimsuits;
leading to the brand being accused of “technological doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/23/swimsuits-world-championships-fina>
”.


So was Speedo right to act so decisively and quickly? On the one hand, any 
delay would seem like tacit endorsement, but on the other, it’s now set a rod 
for its own back. Any future misdemeanour on its part will be seen as hypocrisy.


Perhaps the answer lies in a single word: humanity. To err is human, but 
forgiveness doesn’t require divinity, just the capacity to take a step back and 
listen. Social media may have hijacked brands’ ability to conceal the truth, 
but it has also given them the ability to listen to how the public is feeling 
and align themselves with public sentiment, which is a powerful tool.

Charlotte White is global strategy partner at Carat 
<http://www.carat.com/global/en/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 