
There are no hard definitions of the jargon used in takeover bids but “a very 
substantial undervaluation” should not require much interpretation. It surely 
means a lot more than a gap of 3.2%. SABMiller’s chairman, Jan du Plessis, 
would look ridiculous if, having used those words last week when rejecting a 
£42.15-a-share proposal from Anheuser-Busch InBev, he then rolled over and said 
yes to £43.50.

In practice, Du Plessis may feel his freedom to speak his mind is constrained 
by the views of his big shareholders. Altria, the Marlboro cigarette firm with 
a 27% holding, has already deserted to the bidder’s camp. If the Santo Domingo 
family from Colombia, with 14%, wants to acceptthe new terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/megabrew-takeover-major-sabmiller-investor-rejects-takeover-approach>
 (in share alternative form), then resistance becomes tricky to sustain, or so 
the unwritten rule for company chairmen says.

But directors are paid to give their opinions on a company’s worth and 
prospects, not to be an echo chamber. If Du Plessis meant what he said last 
week, he should reject £43.50 a share whatever his shareholders think. It would 
not be an outrageous stance. Ever sinceAB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> made its move a month 
ago, £45 a share has always seemed the minimum price SAB should demand to open 
its books.

That’s for two reasons. First, AB InBev timed its move opportunistically. 
SAB’s shares were trading at close to £38 in March before investors started to 
fret about emerging markets. Those general worries apply to SAB in the short 
term, and possibly the medium term, but the company’s ability to sell more beer 
in, say, Africa over the next few decades is not altered one jot. SAB is almost 
the definition of a stock to hold and forget. Shareholders get to sell a 
company only once. At the very least, SAB should depart at a premium to 
comparable takeovers in the sector, which implies at least a couple more quid 
on the current offer.

The second reason to reject the latest offer is that SAB has a superb record 
and investors would be taking little risk in sticking with what they know. SAB 
is not a Cadbury Schweppes, struggling to defend its chequered returns when 
Kraft came calling in 2009. It is the world’s second-largest brewer and has 
only enriched its shareholders during its 15 years on the London market. It 
doesn’t need a saviour.

SAB’s board, having been told of AB InBev’s new offer yesterday morning, did 
not manage to respond by the time the market closed. That may suggest 
nervousness in the ranks. But du Plessis’ correct reply should be obvious given 
his past statements: £43.50 is still not enough. If he says something 
different, he’s lost his bottle or his command of the English language, or both.

Glencore’s debt plans remain in spotlight
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e7115e15f26d512b1e8f94bc7b97aed2fd05784%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e7115e15f26d512b1e8f94bc7b97aed2fd05784%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 Glencore says the copper market remains distorted. Photograph: Reuters 
Under normal circumstances, Ivan Glasenberg would surely wish to be buying, 
not selling, a couple of second-tier copper mines. After all, Glencore’s great 
trader told an FT conference the other day that the copper market is 
“distorted” and prices do not reflect the low level of stocks and the continued 
healthy demand from China.

These are not normal circumstances. Glencore is obliged to be in the 
debt-reduction game and would-be buyers of peripheral assets must be given a 
hearing.Thus the company has appointed investment bankers to check out the real 
level of interest in the Cobar mine in Australia and Lomas Bayas in Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/glencore-plans-copper-mine-sales>
.

Analysts estimate the mini-collection might fetch up to $1bn. That barely 
moves the dial in the context of Glencore’s borrowings of $30bn, which is why 
the main plot still centres on the original plans for reducing borrowings. But 
these add-on copper negotiations still have significance. We know Glasenberg 
can over-pay for assets in good times – witness Xstrata in 2013. But can he 
persuade others to do the same in a different climate for the mining industry?

Tesco’s ‘brand guarantee’ looks set to disappoint
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c8df57b7101d721406ff882d9fb5cba65d7fa8%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SABMiller%20does%20not%20need%20a%20saviour%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20time%20for%20the%20chairman%20to%20speak%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fsabmiller-chairman-anheuser-busch-inbev-shares-offer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c8df57b7101d721406ff882d9fb5cba65d7fa8%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Tesco’s new price scheme covers only branded products. Photograph: Jonathan 
Hordle/Rrc 
Every supermarket chain likes to claim its new price scheme is the best in the 
business. In Tesco’s case, however,its new “brand guarantee”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/tesco-offers-money-back-at-the-checkout-in-new-price-promise-scheme>
isn’t even better than the version it replaces in one important respect. The 
new scheme covers only branded products whereas the old one, “price promise”, 
also included own-label goods and fresh food.

There is an important compensation, of course. Instead of being given a 
voucher to be redeemed against a future purchase, any money owed will be 
returned instantly at the till or online checkout. That’s a useful feature if 
you are the sort of person who loses, or can’t be bothered with, small pieces 
of paper (and, note,Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> says 
half the old vouchers were never used).

But, for those Tesco shoppers who are organised and diligent users of 
vouchers, a narrower scheme that covers fewer goods is plainly inferior. 
Overall, one suspects this revamp will annoy as many customers as it pleases.

It is also odd that Tesco went to the high court last year to defend, 
successfully, its right to compare the price of its own-label goods against 
those of Sainsbury’s, which argued its own ingredients were better. What was 
that fuss all about?
 