
The board of SABMiller <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> is 
warming to the approaches of Anheuser-Busch InBev following a fourth informal 
bid approach which values the UK-listed brewer at £67.4bn.

The maker of Budweiser and Stella Artois raised its offer to £43.50 a share 
from £42.15 in cash, with a partial share alternative aimed at SABMiller’s two 
largest shareholders Altria and the Santo Domingo family. It pointed out the 
new offer was a 48% premium to the UK-listed brewer’s share price on 14 
September,before news broke of talks between the two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/16/anheuser-busch-inbev-sets-sights-on-sabmiller>
.

The combination of the world’s first and second brewers would create a giant 
company making a third of the world’s beer.

The SABMiller board, which has rejected three earlier approaches, did not 
issue a statement declining the latest offer as it has done on previous 
occasions nor did it say it was accepting the deal.

“This offer does provide the basis for some form of engagement,” said one 
person who knows some of the major players well.

Shares of SAB, maker of beers including Peroni and Grolsch, were down 
marginally at £36.67, as some investors worried the parties remained too far 
apart to agree to a deal. “The last reaction from SAB was that the previous 
offer was significantly undervaluing it,” said Morningstar analyst Phil Gorham. 
“The latest offer is not a significant improvement.”

At least one institutional shareholder contacted by the Guardian felt the 3% 
increase on the previous offer was not sufficient for it to agree to a deal.


Some said SABMiller should hold out for a bid nearer to £45 a share, but 
accepted the current offer might further split shareholders, raising fears 
among some that the bidder could walk away.

Altria, the owner of Phillip Morris cigarettes, which controls 27% of 
SABMiller, has already agreed to accept the lower offer. But Bevco, the vehicle 
controlled by the wealthy Santo Domingo family of Colombia, which has 14%, has 
so far rejected AB InBev’s approaches on valuation grounds.

The cash-and-share alternative, which is designed to appeal to Altria and the 
Santo Domingo families in particular, to assist them in avoiding large tax 
bills, has been sweetened in the latest proposal. However, it values SABMiller 
shares at only £38.88, short of the main cash offer and there may be room for 
it to be improved further. Significantly the cash element of that alternative 
offer has been raised by 119p to 356p.

The further increase in the offer from the Brazilian-Belgian brewer, albeit a 
relatively small one, will intensify pressure on SABMiller’s chairman, Jan du 
Plessis, to open talks on a deal to buy the group, which was founded 120 years 
ago as South African Breweries. The view of the Santo Domingo family will be 
crucial because the bidder has made it clear it favours a friendly merger. Du 
Plessis last year fought off a merger approach from Glencore as chairman of 
miner Rio Tinto.

AB InBev's offer isn't enough to break up SABMiller and the Santo Domingos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/oct/07/ab-inbev-sabmiller-santo-domingo-takeover-offer>
The new offer came before Wednesday’s bid deadline and after SABMiller’s 
fourth-biggest shareholder earlier in the day rejected AB InBev’s previous 
price as too low.


“We have confidence in the board and we will rely on their judgment. They have 
said the price is too low and we agree with them,” said Dan Matjila, chief 
executive of Public Investment Corporation..

The South African investment manager, which owns about 3% of SABMiller, said 
last week it would seek guidance from brewery group’s board about the financial 
aspects of the proposed deal.

It is the latest major SABMiller investor to say AB InBev’s approach is too 
low to buy the company, whose brands also include Castle beer in Africa. 
SABMiller’s board has said the proposal “very substantially undervalues” the 
business.

SABMiller shares rose 0.8% on news of the latest offer.

The Megabrew takeover – a tale of beers, billions and blue bloods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/09/megabrew-takeover-beers-billions-blue-bloods-ab-inbev-sabmiller>
Aberdeen Asset Management said last week it could see the potential benefits 
of a mergerbut that AB InBev’s proposed offer was opportunistic and too low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/09/sabmiller-plans-1-billion-dollar-savings-beer-battle-ab-inbev>
. SABMiller’s fifth-largest shareholder, Kulczyk Investments, rejected AB 
InBev’s valuation. Investec, another significant investor, was also reported to 
be against the deal.


AB InBev’s chief executive, Carlos Brito, has urged SABMiller shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/07/ab-inbev-raises-takeover-offer-sabmiller-brewer>
 to tell their board to enter serious talks before Wednesday’s 5pm deadline for 
AB InBev to lodge a formal offer.


 