
The business secretary, Sajid Javid, has been judged the most influential 
Asian person in Britain, topping a list of 101 prominent people including Nobel 
Peace prize winnerMalala Yousafzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malala-yousafzai>, musician Zayn Malik and 
artist Sir Anish Kapoor.

Javid, who retains the No 1 slot he won last year, is described as a 
“determined young man” who, after a successful career in banking, has enjoyed a 
“meteoric rise” since joining the political scene in 2010, according to the GG2 
Power 101 list compiled by the Asian Media and Marketing Group (AMG).

The employment minister, Priti Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel>, becomes the highest-ranking 
woman, taking the third–place slot, while Labour’s London mayoral hopeful Sadiq 
Khan is ranked sixth.

The list was revealed at the GG2 Leadership awards dinner in London, attended 
by the justice secretary and lord chancellor, Michael Gove.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsajid-javid-tops-list-of-most-influential-asian-people-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f112edb0be5aaf59afd6e383bb1ab03c58ae8ed%2F863_238_1697_1019%2F1697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sajid%20Javid%20tops%20list%20of%20most%20influential%20Asian%20people%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsajid-javid-tops-list-of-most-influential-asian-people-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sajid%20Javid%20tops%20list%20of%20most%20influential%20Asian%20people%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsajid-javid-tops-list-of-most-influential-asian-people-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f112edb0be5aaf59afd6e383bb1ab03c58ae8ed%2F863_238_1697_1019%2F1697.jpg>
 The employment minister, Priti Patel. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
Malala, who celebrates the launch of her documentary, He Named Me Malala, next 
month, is the youngest entry on the list, aged just 18. The Pakistani-born 
schoolgirl, who was shot by the Taliban for defending her right to education, 
is one of 23 women on the list, and is placed at No 10, having claimed the top 
slot two years ago.

The second youngest is the 20-year-old catwalk model, Neelam Gill, at no 87, 
who is the first British Indian model to have been signed by a major fashion 
label, Burberry.

The fifteen people on the list aged under 35 include former One Direction band 
member Zayn Malik; DJ Shahid Khan, known as Naughty Boy; the sitar player and 
composer Anoushka Shankar, who is the daughter of Ravi Shankar and half sister 
of US singer-songwriter Norah Jones; and Ameet Gill, David Cameron’s director 
of strategy.

The Labour MP, Keith Vaz, chairman of the Home Affairs Select Committee, is 
placed 11th; Amol Rajan, editor of the Independent, was placed 13th; and Radio 
4 Today programme presenterMishal Husain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mishal-husain> was in 16th place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsajid-javid-tops-list-of-most-influential-asian-people-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d27e90aa93f4d47eadfafe0495c2ad060e1a763%2F0_239_3118_1871%2F3118.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sajid%20Javid%20tops%20list%20of%20most%20influential%20Asian%20people%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsajid-javid-tops-list-of-most-influential-asian-people-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sajid%20Javid%20tops%20list%20of%20most%20influential%20Asian%20people%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsajid-javid-tops-list-of-most-influential-asian-people-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d27e90aa93f4d47eadfafe0495c2ad060e1a763%2F0_239_3118_1871%2F3118.jpg>
 Shahid Khan, left, and Zayn Malik in April. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty 
Images 
GG2 Power 101 Top 10

 * Sajid Javid MP 
 * SP & GP Hinduja of the global conglomerate Hinduja Group 
 * Priti Patel MP 
 * Lakshmi Mittal, steel magnate, and wife Usha. 
 * Ameet Gill 
 * Sadiq Khan 
 * Rakesh Kapoor, businessman and CEO of consumer goods company Reckitt 
Benckiser 
 * Sir Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, Nobel winner for chemistry 
 * Sir Anish Kapoor 
 * Malala Yousafzai 
• This article was amended on 21 October 2015. Priti Patel is the employment 
minister, not the pensions minister as an earlier version said.
 