
Camden Town Brewery, Goose Island, Lagunitas IPA, Meantime and Blue Moon have 
two things in common – not only are they widely perceived as “craft beers”, 
they are also owned by sprawling multinationals.

This week’s announcement by Camden Town that it has succumbed to a takeover by 
AB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/camden-town-brewery-sold-inbev-worlds-biggest-drinks-company>
, the world’s largest brewer, brought home this gap between branding and 
reality.

Drinkers took to social media to admonish Camden Town’s founder, Jasper 
Cuppaidge, for selling out – at a price thought to be £85m.

Rival BrewDog, the self-styled “punk” brewer that prides itself on flying the 
banner for the craft beer ethos, went even further.

The company released a scathing video on social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/dec/21/brewdog-bar-camden-town-brewery-hells-lager-off-craft-beer-menu-video?CMP=twt_a-lifeandstyle_b-gdnfood>
, showing Camden Hells beer being ceremonially removed from the menu in one of 
its bars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbrewdog-bar-camden-town-brewery-hells-lager-off-craft-beer-menu-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20taken%20off%20Brewdog%20craft%20beer%20menu%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbrewdog-bar-camden-town-brewery-hells-lager-off-craft-beer-menu-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20taken%20off%20Brewdog%20craft%20beer%20menu%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbrewdog-bar-camden-town-brewery-hells-lager-off-craft-beer-menu-video&media=>
 BrewDog’s video showing Camden Hells being removed from a drinks menu.. 
BrewDog dished out the same treatment to London brewer Meantime after it was 
snapped up by SABMiller earlier this year.

Clearly the purists are concerned that – to paraphrase Gil Scott-Heron’s 
famous lyric – their nascent revolution has been televised.

The genesis of craft beer’s journey into the mainstream in Britain was the 
introduction by Gordon Brown, as chancellor, of Small Brewers’ Relief in 2002. 
The policy slashed excise duty for brewers making less than 60,000 hectolitres 
(10.56m pints) a year. It works on a sliding scale, giving a bigger tax break 
to smaller scale businesses.

It encouraged hundreds of willing amateurs to transform their own combinations 
of water, hops, yeast and malted barley into money-making enterprises. Where 
there were only a few hundred craft brewers 20 years ago, theSociety of 
Independent Brewers (SIBA) <http://siba.co.uk/>now estimates that Britain 
boasts more than 1,500, with a market share of about 7% and growing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhy-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5afbb0752de1cc426f44a1757861412b32050e08%2F0_0_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sale%20of%20Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20a%20sign%20of%20craft%20beer%E2%80%99s%20fizzing%20into%20the%20mainstream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhy-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sale%20of%20Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20a%20sign%20of%20craft%20beer%E2%80%99s%20fizzing%20into%20the%20mainstream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhy-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5afbb0752de1cc426f44a1757861412b32050e08%2F0_0_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Hells Lager move along the production line inside Camden Town’s brewery. 
Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
These include critically acclaimed London brewhouses such as Partizan 
<http://www.partizanbrewing.co.uk/> and The Kernel 
<http://www.thekernelbrewery.com/>, who throw open their doors on what is 
becoming known as the Bermondsey beer mile every Saturday. Further north,
Manchester’s Cloudwater <https://twitter.com/cloudwaterbrew?lang=en-gb>and 
Northern Monk <http://www.northernmonkbrewco.com/> from Leeds – as well as a 
phalanx of Yorkshire brewhouses – have also made names for themselves.

Inevitably, the success of small players has alerted the likes of AB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> and SABMiller, which will 
form one company producing more than 500m hectolitres a year once their £71bn 
tie-up is finalised.

But SIBA’s managing director, Mike Benner, says that takeovers by brewing 
multinationals do not necessarily mean the craft beer revolution has been 
hijacked by the money men. “What we’re looking at is a success story,” he said. 
“The very fact that global brewers are getting in on the craft beer scene 
demonstrates they can see that consumers want more diversity, higher quality 
and a range of different flavours for different occasions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhy-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e767b19b359159d5e44eec66283718b66e95694%2F0_0_3403_2042%2F3403.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sale%20of%20Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20a%20sign%20of%20craft%20beer%E2%80%99s%20fizzing%20into%20the%20mainstream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhy-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sale%20of%20Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20a%20sign%20of%20craft%20beer%E2%80%99s%20fizzing%20into%20the%20mainstream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhy-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e767b19b359159d5e44eec66283718b66e95694%2F0_0_3403_2042%2F3403.jpg>
 A bottle of Punk IPA by Brewdog. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
Increased diversity at the taps has also widened the love of good-quality beer 
beyond real ale aficionados, who frown upon anything not kept in wooden casks. 
Quality beers are now being produced in kegs, bottles and even cans, helping 
craft brewers offset the rapid decline of high street pubs.

“Increasingly we’re seeing craft-brewed beers in the hospitality environment, 
casual dining and so on,” said Benner. “The link between quality beer and 
dining is here to stay.”

It is not just domestic success that has attracted the big names though. Craft 
beer has gone global in recent years, with brewhouses opening up in all sorts 
of unexpected places. Whether it’sGreat Leap Brewing 
<http://www.greatleapbrewing.com/> in Beijing, Yasigi 
<http://www.livinginkampala.com/reviews/restaurants/yasigi-beer-garden/> in 
Kampala, Uganda, or theLouisiane Brewhouse 
<http://www.louisianebrewhouse.com.vn/> in Nha Trang, Vietnam, good quality 
beers have global appeal. That means big rewards for brewers that can find ways 
to tap into those fast-growing markets.

The possibility of international expansion was one reason Cuppaidge gave for 
his decision to sell Camden Town Brewery.

But even if small brewers are willing to swap their neighbourhood charm for 
global domination, drinkers do not have to be slaves to the multinationals. 
Shifting tastes have given rise to businesses that do more than just 
manufacture, such as London-basedU Brew <https://ubrew.cc/>. This company 
allows customers to brew their own beer on its premises, rather than having to 
find space for the equipment at home. Thus the ultimate hipster badge of honour 
– a brew so exclusive it has your own name on it – is within reach.

If that sounds like too much effort, drinkers can also plump for Honest Brew 
<http://honestbrew.co.uk/>, a company that delivers a variety of bottles direct 
to the door, depending on customers’ tastes.

The growth of the quality beer industry means that while major brewers are 
getting their claws into the action, there is still space for smaller companies 
to benefit from the growing thirst for originality. And for those who would 
rather have a dry Christmas than put money into the pockets of AB InBev and 
SABMiller, that choice will still be there.

“Consumers now want beer with a story to tell, local beers that mean something 
to them,” said Benner. “There will always be a market place for genuine, 
locally brewed, high-quality beer.”
 