
Samsung has delayed shipments of its latest flagship smartphone, the Galaxy 
Note 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/samsung-galaxy-note-7-review-the-king-of-the-phablets-returns>
, as it conducts additional quality control testing.

Local news agency Yonhap reported 
<http://english.yonhapnews.co.kr/search1/2603000000.html?cid=AEN20160831012100320>
 that deliveries from the Korean electronics firm to three of South Korea’s 
mobile phone networks, SK Telecom, KT and LG Uplus, which began at the 
beginning of this week, were halted unexpectedly.

A Samsung spokesperson told Reuters: “Shipments of the Galaxy Note 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/galaxy-note-7> are being delayed due to 
additional tests being conducted for product quality.”

There have been several unconfirmed local reports of users claiming that the 
battery of the Galaxy Note 7 exploded during charging.Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> did not elaborate on what 
further testing was required and to where shipments of the high-priced phablet 
were being delayed.

The Galaxy Note 7 is the first Samsung smartphone to have a USB-C connector. 
The new connector brings with it a new charging standard to which some 
third-party cables have been found to be non-compliant, causing damage to 
devices from laptops to smartphones using the new port. Amazon recentlyclamped 
down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/30/amazon-clamps-down-dangerous-usb-c-cables>
 on the non-compliant and dangerous cables.

Quality-control problems delaying the release of the latest Samsung flagship 
phablet could be a major blow for the world’s largest smartphone manufacturer. 
Its recent sales saw it capture more market share and return to solid profits, 
but high sales of the Note 7 along with the Galaxy S7 line are required to 
maintain momentum in the second half of the year.

The company has previously said that demand for the Note 7, which marks the 
first return to Europe for the phablet line since2014’s Note 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/15/samsung-galaxy-note-4-review-phablet-android-fingerprint-stylus>
, has far outstripped supply, forcing the launch of the smartphone to be pushed 
back in some markets.

Production problems for the curved-screen Galaxy S6 Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/01/samsung-galaxy-s6-edge-smartphone-review-android>
 last year resulted in poorer than expected sales in some regions. Samsung will 
be hoping to avoid a repeat of the problems with the Note 7, which has garnered
favourable reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/samsung-galaxy-note-7-review-the-king-of-the-phablets-returns>
 and is expected to sell double that of previous versions.

 * Samsung Galaxy Note 7 review: the king of the phablets returns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/samsung-galaxy-note-7-review-the-king-of-the-phablets-returns>
 * Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge review: this is the smartphone to beat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow> 