
Writer and broadcaster Sandi Toksvig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sandi-toksvig> has said she was turned 
down as the original host of the BBC’s long-running panel show Have I Got News 
For You because she is a woman.

Toksvig, the outgoing presenter of Radio 4’s the News Quiz, said she recorded 
a pilot for the show 25 years ago and was the preferred choice of 
programme-makers.

“They made two pilots – one with me and one with Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>,” she told the new 
issue of Radio Times magazine. “I was told by the producers that they preferred 
my version, but the channel decided they couldn’t have a woman in charge.”

Asked if it made her angry, Toksvig said: “Of course, but it also made me feel 
inadequate and question whether I was really up to it.”

The claims, albeit a quarter of a century later, will be an embarrassment for 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, coming at a time when its track 
record of employing women, both on-screen and in senior positions behind the 
scene, has come under close scrutiny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fsandi-toksvig-bbc-denied-me-host-role-because-im-a-woman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434393019197%2F1ad4642f-479c-463c-9c24-fbb0a5663a5f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sandi%20Toksvig%3A%20BBC%20denied%20me%20host%20role%20because%20I'm%20a%20woman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fsandi-toksvig-bbc-denied-me-host-role-because-im-a-woman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sandi%20Toksvig%3A%20BBC%20denied%20me%20host%20role%20because%20I%27m%20a%20woman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fsandi-toksvig-bbc-denied-me-host-role-because-im-a-woman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434393019197%2F1ad4642f-479c-463c-9c24-fbb0a5663a5f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Angus Deayton during filming for the TV quiz show Have I Got News For You. 
Photograph: PA 
The BBC director general, Tony Hall, was told by the BBC Trust to put more 
women on air “as a matter of urgency”, with Hall himself saying the corporation 
has to be “more reflective of its audiences”.

Toksvig, who will step down as the host of the radio show next week, later 
appeared as a guest on the very first edition of Have I Got News For You, which 
aired on BBC2 in 1990, alongside its regular team captains Ian Hislop andPaul 
Merton <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/paul-merton>. Deayton was dropped 
as its presenter in 2002 after revelations about his private life.

The show has since been fronted by a different presenter each week and has 
continued to thrive, watched by around 6 million viewers in its Friday night 
BBC1 slot.

Toksvig said: “I thought Angus was very good and he’s an extremely nice chap, 
but I would not have been caught with either prostitutes or cocaine. So 
possibly I would have been a better bet in the long run.”

The BBC looked to address the lack of women on its panel shows last year when 
itsdirector of television, Danny Cohen, announced a ban on all-male lineups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/08/bbc-comedy-shows-male-panels-female-presence>
. But the announcement was criticised by some high-profile comics and 
presenters, including Dara Ó Briain, who said last year the BBC should have 
evolved instead of legislating for token women. Ó Briain said he agreed with 
the policy but by making it public it might undermine some people “who’ve been 
on millions of times [and] suddenly look like the token woman”.

Sandi Toksvig to leave Radio 4’s News Quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/28/sandi-toksvig-radio-4-news-quiz> 
Toksvig herself joined in the criticism last year, saying: “I know there has 
been a great push to get more female panellists on television, and I don’t 
think that’s the answer.

“But if you get more female hosts, you’ll immediately have more women taking 
part, without it causing any trouble at all. They bring a different tone and 
make it easier for other women to feel comfortable about participating, so I 
would be a big fan of more female hosts on quiz shows.”

The corporation has continued to face accusations of ageism and sexism from 
people such as the BBC’s former reporter and documentary film maker Olenka 
Frenkiel and award-winning former Newsnight reporter Liz MacKean.

The former Countryfile presenter Miriam O’Reilly, who won a landmark age 
discrimination case against the BBC four years ago after she was dropped from 
the show, said: “From what I am told by women working at the BBC today, sexist 
and ageist attitudes towards them thrive.

“Women feel powerless to do anything about it because they are concerned that 
speaking out could affect their careers.”

Toksvig, who succeeded Simon Hoggart on the News Quiz nine years ago, said she 
was daunted when she first took charge of the long-running Radio 4 favourite.

“I think I was daunted by it. Even nine years ago having a woman in charge of 
the show seemed quite radical,” she said.

Dara Ó Briain hits out at BBC ban on men-only panel shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/25/dara-o-briain-bbc-ban-men-only-panel-shows>
She said the morning after her first outing as presenter, the producer rang 
her to say there hadn’t been a single complaint. “What he meant was no 
complaints about a woman presenting,” she says.

Toksvig added: “I’m not giving up broadcasting. It’s just, as a presenter, I 
can’t be seen as overtly political and I do find that restricting.”

Toksvig is one of the founding members of the new Women’s Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> party, which plans to field 
candidates in the 2020 general election. She said: “I have made jokes over and 
over again about politics and I’ve had enough. This election, I decided that 
instead of making jokes about politics, I need to take part in it and therefore 
I can’t make jokes and participate.”

Asked whether the situation is better for women in broadcasting now, she said: 
“I want to be positive and say yes, but the election coverage was so 
predominantly male, it made me a bit depressed.”

John Lloyd, the former Blackadder producer and creator of the News Quiz, 
hosted the original pilot of Have I Got News For You when it was going to be 
called John Lloyd’s Newsround. Lloyd, who now makes another panel show, QI, for 
BBC2, dropped out after deciding he did not want to present the show full time.

He described Toksvig’s departure as a “national tragedy”. “It is very exciting 
how many good female comics are out there now,” said Lloyd. “It’s fascinating 
how far attitudes have changed. It’s difficult to know whether it’s 
broadcasters being more proactive, but something [has changed],” he added.

“We used to complain how difficult it was finding enough women to fill panel 
games but in the last, I would say, less than five years, that has turned 
completely on its heads. There is a raft of incredibly good female comics out 
there.”

A BBC spokesperson said: “We’re proud of the fact that the BBC of today has a 
huge range of women presenters across TV and Radio including Tess and Claudia, 
Mary Berry, Anne Robinson, Fiona Bruce, Clare Balding, Kate Humble, Clemency 
Burton-Hill, Clara Amfo, Annie Mac, Louise Minchin, Sophie Raworth, Emily 
Maitlis, Ritula Shah and many others.”
 