
One in two of every new mortgages in Britain is sold by Spanish bank Santander 
– the result of an expansion drive and the withdrawal of many traditional 
lenders from the market.

Santander's red flame logo is implanted on high streets countrywide following 
the bank's decision to capitalise onthe brand awareness caused by the 
sponsorship of Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/10/santander-bradford-bingley-alliance-leicester-abbey>
 and replace Abbey, Bradford & Bingley and Alliance & Leicester over branch 
doorways.

Figures published by Santander today show that its net lending – which strips 
out remortgaging – reached £7.6bn in 2009. This is estimated to be half the net 
lending of the entire mortgage market in 2009.

The bank's share of gross lending – which includes remortgaging – is well 
ahead of its traditional share of stock and peaked at 20.4% in the last three 
months of 2009. The gross mortgage lending of £26.4bn means the bank sold one 
in five mortgages with a total market share for the year of 18.6%, a level the 
bank believes is its highest ever.

Santander is also making inroads into its share of stock – existing mortgages 
– which rose from 12.9% at the end of 2008 to 13.5% at the end of 2009, also 
the highest level the bank has ever achieved. Abbey historically had a market 
share of between 9 and 10% while A&L was between 2 and 3%. But the bank has 
further to go to make a dent in the share of stock of Halifax, part of the 
Lloyds Banking Group, which stands at about 20%.

The bank also appears to have benefited from the withdrawals of savings that 
building societies have been suffering from 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jul/29/building-societies-record-savings-withdrawal>
 by taking in new savings of £14.9bn.

Profits in the UK rose 30% to £1.5bn out of a total for the group of €8.9bn 
(£7.7bn). Provision for bad debts rose a third to £784m.

About 1,000 Bradford & Bingley and Abbey branches were rebranded Santander in 
January, while A&L will be replaced with the name of the Spanish bank later 
this year.
 