
Santander’s UK banking arm has signalled that it is preparing to hand out £45m 
in compensation following its fine last year for giving unsuitable investment 
advice to customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/26/santander-fined-poor-investment-advice>
.

The UK arm of the Spanish bank included the £45m in a list of provisions in 
its results for 2014, which also showed the payment protection mis-selling 
scandal cost £95m during the year. It also spent £50m closing 100 branches as 
it shut Abbey National, Bradford & Bingley and Alliance & Leicester branches 
that were side-by-side on high streets.

The Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> fined 
Santander last March after finding problems in the way retail investments were 
sold in the two years to December 2012.

But the UK business, a self-styled “scale-challenger” to the big four high 
street banks, was bolstered by customers switching their current accounts to 
its 1|2|3 account which charges £2 a month but pays out 3% interest on balances 
up to £20,000.

Following the introduction of a seven day current account switching service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/13/best-current-accounts-seven-day-switching>
 in September 2013, Nathan Bostock, the former Royal Bank of Scotland banker 
who now runs the UK operations, said that one in four bank customers who had 
moved their current account had taken it to Santander – 276,000 customers moved 
to the bank.

The big four banks – HSBC, Barclays, and bailed-out RBS and Lloyds Banking 
Group – hope the switching service will prove there is competition on the high 
street, which is already being subjected toan investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/18/banking-sector-review-watchdog-finance-competition>
 by the Competition and Markets Authority.

Bostock took over from Ana Botín, who has returned to Spain to run the overall 
Santander bankfollowing the death of her father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/10/santander-banking-chairman-emilio-botin-dies-aged-79>
 in September.

Bostock said the UK business would miss its aim of bolstering its lending to 
corporates to 20% of all its lending, because the bank did not want to take on 
too much risk.

He alluded to concerns about the introduction of rules requiring a ringfence 
to be erected between high street operations and investment banking units, but 
was not specific when asked about the bank’s preparations for the rules. He 
said there was a “lot of work” to do.

A flotation of the UK business has been a topic of discussion for the last 
four years. Bostock said: “It remains a medium-term objective for the 
organisation. We’re not under any pressure ... so we’re building a business 
that at the right time is fit for an IPO”.

Profits of the UK business were 26% higher at £1.4bn in 2014, while group 
profits were up 32% at £7.3bn.
 