
Dead Can Dance played an acclaimed homecoming show at Sydney Opera House last 
year, with singer Lisa Gerrard’s powerful voice on display.

It was a good moment for Gerrard and bandmate Brendan Perry, but an even 
better one for an Australian crowd finally able to express its devotion for an 
act that left for London 31 years earlier, aware that Australia in 1982 was not 
where their careers would thrive. Dead Can Dance didn’t return but their cult 
following grew legion enough to speedily sell out consecutive Opera House shows 
and presumably those in other states.

For everyone who attended that long-awaited Australian tour – greying goths, 
classical music nerds and world music freaks – the contralto undulations of 
Sanvean, steeped in unabashedly saccharine strings, roused a powerfully 
embracing sense of togetherness.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJGmvXGBBfjs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJGmvXGBBfjs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJGmvXGBBfjs&media=>
Unlike most anthems, whipped up to be belted out by one and all, the 
experience was relished inwardly and silently by a crowd struck dumb by 
Gerrard’s glossolalia – an invented language only the summoner can deliver. 
Those who knew Gerrard wrote the song because she missed her family in 
Australia, may have appreciated it even more.

Cowritten with composer Andrew Claxton, Sanvean first appeared on Dead Can 
Dance’s 1994 live record, Towards the Within, released on 4AD. In 1995, a 
version was also released on Gerrard’s solo album, The Mirror Pool and, since 
then, like any brilliant but zeitgeist-defying song, appreciation built with 
the same slow-burning persuasiveness the song itself exemplifies.

Sanvean has appeared in several movies, in TV series The West Wing and was 
covered by sopranoSarah Brightman with the London Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xixzLRKbF4c>. Paul Oakenfold used it on a 
track, Hermès in an ad and the BBC in a history series.

But what makes Sanvean an Australian anthem? This intensely foreign-sounding 
song is from a duo that is Australian on paper but global in nature, tapping 
exotic traditions from the Middle East, Africa, Greece and China. Where’s the 
Aussie in all that, mate? Can’t we just playFlame Trees 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJJV1nruUUA> again?

Gerrard grew up in a Greek and Turkish part of Prahran in Melbourne and has 
said her “unique language” is probably due to that environment. She met Perry 
at a “little band” happening in Melbourne, the shambolic post-punk scene 
depicted in Richard Lowenstein’s 1986 cult film,Dogs in Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/08/dogs-in-space-rewatched-michael-hutchence-in-a-couch-crashing-classic>
. Perry and Gerrard were not just passersby at a party: Dogs in Space actor 
Nique Needles played bass in Gerrard’s first band, Microfilm.

Do the sum of these uniquely Australian parts begin to qualify it?

 Question if Sanvean ought to be bestowed the title Australian anthem, and 
you’ll begin to wonder what that even means. And, inadvertently, you’ll arrive 
at your answer: that’s what we, as Australians, have done so long and perhaps 
so pointlessly – question who we are, recoil from it, fleetingly find oneness 
in it, hold it tight and treasure it until again we see it’s slipped from our 
fingers.
 