
Sarah Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin> has defended her 
controversial use of the term "blood libel" in the wake of the Arizona 
shootings and accused Barack Obama of electioneering in his response to the 
incident.

In her first TV interview since an attack which left six people dead, Palin 
appeared on Fox News to insist that the term usedin a video statement last week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jan/12/sarah-palin-response-arizona-shooting>
, was justified because she had been "falsely accused of being an accessory to 
murder".

Palin, who is expected to run for president in 2012, was widely criticised for 
insensitivity by using a phrase which refers to the false accusation that Jews 
killed Christian children to use their blood in religious rituals.

Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords>, who is recovering in 
hospital after being shot in the head in the Tucson attack, is the first Jewish 
congresswoman from Arizona.

Asked if she knew what the term meant, Palin told Sean Hannity of Fox News: 
"Blood libel obviously means being falsely accused of having blood on your 
hands." <http://video.foxnews.com/v/4500318/state-of-the-union/> She pointed 
out that the term had been used in non-religious context inheadline on comment 
piece in the Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703667904576071913818696964.html>
, two days before her video statement was released.

The interview came after a new poll showed that Palin's response to the 
tragedy was judged poorly compared with the president's handling of it.

Almost 80% of those questioned in the Washington Post-ABC survey approved of 
Obama's response, 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/giffords-tucson-shooting-abc-news-washington-post-poll/story?id=12633097>
 compared with a 30% approval rating for Palin's response. Obama's speech at 
the memorial service for the victims of the shootings waswidely praised 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jan/13/obama-tucson-speech-pastor-politician>
.

Palin conceded that some of the points Obama made "really hit home", but she 
suggested he had tried to exploit the incident. "The setting was a bit bizarre. 
It was a bit like a pep rally, kind of like a campaign stop. The setting really 
did detract away from the message," she said.

In the interview, Palin – who is a paid Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> analyst – repeatedly said she was not 
attempting to defend herself. "This isn't about me," she said, "My defence 
wasn't self-defence, it was defending those who were falsely accused."

But in the course of the half-hour interview, she did not name Giffords or any 
of her fellow victims.

"In a situation like we have just faced in these last eight days of being 
falsely accused of being an accessory to murder, I and others need to make sure 
that we too are shedding light on truth so a lie cannot continue to live," she 
said. "If a lie does live, then of course your career is over and your 
reputation is thrashed and you will be ineffective in what we intend to do."

Palin again denied that a now infamous campaign map showing Giffords's 
electoral district in the cross hairs of a gun had influenced the shooter Jared 
Lee Loughner.

She also questioned claims that Loughner had been influenced by rightwing 
rhetoric. She said he appeared to be "apolitical or perhaps even left-leaning".

Appearing in front of the same fireplace in Wasilla, Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> where she had made the blood libel 
remarks, Palin said she would not be silenced by criticism from the left.

"They can't make us sit down and shut up. I know that a lot of those on the 
left hate my message and they will do all they can to stop me because they 
don't like the message," she said. The former governor of Alaska said she 
supported calls for civility in politics but added, "we should not use an event 
like that inArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> to stifle 
debate".
 