
In the 21st century, Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live> has lived or 
died by its presidential election coverage. For all the flak that the show 
receives for not living up to its “glory days” – and those glory days generally 
happen to line up with the speaker’s teenage years – it redeems itself in the 
cultural landscape with presidential debate sketches that hit the mark and 
justify its existence.

So it’s understandable that the show’s writers tilted so heavily in favor of 
election comedy for this season’s premiere on Saturday. The opening sketch was, 
as is now de rigueur, a take on the first presidential debate. Recent 
Emmy-winner (and Ghostbusters scene-stealer) Kate McKinnon of course returned 
as an ecstatic Hillary Clinton, a shimmying, wide-eyed, over-prepared debater 
who can’t believe how easy it all is.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fsnl%2Fvideos%2F10154512969416303&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fsnl%2Fvideos%2F10154512969416303>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fsnl%2Fvideos%2F10154512969416303&media=>
Donald Trump v Hillary Clinton debate 
<https://www.facebook.com/snl/videos/10154512969416303/> 
Facing her was the show’s latest take on Donald Trump, long-time SNL favorite 
Alec Baldwin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin>, who had been 
teased earlier this week.

Baldwin’s Trump was technically flawless – the hair and make-up, the sneer, 
the bravado – but it felt somehow lifeless, as if the writers couldn’t imagine, 
or get away with, a more over-the-top caricature than the man himself. (Baldwin 
is pegged to play Trump for the entire season,according to The Hollywood 
Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/alec-baldwin-snl-new-donald-trump-933435>
. Last year’s Trump, Taran Killam, did not return this year; neither did 
long-running Obama imitator Jay Pharoah.) If anything, the show seems to have 
more fun writing great lines for Clinton – “If you don’t elect me, I will 
continue to run for president until the day I die. I will never die” – than 
their unmemorable Trump.
Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Introducing @AlecBaldwin <https://twitter.com/AlecBaldwin> as Donald Trump. 
#SNLPremiere <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SNLPremiere?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/cGy7kotJWs <https://t.co/cGy7kotJWs>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/782429425539219456> October 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/782429425539219456> 
After a bland cold-open, wherein actor and host Margot Robbie “fact-checked” 
her monologue alongside a stream of available cast members, the show shifted to 
its secondary topic for the evening – how pretty Margot Robbie is. An entire 
sketch devoted to her attractiveness led neatly into a pre-taped sketch that 
imagined how hilarious it would be if she wasn’t actually that attractive.


Margot Robbie backs Australian marriage equality on Saturday Night Live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/margot-robbie-backs-australian-marriage-equality-on-saturday-night-live>
And with that important point out of the way, we were back onto the campaign, 
with a Family Feud sketch devoted to “Team Trump” and “Team Clinton” battling 
it out. Game show sketches are almost always lazy excuses for a string of 
impressions, and that was as true as ever, with Larry David reprising his 
Bernie Sanders impression while Robbie took on Ivanka Trump and Cecily Strong 
premiered an irritating take on next week’s host, Lin Manuel-Miranda. The 
sketch’s strongest gag was Chris Christie’s inability to stop making bridge 
references; it ended with a non-joke about Jill Stein that implied that, 
perhaps more than ever, the SNL writers are taking a firm stand in who their 
viewers should (and shouldn’t) vote for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsaturday-night-live-alec-baldwin-is-a-flawless-trump-but-spoof-falls-flat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf36d266811ab08c62a40d493cbf192701c1b5d8%2F0_41_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saturday%20Night%20Live%3A%20Baldwin%20is%20a%20flawless%20Trump%20but%20spoof%20falls%20flat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsaturday-night-live-alec-baldwin-is-a-flawless-trump-but-spoof-falls-flat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saturday%20Night%20Live%3A%20Baldwin%20is%20a%20flawless%20Trump%20but%20spoof%20falls%20flat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsaturday-night-live-alec-baldwin-is-a-flawless-trump-but-spoof-falls-flat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf36d266811ab08c62a40d493cbf192701c1b5d8%2F0_41_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Musical guest The Weeknd, host Margot Robbie, and Kenan Thompson on Saturday 
Night Live. Photograph: NBC/Getty Images 
Weekend Update, once a highlight of every episode, has not quite returned to 
its full-strength Seth Meyers days, but co-hosts Michael Che and Colin Jost are 
finally finding a groove. Their focus, of course, was on the recent debate and 
the upcoming election, but they eventually expanded to includeColin 
Kaepernick’s national anthem protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/colin-kaepernick-anthem-protest-monday-night-football>
 in a bit that showcased their growing camaraderie.

The last half-hour took some delightfully quirky turns. The show debuted 
Melania Moments, inane musings from Trump’s wife that mirrored the show’s 
classic Deep Thoughts by Jack Handey. It also had fun with a take on a “women 
in film” panel, which seemed to be taking advantage of its strong female cast 
but ended up being a showcase for McKinnon’s delightful weirdness. She made the 
loosely structured sketch entirely worthwhile; any scene that allows a 
bewigged, bespectacled McKinnon to conclude with a phrase like “the little 
baboon ran off with my broaches” is always welcome.

And in its final moments, the show went meta, with Pete Davidson stepping into 
the lead role in a Mr Robot sketch to address cast member Leslie Jones’ 
real-life hacking scandal. It was a cleverly done, if joke-light, sketch, and 
it ended the premiere in a genially amusing manner. Between Baldwin’s Trump and 
Robbie as host, SNL certainly looks the part of a glamorous television show; 
now it needs to work more on the substance that once made it the go-to for 
political satire.
 