
For fans, the return of former cast member Tracy Morgan to host Saturday Night 
Live <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live> was an 
event in itself.

Tracy Morgan makes an emotional return to Saturday Night Live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/18/tracy-morgan-makes-a-triumphant-return-to-saturday-night-live>
More than a year after a car crash that killed one passenger and left Morgan 
in critical condition, he appeared back to normal – or at least, his version of 
normal – forSaturday night’s show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/18/tracy-morgan-makes-a-triumphant-return-to-saturday-night-live>
. The simple fact of Morgan being up there to talk, read a cue card and 
improvise with a camel felt like a miracle.

Understandably, the show leaned heavily on nostalgia. The monologue featured a 
30 Rock reunion, a chance for Morgan to play oppositeAlec Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin>, Tina Fey, Jane Krakowski and 
Jack McBrayer again, in a gently funny sketch that allowed Fey to express how 
happy they were that Morgan was “ready to make people laugh again”.

Almost every sketch gave Morgan a chance to resurrect an old character – 
dim-witted TV host Brian Fellows, unstable homeless man Woodrow, leering 
Astronaut Jones. Hardcore fans at home were delighted, but the in-studio 
audience seemed to have a mixed reaction.

It’s been more than a decade since Morgan left SNL, and given the show’s 
archaiclottery ticket policy 
<http://www.nbc.com/tickets-and-nbc-studio-tour#snl>, it is likely many in the 
audience were never deeply invested in Morgan or his turn-of-the-millennium 
characters.

For the more casual fan, the highlights came in a cold open devoted to the 
week’s Democratic presidential debate. The show co-opted Baldwin to play the 
aggressive Jim Webb, and former SNL writerLarry David 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/larry-david> appeared unexpectedly 
as, well, a Larry David-esque version of Bernie Sanders, complaining about the 
inanities of everyday life while bragging about only owning one pair of 
underwear. Kate McKinnon’s determined Hillary Clinton – “I think you’re really 
gonna like the Hillary Clinton that my team and I have created” ­– was solid, 
as always.

Overall, the portrayal of Sanders was generous, but McKinnon’s warning – “If 
you get into bed with Bernie Sanders tonight, you’re gonna wake up with 
President Trump tomorrow” – suggested that the writers’ political leanings may 
be divided between the two main Democratic contenders.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpfmwGAd1L-o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpfmwGAd1L-o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpfmwGAd1L-o&media=>
 Larry David plays Bernie Sanders. 
Donald Trump to host Saturday Night Live in November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/13/donald-trump-to-host-saturday-night-live>
The first post-monologue sketch, about members of a recently broken family 
spilling their dirty secrets on the set of Family Feud, worked very well, as 
did a pre-tape with an aggressive-looking Morgan looking for a dance partner. A 
musical sketch and a commercial parody for fake cocaine were weak. Weekend 
Update was mostly memorable for a quick drop-in from Fey, who showed off the 
Playboy poses she’ll now never be able to do.

But overall, the writing felt tired, as it often does on the third week in a 
row for the show. It’s a problem when a camel wandering into frame garners the 
biggest laugh of the night. Three consecutive weeks of work may not sound like 
an insurmountable load, but the show’s brutal schedule catches up to the 
writers very quickly. They now have a two-week break before Donald Trump hosts –
controversially 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/17/tracy-morgan-saturday-night-live-guest-host>
 – on 7 November.

But if this wasn’t the funniest episode the show has ever done, it was clearly 
an emotional night for the people involved. This was a reminder of the unique 
position SNL holds in comedy and TV history, serving as a home to which its 
alumni – or at least, the ones that became stars – are always welcome to return.

In his goodbyes, Morgan stood next to his wife and daughter to thank everyone 
involved before mispronouncing long-time co-star Jane Krakowski’s name. It was 
a perfect ending.
 