
You don't have to be a dyed-in-the-wool luddite to recognise that technology 
can be a two-edged sword. A list of wholly positive developments might, in the 
end, turn out to be quite a short one: the printing press, certainly; the 
telescope, yes; rear parking sensors …

The emergence of DVD alongside the advent of the widescreen TV falls into the 
"mixed blessing" category. That vast expanse of flat, matt, glare-free screen, 
coupled with the crystalline clarity of DVD, allowed us to enjoy our favourite 
films all over again with a richness of detail that can seem almost 
hallucinatory. AsThe Sopranos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/the-sopranos>'s Paulie Walnuts 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paulie_Gualtieri> poetically put it, having 
recently seenOn the Waterfront 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36202/on-the-waterfront> on a widescreen: 
"Karl Malden's nose hairs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eDH3wvlC9pY> looked 
like fuckin' BX cables."

But for every revelatory glimpse up the nostrils of Father Barry there's a 
bafflingly circuitous DVD menu system, seemingly designed byMC Escher 
<http://settingexamples.blog.com/files/2010/08/mc-escher-waterfall.jpg> on LSD 
and intent on dropping you back repeatedly into the onslaught of the main menu 
screen's excruciatingly loud jingle.

Probably the most troublesome aspect of the modern viewing experience is the 
matter of theaspect ratio 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aspect_ratio_%28image%29>. Consider the format 
history of Woody Allen'sAnnie Hall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36314/annie.hall>. That film was shot in 
a 4:3 ratio, "matted" to the more widescreen 1.85:1 for cinemas, and is now 
available on DVD in 16:9. Leaving aside the fact that 1.85:1 and 16:9 are 
roughly equivalent but not identical, it's natural to regard the widescreen DVD 
as adhering to the definitive format for the film. But after its cinema run 
ended in 1977 and prior to its release on DVD in 2000, Annie Hall would 
generally have been seen only in 4:3, via TV broadcasts and on VHS. Which means 
that millions of people have had key scenes from Annie Hall indelibly imprinted 
upon their psyches in a 4:3 ratio.

So which version is "right"? When Woody sneezes that big cloud of 
premium-quality California cocaine across the room 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UHTcjZzSlAM> during the party scene, does your 
mind's eye recall it in wide or square format? Even if you do have a firm idea 
of what the ideal aspect ratio for a given film is, it's not always easy to 
watch it that way. Depending on what format your film was originally shot in, 
how your DVD version is formatted, how your DVD player is set up and what 
screen-format setting you select on your TV, you can often find yourself not so 
much spoilt for choice as overwhelmed by permutations. Adjustable aspect ratio 
settings mean we must constantly contend with issues such as stretching, smart 
zooming, errant subtitles, HDMI-mode toggling, "letterboxing" (horizontal black 
bars above and below a widescreen image), "pillarboxing" (vertical black bars 
either side of an older, square-formatted image) and even the dreaded 
"windowboxing" (both letterboxing and pillarboxing at same time). It's all too 
easy to arrive at a situation whereby, no matter what sequence of available 
setting combinations you try, you just can't seem to get the picture on the 
screen to look quite right.

Then there's the question of DVD versioning 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DVD_region_code>. The Region 2 DVD of Annie Hall 
offers only the 16:9 version, whereas the Region 1 disc also includes the 4:3. 
Both discs present a problem when it comes to the classicbalcony scene 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qLblwVUEHyw>, where the newly acquainted Alvy 
and Annie's dialogue is hilariously contextualised by means of subtitles 
revealing the characters' inner thoughts – "Christ, I sound like FM radio. 
Relax," and so on. On the Region 2 disc the nice, clean, sans-serif font used 
in the original film has been replaced by rather ungainly italicised digital 
text; the Region 1 version's subtitles are rendered in a distractingly large, 
phenomenally ugly font, and come complete with preposterously unnecessary 
"[Thinking]" annotations.

Allen himself is famously hands-off when it comes to curating his back 
catalogue. Such laxness contrasts starkly with hisAnnie Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> character, Alvy Singer – depicted 
as so finicky about cinemagoing that he refuses to enter a theatre two minutes 
after a Bergman film has started, even though, as Annie (Diane Keaton) points 
out, "We'll only miss the titles – they're in Swedish."

But all these technical and artistic niggles are enough to make the most 
laidback viewer pine for earlier, simpler times. In the olden days (circa 1995) 
you simply inserted a VHS cassette, waited five or six minutes for it to 
rewind, picture-searched (laboriously yet reliably) past a few ads, then 
pressed play. Maybe you gave the tracking a tweak occasionally, but that was 
it: your film would then play on your TV in exactly the same way every copy of 
that VHS would play on pretty much any other TV on Earth.

So why do we go on buying into all these new technologies? Well, some of us 
can't help it. It's like Alvy's old joke about the man whose brother thinks 
he's a chicken. Why don't we turn him in? We need the eggs.
 