

Tourists look out over Barcelona and the Sagrada Familia. Photograph: Santiago 
Lyon/AP

While builders daily labour to construct the next precipitous spire of 
Barcelona's most famous landmark and to installAntoni Gaud√≠ 
<http://www.gaudidesigner.com/uk/index.html>'s colourful cornices and bright 
mosaics, the government's builders prepare to run atrain tunnel 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/art/news/story/0,,2065589,00.html> almost 
underneath it. If the church then shifts, the ceiling may crack, its towers may 
fall - and perhaps philosophically worst of all, we abandon art for immediate 
utility.

The church is the most visited site in Spain, thanks to its unimaginable 
vastness, itsel Modernisme <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modernisme> beauty and 
the continued struggle to complete it. Queen Victoria was still on the throne 
when the first stones were laid, and it will almost certainly be King Charles 
III - or even William V - before it's finished.

On first visiting the Sagrada Familia 
<http://www.greatbuildings.com/buildings/Sagrada_Familia.html> in 2003, the 
facade by itself stopped me in my tracks. It is so colossal, and so out of 
place in a run-down urban neighbourhood, that it inspired something close to 
fear, like facing the Niagara Falls. Awe verges on terror at the Sagrada 
Familia, perhaps to the faithful intimating an immanent divinity.

Only if you have been to St Peter's in Rome, St John the Divine in New York or 
the Aghia Sophia in Istanbul can you even begin to conceive of the magnitude of 
the nave, made all the larger with incomplete walls and ceiling. Then there are 
the towers, from which you can see all of Barcelona and beyond, while 
simultaneously inducing vertigo like James Stewart never knew. The towers built 
so far (there are taller to come) are crowned almost whimsically with what look 
like spires made of apples and oranges, perky touches which save the grandeur 
from gloom.

Protecting the Sagrada Familia is an issue that extends beyond questions of 
architectural merit, though. If a building of such numbing beauty is put at 
risk for a train tunnel, what does that say about us? Is progress at all costs 
a desirable way of living? Like Mussolini tearing up invaluable Roman ruins to 
put down a straight road, we risk destroying our cultural history for a problem 
technology can solve.

Unesco considers the Sagrada Familia important enough to have made it a World 
Heritage Site. There are already31 such sites 
<http://whc.unesco.org/pg.cfm?cid=86> - both human achievement and natural 
wonder - in danger thanks to apathy, avarice or callousness. Is it worth adding 
another one to the list just toget from Madrid to Barcelona faster 
<http://www.railway-technology.com/projects/spain/>?
 