
I would guess that most of the miners from the Great Strike of 1984 are no 
longer members of the National Union of Mineworkers (Scargill and allies told 
they no longer qualify for NUM benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/aug/25/arthur-scargill-expelled-num-finances>
, 26 August). I count myself among their number, but feel I'm not alone in my 
dismay in witnessing the disgraceful behaviour of the current officials of the 
remnants of this great union in their efforts to humiliate Arthur Scargill. His 
message in 1984 was simple: "Thatcher and her cronies intend to close the coal 
industry." It's now self-evident that Arthur was right.

The miners supported Arthur Scargill because they recognised the words of a 
straight-talking, honest man. The main beneficiaries at the end of the strike 
were the parties intended to benefit in the first instance: the international 
oil and coal companies. As for the miners, ask any one of us whether we 
regarded ourselves as "defeated", and I think an appropriate answer will be 
forthcoming. There have been acres of print devoted to the strike, some of it 
notable, such as Seumas Milne'sThe Enemy Within 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Enemy-within-Thatchers-Secret-Against/dp/1844675084>. 
Besides enlightening the reader as to the true character of the government of 
the day and its aim to destroy a national asset for the benefit of 
international big business, it also illustrates what the miners of 1984 were 
truly up against. From that point of view, the NUM members, on strike for a 
year, and Arthur Scargill emerge with all the credit. The removal of Arthur 
Scargill from his position within the NUM by the current officials should be 
regarded as an insult to every miner who stayed out on strike in support of the 
coal communities and the national president in 1984.

William McKinlay

Stirling
 