
With GCSE results released last Thursday, school-leavers are gearing up for 
their next stage of training or education. In the past two years, a growing 
number have pursued apprenticeships – in the academic year 2014-2015, the 
number of under 19s starting an apprenticeship increased by 5.1% on the 
previous year. And in 2013-2014 the number increased by 4.6%.

But just less than a quarter of small and medium-sized firms have an 
apprentice, so what’s putting them off? Potential costs and not enough clarity, 
says a recentreport 
<http://www.fsb.org.uk/docs/default-source/fsb-org-uk/fsb-apprenticeships-report-final.pdf?sfvrsn=0>
 from the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB). There are around a million 
apprentices in the UK’s small businesses and there is potential to double 
that,but only if the government puts the right system and incentives in place, 
says the report.


New developments are encouraging, says Annie Peate, policy adviser in 
education and skills at the FSB and author of the report. A day after it was 
published, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
announced new initiatives. Two of the FSB’s recommendations – making 
apprenticeships more cost-effective for small businesses, and making 
information about apprenticeships more accessible – have been addressed.

Small businesses with under 50 employees who take on a 16- to 18-year-old as 
an apprentice will now pay nothing towards the costs of their training, and 
will be given a cash incentive of £1,000 per apprentice. The government will 
also create an apprenticeship investment calculator for its apprenticeship 
website, allowing small businesses to understand what the potential costs, and 
benefits, might be.

‘Public or state, the point is the same’: why schools should teach business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/aug/17/public-state-schools-should-teach-business-tom-cridland>
But there is still plenty to be done to get the message out. Take the 
apprenticeship levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
, a significant strand of the government’s new approach to apprenticeships 
funding. From spring 2017, business in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland with earnings of more than £3m will pay 0.5% of their payroll total 
minus a £15,000 allowance towards apprenticeship funding. So a business with 
earnings of £5m would initially owe £25,000 (0.5% of £5m), but with the £15,000 
levy applied, its contribution would be £10,000. Very few small businesses are 
likely to be affected by it, says Peate, but many, incorrectly, think they will.

The FSB wants to see far more practical advice on apprenticeships, tailored to 
the needs of small businesses and based around their recommendations and 
experience. To that end, they are proposing that the government convene a panel 
of small businesses – the FSB 100 – to review and consult on apprenticeship 
policy.

Peate says: “In particular, small businesses said the government’s 
apprenticeships website didn’t really speak to them. They want almost a 
step-by-step guide. The message that came through from the respondees in our 
report was that they understand the business benefits, but they need to know 
how it all works and, crucially, where they start – because once they’ve 
switched off [from the idea of getting an apprentice], it’s very difficult to 
get them back.”

Those who have already taken on apprentices say that looking beyond graduates 
can have huge benefits. “It’s been a really positive step for us,” says Hugh 
Wade-Jones, founding partner of mortgage brokerEnness 
<http://www.ennessprivate.co.uk/>, which takes on around three to four 
apprentices per year. Not all are school leavers – one particularly successful 
former apprentice is ex-army.

“Initially we recruited from within the industry but we found that people had 
bad habits [such as poor interactions with clients or poor presentation skills] 
and weren’t trained to a satisfactory level,” Wade-Jones says. “It was very 
difficult to get people to adapt, particularly if they had been in a large bank 
or organisation. [Apprenticeships have] given us access to individuals that we 
wouldn’t have found within the industry. Now we have people who are Enness 
people, rather than the guys who have done the rounds at three or four 
different companies.”

There are costs involved, certainly. “The biggest cost is having the 
infrastructure and setting up the learning culture,” says Simon Conington, 
managing director ofBPS World <http://www.bps-world.com/>, one of the first 
recruitment firms to offer apprenticeships.

Five ways you can inspire budding entrepreneurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/14/five-ways-inspire-budding-entrepreneurs>
“If you have brought an apprentice in and haven’t built a robust programme, 
and you don’t thoroughly monitor it, you are setting those people up to fail. 
Yes, there is a wage cost, and the fact that they are probably not going to 
contribute [significantly] for at least six months. But we’ve broken down the 
programme into stages around what apprentices can do, so they do start 
contributing pretty quickly.”

And taking on an apprentice is not without its challenges. Simon Schnieders 
founded SEO companyBlue Array <https://www.bluearray.co.uk/> a year ago. Of the 
six employees, three are apprentices – the most recent started in the last 
month. “It can be difficult finding the right candidate, and managing your own 
expectations,” he says. “Apprentices may have some basic building blocks, such 
as being able to do basic word processing and Excel. But that’s probably all 
you are going to get. An apprentice is going to need support from you 
throughout. But the rewards are huge.”

Tom Pool, 20, is proof of that. He was Schnieders’ first apprentice. After 
leaving school following his GCSEs, Pool decided A-levels were not for him, and 
completed a level three NVQ in engineering before joining Blue Array six months 
ago. “I really wanted to join my friends at university,” he says. “However, 
after working out the costs, it became apparent that I would be taking on at 
least £50,000 worth of debt.

“My experience has been incredible. I’ve met many interesting people and feel 
valued as a part of the team. The variation keeps the business exciting and I 
actually enjoy coming into work every day.”

So how can small business make apprentices work? A close partnership with the 
training provider, and carefully supervising the apprentice, says Petra Wilton, 
director of strategy and external affairs at the Chartered Management 
Institute. She adds that businesses need to give the training provider regular 
feedback on the apprentice’s performance.

Having an apprentice is not, she says, a quick win. “There can be a downside 
in terms of the initial investment in time to understand what’s right for your 
business. You need to be aware of the management time, which is needed to 
support an apprentice, and you do need to commit resources to support them. But 
that’s generally hugely outweighed by the benefit. In the medium and longer 
term, apprentices can add real value back to the business.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 