
Scientists trying to grow human organs inside pigs in an attempt to tackle a 
shortage of donors have successfully created part-human, part-pig embryos.

Researchers at the University of California, Davis combined human stem cells 
and pig DNA and allowed the embryos to mature for 28 days, before terminating 
the experiment and analysing the tissue.


Inside the ‘black box’ of human development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/05/human-development-ivf-embryos-14-day-legal-limit-extend-inside-black-box>
They believe the animals, which if they had been carried to term would have 
developed a human internal organ, but would have looked and behaved like any 
other pig. The goal is that in the future, similar animals could potentially 
act as a ready source of organs for life-saving transplants.

To create the “chimeric” embryos, the scientists used a gene-editing technique 
known asCrispr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/10/crispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease>
 to knock out a section of the pig’s DNA necessary for the embryo to develop a 
pancreas.

Human induced pluripotent (iPS) stem cells were then injected into the pig 
embryo. These are cells that have the potential to develop into any tissue type 
in the resulting foetus. Although genetically foreign, they are not rejected by 
the pig embryo because its immune system has not yet developed.

Instead, the human cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/06/human-pig-embryos-qa-chimeras-transplant-organs-scientists>
 would be expected to follow the chemical cues from the pig embryo to develop 
into different tissues in the foetus. In most cases they are outcompeted by the 
pig embryo’s own cells but in the case of the pancreas there are no pig cells 
to compete with. Hence the embryo goes on to develop a pancreas derived from 
the injected human cells.

Human-pig embryos Q&A: how would 'chimeras' make transplant organs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/06/human-pig-embryos-qa-chimeras-transplant-organs-scientists>
“You are basically creating a vacuum, a hole, so that the human cells respond 
to the right cues, they make a pancreas. The pig cells can’t. But what we don’t 
know, and this is what they need to look at, is whether the human cells can 
also contribute substantially to other tissues, and particularly they are 
worried about the brain,” said Robin Lovell-Badge, a geneticist at theFrancis 
Crick Institute <https://www.crick.ac.uk/> in London.

It was reported earlier this year that scientists had begun attempts to create 
the embryos, but there has been opposition from authorities. In September last 
year, the USNational Institutes of Health <https://www.nih.gov/> said it would 
not back research into “chimeras” until it knew more about the implications.

It cited fears that the presence of human cells could affect the animal’s 
brain and behaviour, potentially making it more human. Prof Pablo Ross, the 
reproductive biologist leading the research, sought to calm those fears, saying 
there was a “very low potential for a human brain to grow”.

“Our hope is that this pig embryo will develop normally but the pancreas will 
be made almost exclusively out of human cells and could be compatible with a 
patient for transplantation,” he said.

The approach is not without potential problems. “There are other cells types 
that are going to be present in the pancreas which come from the pig – that 
would include blood vessels,” said Lovell-Badge. “Those would be a big problem 
and they would be rejected by a human.” It is also possible that the surface of 
the human cells may be modified inside the pig embryo, potentially leading to 
the organ being rejected by a human.

The ethics of growing human embryos in the lab - podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2016/may/27/the-ethics-of-growing-human-embryos-in-the-lab-podcast>
Concerns have been raised about whether the transplantation of an organ from 
an animal into a human could risk introducing animal viruses into a patient. 
Researchers from Harvard Medical School, however,revealed last year 
<http://www.nature.com/news/gene-editing-record-smashed-in-pigs-1.18525> that 
it was possible to use gene-editing technology to inactivate more than 60 
retrovirus genes in pigs in a step towards such organ transplantation.


It is not the first attempt to create chimeras. Among the previous 
experiments, scientists using different techniques were able to produce amouse 
with a rat’s pancreas <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20813264>, and  mice 
with livers almost completely composed of human 
<https://www.salk.edu/insidesalk/articlenph.php?id=168> cells. 


“The whole idea of making chimeras, mixing different animal species or 
human-animal, has been around for decades,” said Lovell-Badge.

But Peter Stevenson, from Compassion in World Farming, told the BBC’s Panorama 
programme: “I’m nervous about opening up a new source of animal suffering. 
Let’s first get many more people to donate organs.


“If there is still a shortage after that, we can consider using pigs, but on 
the basis that we eat less meat so that there is no overall increase in the 
number of pigs being used for human purposes.”

A pig was said to be an “ideal incubator” for human organs and Walter Low, a 
professor in the department of neurosurgery, University of Minnesota, told the 
BBC that researchers wanted to create not just a pancreas – the current focus – 
but also hearts, livers, kidneys, lungs and corneas.

Prof George Church, who has led similar research into the possible use of 
chimeras, told the broadcaster: “It opens up the possibility of not just 
transplantation from pigs to humans but the whole idea that a pig organ is 
perfectible.


“Gene editing could ensure the organs are very clean, available on demand and 
healthy, so they could be superior to human donor organs.”
 