
Scott Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/13/scott-walker-record-republican-presidency>
 has vowed to unravel Barack Obama’s legacy, starting with the Iran nuclear 
deal, should he become president.


Scott Walker, first Alec president? Long ties to controversial lobby raise 
concern
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/scott-walker-alec-2016-election>
The Wisconsin governor said on Thursday he would cancel the deal “on day one” 
in the White House and pick apart other Obama achievements, including 
healthcare reform.

Walker laid out an ambitious conservative agenda in a keynote address to the 
annual meeting of theAmerican Legislative Exchange Council 
<http://www.alec.org/annual-meeting/> (Alec) , one of the nation’s most 
controversial and powerful lobbying networks, in San Diego.

He promised to curb organised labour, slash taxes and regulations, and inject 
Ronald Reagan-style “steel” into US foreign policy, saying Islamic extremism, 
not climate change, was the leading security threat.

“We fight to win,” he said. “The rest of the world must know there is no 
greater friend and no worse enemy than the United States of America.”

The governor, a leading contender in a crowded GOP field 
<http://politicalwire.com/2015/03/25/walker-holds-big-lead-in-iowa/>, made 
numerous references to his religious faith and boasted of defunding Planned 
Parenthood, drawing cheers from the audience of legislators and lobbyists.

Walker, who has close ties to the lobbying network, also won applause vowing 
to dismantle the administration’s Iran deal – a deal secretary of state John 
Kerry and other senior officials were concurrently trying to sell on Capitol 
Hill.

The radical regime that took US embassy staff hostage in Tehran in 1979 
remained a foe, said Walker: “Iran has not changed much since then. I will 
terminate the deal with Iran on my very first day.”

In a shot at Hillary Clinton, the Democratic frontrunner, he said an 
“Obama-Clinton doctrine” had let Russia, China and terrorists threaten US 
security.

“I’m for true safety,” Walker said. “The commander in chief has a sacred duty 
to protect the American people.”

In one of four references to Reagan, he promised to “go back” to an era of 
strong American values and peace.

The governor mocked Obama’s focus on climate change as a security threat, 
eliciting guffaws from the audience. “The greatest threat is radical Islam,” he 
said. “I’d rather take the fight to them rather than wait for them to bring the 
fight to us.”

With Mexico just 20 miles away, Walker cited a “need to secure our borders”. 
But he otherwise steered clear of immigration, a fraught topic for Republicans 
which Donald Trump was due to stir anew on Thursday ona visit to the Texas 
border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/23/donald-trump-immigration-activists-protest-laredo-texas-border>
. Walker did not mention Trump or any of the 14 other GOP hopefuls.

San Diego is far from Wisconsin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> 
but Alec’s conference was home ground for Walker. He has maintainedclose ties 
with the group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/scott-walker-alec-2016-election>
, and promoted its policy positions, since taking public office in 1993 as a 
state legislator.

Many of his most contentious actions – a tough-on-crime bill that sent 
incarceration rates soaring, stand-your-ground gun laws, protection of 
corporate interests, attacks on union rights and many more – have borne the 
Alec seal of approval.

As governor since 2011, Walker no longer officially belongs to Alec but 
according to the Center for Media and Democracy (CMD), in his first year as 
governor he signed into law 19 bills that reflected, to some degree, Alec 
thinking.

The CMD, which monitors the lobbying group, has speculated Walker could become 
the “first Alec president 
<http://www.prwatch.org/news/2015/06/12851/scott-walker-first-alec-president>”. 

The network matches state legislators – overwhelmingly Republican – with major 
US corporations,facilitating meetings behind closed doors 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/dana-milbank-alec-stands-its-ground/2013/12/04/ad593320-5d2c-11e3-bc56-c6ca94801fac_story.html>
 and drafting business-friendly bills which often become law.

Hundreds of protestors marched on Wednesday to the Manchester Grand Hyatt 
hotel in San Diego, where the three-day conference was being held. The mix of 
labour groups, Democrats and environmentalists chanted slogans and brandished 
banners against corruption and corporate money inUS politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics>.

“They want to destroy labour unions,” Dolores Huerta, a veteran labour leader, 
told the Guardian. “If you don’t have labour unions you don’t have 
redistribution of wealth, and then you don’t have a middle class. And without a 
middle class you don’t have democracy.”

Huerta assailed Walker, saying he would roll back social progress. 

“He’s a disaster for the country,” she said.

Jim Mickelson, 46, a firefighter and union leader, brought his wife and three 
daughters to the protest.

“We’re here to let them know they’re not welcome,” he said.

What might Scott Walker's America look like? Just see what he did to Wisconsin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/13/scott-walker-record-republican-presidency>
Addressing a packed ballroom, Walker joked that the protest was a mere 
“warm-up act” compared to the huge, raucous backlash he faced in Wisconsin after
dismantling the collective bargaining rights of public sector workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/01/wisconsin-protests-progressive-scott-walker-anti-union>
. He said he had faced down death threats.

“We took on the unions and won,” he said. “They believed they could win by 
intimidating local officials.”

He talked up his controversial record in Wisconsin, saying “big, bold reforms” 
lowered taxes by $2bn and improved education standards.

“We can hire and fire based on merit,” he said. 

Critics accuse him of wrecking the budget and gutting educational institutions.

Walker vowed to repeal Obamacare, saying the path to a greater America was 
transferring power from Washington to state level, moving people from welfare 
to work and slashing federal regulations, which he said were “out of control”.

He said the US should build the Keystone pipeline, and use the energy 
“abundance God has given us”.
 