
For people of my generation, this was football’s equivalent of our JFK moment. 
Holland were playing Sweden in the early stages of the 1974 World Cup in West 
Germany whenJohan Cruyff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-dies-aged-68-holland-football-legend>
, the Dutch captain, performed a move that launched a thousand knee operations 
in the west of Scotland.

I don’t need YouTube to take me back to that moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-video-obituary>
. There’s Cruyff with his long sinewy body trying to escape the attention of a 
player called Jan Olsson. And now there he is again springing free of the 
hapless Swede, having seemingly turned his own body inside out through 180 
degrees. And there’s Olsson, who for a moment doesn’t know if it’s New York or 
new potatoes, preparing to bite the turf in a confused heap.

I can’t even remember if Cruyff’s turn set up a goal; I expect not, though, as 
this moment of grace deserved to have the stage all to itself. I don’t even 
think my 11-year-old pals and I hung around to watch the rest of the game: 
there was only one thing on our mind, and that was to get down the park for a 
game of three-and-in and to try to reproduce this thing of wonder we had just 
seen. The lord only knows how much business my pal Billy, the knee specialist, 
has had as a result of Cruyff’s turn, as hundreds of Glaswegian men have 
carried their ceaseless and forlorn attempts to achieve footballing nirvana on 
a pitch deep into middle age. At that moment, we all became supporters of the 
Dutch national team as they rampaged through the tournament, eviscerating all 
in their path with football that made them look as though they were moving on 
casters.

When, a couple of weeks later, they were undone in the final by West Germany’s 
utilitarian brilliance, we were inconsolable. But you couldn’t be upset at the 
Germans for long. For how can you hate a side captained by Franz Beckenbauer 
and which included Gerd Müller? And hadn’t several of them been part of the 
Bayern Munich side which had put the thugs of Atlético Madrid to the sword in 
the European Cup final a few weeks earlier?

Johan Cruyff: father of modern game who also shaped Dutch culture | David 
Winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/johan-cruyff-father-modern-game-dutch>
The Germans, of course, were also helped by Jack Taylor, an English referee 
who seemed determined to make up for the injustice of the 1966 World Cup final. 
Later, Cruyff would reflect on that final and say that more people would 
remember the football that Holland played than the identity of the eventual 
winners. Before the end of the year, the orange top of Holland and the blue and 
red stripes ofBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> FC, 
Cruyff’s then club side, would swamp orders for Celtic and Rangers tops at 
Lumley’s football emporium on Sauchiehall Street.

Cruyff had come to the attention of Scottish football fans three years 
earlier, when he was part of theAjax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax>
 side that dismantled a fine Celtic team in the quarter-final of the European 
Cup. I don’t remember much about that tie, but I do remember a picture in the
Daily Record of Cruyff arriving at Glasgow airport accompanied by his wife 
Danny. They were effortlessly glamorous. He wore a dark raincoat over his suit 
and a look of cool disdain. There was a bracelet on his right hand.

She was, quite simply, a pure honey. She had big blonde, Angie Dickinson hair, 
was wearing a suede coat with black hotpants and knee-high boots and clutching 
a copy ofMarie Claire. The Rolling Stones used to write songs about such women 
and you felt relieved that a player like Cruyff was with someone like her.

By 1975, Cruyff had been voted European footballer of the year three times, 
the first player ever to have won it so often. He was the embodiment of the 
concept of total football, which the Dutch had introduced and which would 
capture the imagination of student coaches all over the world. It was a 
revolution that, of course, didn’t seem to include Scotland.

As Cruyff and Ajax were winning three European Cups in succession in the early 
1970s, Scottish club football had reached a level of continuous achievement on 
the European stage that it was only momentarily to glimpse again.

In the 20 years or so since the birth of the European Cup in 1956, Celtic and 
Rangers had each won a European trophy and had contested 11 semi-finals between 
them. Dundee, Hibs and Kilmarnock had also routinely defeated some of Europe’s 
best. The backbone and creativity of England’s elite clubs was being provided 
by a host of hard and skilful Scottish footballers.

It’s difficult to escape the conclusion though, that when the rest of Europe 
marvelled at Holland’s new-age football, Scottish coaches simply regarded it as 
a fancy-Dan frippery that would never stand up to the rigours of a cold 
November night at Brockville.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjohan-cruyff-simply-a-legend-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johan%20Cruyff%3A%20'simply%20a%20legend'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjohan-cruyff-simply-a-legend-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Johan%20Cruyff%3A%20%27simply%20a%20legend%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fjohan-cruyff-simply-a-legend-video-obituary&media=>
 Johan Cruyff: ‘Simply a legend’ - video obituary 
Since then, we have had the occasional glimpse of something finer, provided by 
Alex Ferguson and Jim McLean and their splendid Aberdeen and Dundee United 
teams of the early 1980s. And though Celtic and Rangers each spent millions for 
limited success in Europe’s secondary competition in 2003 and 2008, there was 
no long-term strategy accompanying it.

Rangers almost ruined themselves and Celtic now have a policy of hiring 
cut-price Scandinavians and eastern Europeans in the hope that they can sell 
them on to Southampton.

Both of these clubs, freed from the pressure of competing directly against 
each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/18/how-the-mighty-glasgow-rangers-have-fallen>
for the last four years, have squandered the opportunity to rear their own 
young players and give them opportunities they otherwise would not have had in 
the crucible of Old Firm rivalry. Celtic, with their multimillion-pound 
training academy, effectively use it to provide players on loan to their other 
Scottish clubs.

Before his death last week, Cruyff had not long departed his role overseeing 
the youth academy of Ajax, a club that operates under the same economic 
constraints as Scotland’s top two. He would not have lasted long in a similar 
role with either of those clubs.
 