
When Scott Walker strides to the podium to deliver the keynote speech at the 
annual meeting of theAmerican Legislative Exchange Council 
<http://www.alec.org/annual-meeting/> (Alec) in San Diego on Thursday morning, 
it will not be just another campaign stop. It will also be tacit recognition of 
the Republican presidential candidate’s relationship with one of the nation’s 
most controversial and powerful lobbying networks.

Scott Walker: a candidate who embodies America's current partisan divisiveness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/14/scott-walker-wisconsin-divisive-governor-elections>
It is a relationship that spans two decades. Since he first took public office 
in 1993 as aWisconsin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> legislator, 
through to his current position as that state’s governor, Walker has maintained 
close ties to Alec, with policies to match. Many of Walker’s most contentious 
actions – a tough-on-crime bill that sent incarceration rates soaring, 
stand-your-ground gun laws, protection of corporate vested interests, attacks 
on union rights and many more – have borne the Alec seal of approval.

Should Walker win the Republican nomination in 2016 (a plausible outcome 
<http://politicalwire.com/2015/03/25/walker-holds-big-lead-in-iowa/>) and then 
defeat the Democratic candidate to take the presidency (a harder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/14/scott-walker-wisconsin-divisive-governor-elections>
, though not unthinkable, challenge) he would become the firstAlec alum 
<https://twitter.com/ALEC_states/status/569642687978192896> to enter the Oval 
Office. In short, it is now possible to conceive of the first Alec president of 
the United States.

A poll 
<http://www.quinnipiac.edu/news-and-events/quinnipiac-university-poll/2016-presidential-swing-state-polls/release-detail?ReleaseID=2261>
 on Wednesday by Quinnipiac University that tests hypothetical candidate 
scenarios in the general election next November has Walker beating Hillary 
Clinton in three key states – Colorado, Iowa and Virginia – by between three 
and nine percentage points.

To Alec’s critics, the prospect is chilling.


“Walker developed his political career with Alec’s help, and if he wins in 
2016 there would be legitimate concern that he would bring its focus on 
corporate-friendly laws and enriching special interests with him to the White 
House,” said Brendan Fischer of the Center for Media and Democracy, which 
monitors the lobbying group.

Walker’s press secretary Ashlee Strong, however, said the presidential 
candidate had a long-standing and positive relationship with Alec, “an 
organization that helps bring to life one of his most strongly held principles: 
that power belongs in the hands of state and local governments, not in 
Washington DC.” As a former state legislator, Strong added, Walker “looks 
forward to any opportunity to exchange ideas and discuss solutions with elected 
leaders who work closest to the taxpayers.”


But what impact does Alec’s involvement with so many senior politicians have on
US politics <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics>? And what does 
Walker’s close involvement with the network tell us about his style of 
government and how he would steer a potential presidency?

The network acts as a dating agency: it arranges hook-ups between state 
legislators – overwhelmingly Republican – and major US corporations. It brings 
them togetherbehind closed doors 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/dana-milbank-alec-stands-its-ground/2013/12/04/ad593320-5d2c-11e3-bc56-c6ca94801fac_story.html>
, to dream up new business-friendly measures.

Once ensconced in private, the politicians and corporate lobbyists are asked 
to decide which legislation they want to prioritize. Alec takes the preferred 
options, which by definition are beneficial to big business, and drafts them 
into model bills that it proceeds to disseminate across Republican-controlled 
state assemblies. The bills duly pass into law.

In 1998, Walker pushed through the Wisconsin legislature a Truth in Sentencing 
bill that eliminated almost all parole for many classes of state prisoners. He 
was open about Alex’s influence over the legislation, which had previously 
encouraged take-up of similar laws by other states as well as the federal 
government.

In a 2002 interview 
<http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/corrections/laws5.html>, 
Walker recalled that “many of us, myself included, were part of Alec … Clearly 
Alec had proposed model legislation. And probably more important than just the 
legislation, [Alec] had actually put together reports and such that showed the 
benefits of truth-in-sentencing and showed the successes in other states. Those 
statistics were very helpful to us when we pushed it through.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fscott-walker-alec-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06b5ce8f9629e6632a4cd257ea4ca91ab30d983c%2F0_0_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scott%20Walker%2C%20first%20Alec%20president%3F%20Long%20ties%20to%20controversial%20lobby%20raise%20concern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fscott-walker-alec-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scott%20Walker%2C%20first%20Alec%20president%3F%20Long%20ties%20to%20controversial%20lobby%20raise%20concern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fscott-walker-alec-2016-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06b5ce8f9629e6632a4cd257ea4ca91ab30d983c%2F0_0_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Scott Walker celebrates his recall election victory in 2012. ‘Alec exists to 
facilitate corporate influence and Walker’s record as governor in Wisconsin 
suggests he’s OK with that,’ says Brendan Fischer of the Center for Media and 
Democracy. Photograph: Darren Hauck/Reuters 
The explicit design of the Truth in Sentencing law was to keep prisoners 
locked up for longer, and its impact was thus predictable: it vastly swelled 
the Wisconsin prison population and helped boost profits for the private prison 
companies which, at the time the legislation was enacted, constituted some of 
Alec’s most active corporate members. Combined with other moves to get tough on 
crime from the same period, the law helped to inflate prison numbers 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/how-scott-walker-built-career-sending-wisconsin-inmates-private-prisons/>
 to a level that remains today at 23,000 – including putting one in eight 
African Americans of working age behind bars, the highest proportion of 
incarcerated black adults 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2167402-blackimprisonment.html#document/p3/a227435>
 in the country.

As governor since 2011, Walker no longer officially belongs to Alec – 
political membership is drawn from state legislators. But he continues to 
preside over a political machine that is heavily indebted to the lobbying 
organisation for its ideas and direction, not least because at least 43 of the 
82Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> in the 
Wisconsin legislature are Alec members.

What might Scott Walker's America look like? Just see what he did to Wisconsin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/13/scott-walker-record-republican-presidency>
According to the Center for Media and Democracy 
<http://www.prwatch.org/news/2015/06/12851/scott-walker-first-alec-president>, 
in his first year as governor Walker signed into law 19 bills that reflected, 
to some degree, Alec thinking, which in turn reflected the desires of the big 
American corporations which make use of the lobbying network to inject their 
interests directly into the political process.

“Alec exists to facilitate corporate influence and Walker’s record as governor 
in Wisconsin suggests he’s OK with that,” Fischer said.

One of those first-year efforts was Wisconsin’s Castle Doctrine 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/statepolitics/walker-to-sign-castle-doctrine-bill-wednesday-bh3brej-135197918.html>
 law, which Walker signed in December 2011 and which took as its template an
Alec model bill 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2166237-alec-exposed-in-wisconsin.html#document/p24/a227443>
. Alec, in turn, had based its model bill on Florida’s original 2005 
legislation, devised with the help of the National Rifle Association, that 
increased immunity against prosecution for property owners who “stand their 
ground” and shoot, even to kill, when they feel threatened by someone.

The stand-your-ground laws – dubbed “shoot first” by detractors – were rapidly 
spread around the US under Alec’s active tutelage. Two months after Walker 
signed the bill, an unarmed black teenager called Trayvon Martin was shot as he 
was walking in a residential area of Florida by a self-appointed neighbourhood 
watch leader who was not initially prosecuted, prompting nationwide anger and 
debate about the controversial law.

Ten days after the death of Trayvon Martin, Bo Morrison, 20, was shot dead by 
a homeowner in Slinger, Wisconsin, when he sought refuge on the man’s porch 
after an underage party was busted by police. Morrison was unarmed, yet state 
prosecutors decidednot to charge 
<http://fox6now.com/2012/03/21/district-attorney-issues-no-charges-in-slinger-shooting/>
 the homeowner, Adam Kind, citing the newly enshrined Castle Doctrine 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2167425-castle-doctrine-2.html#document/p23/a227450>
.

Alec came under so much flak in the wake of the Trayvon Martin shooting that 
several of its biggest corporate donors severed ties, pitching it intofinancial 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/alec-funding-crisis-big-donors-trayvon-martin>
. In an attempt to limit the damage, Alec disbanded the part of its operation 
that had spearheaded the stand-your-ground law, promising in future to 
concentrate on purely economic matters.

His whole economic agenda is an Alec agenda.
State representative Chris Taylor 
Yet Walker continues to proclaim his championing of the controversial law. In 
his speech announcing thelaunch of his presidential campaign 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/scott-walker-announces-2016-campaign-2015-7> 
last week, he specifically name-checked the Castle Doctrine, without mentioning 
its Alec origins, as one of his proudest reforms, along with his introduction 
of new voting restrictions (another Alec favourite) and the defunding of 
Planned Parenthood.

Alec itself counters criticism of its influence in states such as Wisconsin by 
saying that it is an “educational organisation” focused on “limited government, 
free markets and federalism”. Its spokesman, Wilhelm Meierling, told the 
Guardian Walker was one of three Republican presidential candidates – alongside 
Marco Rubio and Lindsey Graham – who have belonged to the network, in addition 
to six sitting governors.


“Legislators from across the country have engaged with Alec on a consistent 
basis since 1973,” Meierling said.

In addition to the Castle Doctrine, several other important pieces of 
legislation signed by Walker during the past four years all carry Alec’s stamp 
– some having been openly supported by the lobbying group, others importing
word-for-word passages from Alec model bills 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2166237-alec-exposed-in-wisconsin.html#document/p27/a227539>
. One of his first acts as governor was to encourage the passage of a bill that 
made it more difficult for Wisconsin citizens to sue big corporations for 
injury or other damages. As it moved through the legislature, Alec wrote to 
each of the legislators to say that it “supports this legislation which 
includes numerous provisions that reflect Alec’s civil justice reform policy 
and model legislation”.

Chris Taylor, a Democratic Wisconsin state representative who has become an 
Alec member in order to monitor its activities from within, said the lobbying 
group’s influence ran through Walker’s economic policy as governor.

“His whole economic agenda is an Alec agenda,” she said.

Walker’s 2011 assault on the collective bargaining rights of public sector 
workers, which led todramatic protests 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/sns-wisconsin-protests-pg-photogallery.html>
 at the state capitol and the surreal flight of Democratic legislators across 
state lines into Illinois in an attempt to block passage of the bill, as well 
as hisapproval this year 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/statepolitics/scott-walker-signs-right-to-work-bill-b99457819z1-295609181.html>
 of a similar right-to-work measure that stripped private sector unions of 
their powers, bear significant Alec influences. Taylor said their combined 
impact was to dampen down wages.

“Wisconsin has a crisis of wage growth,” she said. “The only people who are 
enjoying rising wages in the state are the 1% – that’s why Alec policies are so 
harmful. They maximise corporate profits while driving down wages of 
middle-income families, which in turn suppresses new jobs as people don’t have 
spare money to spend.”

Taylor will be attending the San Diego summit where Walker will be the keynote 
speaker.Alec says <http://www.alec.org/annual-meeting/> 2,000 legislators and 
business lobbyists are expected to attend, participating in numerous meetings 
where new model bills will be privately crafted – away from the prying eyes of 
the media <http://www.alec.org/media-policy/>.

 This article was amended on 4 August 2015. An earlier version stated that 
“private prison companies constitute some of Alec’s most active corporate 
members”. This has been corrected.

 