
A standoff between the two houses of parliament threatens to thwart a 
government-backed crackdown on multinational tax avoidance and a Labor-backed 
plan to increase tax transparency.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, told the House of Representatives on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2015/nov/12/eric-abetz-demands-julie-bishop-explain-staffers-presence-at-coup-meeting-politics-live>
 the government would not accept the “cobbled together, last-minute, 
back-of-the-envelope” amendments thatthe Senate made to the Coalition’s 
multinational tax package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/11/senate-setback-offers-coalition-an-ultimatum-on-multinational-tax-changes>
 on Wednesday.

The changes made by Labor, the Greens and four crossbench senators would 
reintroduce a version of the tax transparency measures for big Australian 
private companies that were wound back only last month.

The Coalition’s policy is to shield Australian-owned private companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/05/coalition-says-kidnap-risk-means-wealthy-need-tax-reporting-exemptions>
 from a Labor-era requirement for entities with annual turnover above $100m to 
publish details about their annual revenue and the tax they pay in Australia.

Senate setback offers Coalition an ultimatum on multinational tax changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/11/senate-setback-offers-coalition-an-ultimatum-on-multinational-tax-changes>
The government’s decision to reject the transparency amendments entrenches a 
standoff between the upper and lower houses, putting a cloud overthe 
government’s budget measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-confirms-30-multinationals-face-tax-avoidance-crackdown>
 targeting multinational tax avoidance that was due to begin on 1 January.

“I move that the amendments be disagreed to,” Morrison told the lower house, 
accusing the opposition of failing to act in good faith.


“The Senate, on the run at the last minute, has sought to dramatically amend 
this bill and include a raft of peripheral additions ... this is a very shabby 
process that cannot be supported and should not be encouraged ... this is the 
type of cynical, old politics that Australians are sick of.”

The Greens MP Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> said: “To come in here 
and call it a shabby process shows us really what is motivating this 
government. Only a blue-blood government with a born-to-rule mentality would 
call democracy a shabby process.”

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said the government was 
creating a dispute between the houses by refusing to accept the transparency 
measures.


“From time to time governments lose votes ... and the treasurer has to get 
used it. You lost a vote, get over it,” Bowen told Morrison in parliament.

“You lost the support of the crossbench. It happens. It’s not a ‘shabby 
process’, it’s called democracy, it happened to us from time to time when we 
were in government, we had to deal with it, it’s called losing a vote.”

Bowen said the upper house was not impressed by the tactics employed by 
supporters of the government’s position.

He pointed to revelations about the Family Office Institute Australia 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/the-institute-with-no-members-embarrasses-senate-committee-20151029-gkm71n>
, which gave a submission to a Senate committee in support of shielding big 
private companies from the disclosure rules.

“It turns out that Family Office Institute has no members and is what is 
called an astroturf organisation,” Bowen said. “The Senate was less than 
impressed with that shabby process and the Senate voted last night.”

The government announced in the 2015 budget that it would give the Australian 
tax office greater powers to stop global companies using “artificial or 
contrived arrangements” to avoid tax obligations – but the Senate passed the 
legislation only after making an amendment relating to tax transparency.

The Coalition’s setback in the Senate on Wednesday followed Labor’s procedural 
bungle last month,when it did not call for a voting division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/15/labors-shadow-boxing-with-turnbull-distracts-from-real-transparency-fight>
 on the government’s earlier bill to revoke the requirement for big 
Australian-owned private companies from having to publish details about their 
tax affairs.

Coalition says kidnap risk means wealthy need tax reporting exemptions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/05/coalition-says-kidnap-risk-means-wealthy-need-tax-reporting-exemptions>
Wednesday’s amendments would reintroduce the transparency obligations for big 
companies, while providing an avenue for firms to apply to the tax commissioner 
for an exemption on a case-by-case basis.

The company would need to convince the commissioner “that to make the 
information publicly available may be significantly prejudicial to any of the 
entity’s current or future commercial negotiations”.

In a written statement of reasons for rejecting the amendments, the government 
said it would be inappropriate to require the tax commissioner to make such 
decisions.

“The tax office is not equipped with the expertise to assess the commercial 
sensitivities of company negotiations,” the statement said. “The Senate 
amendment would require the ATO to divert resources away from its core 
activities, which is not in the public interest.”

But Morrison did not rule out a policy shift after his planned meeting with 
the tax commissioner, Chris Jordan, to discuss “potential unintended 
consequences” next week.

“The government is not rejecting the consideration of the issues raised in 
these amendments but the appalling process that has produced these amendments,” 
Morrison said.

Parliament rises on Thursday, with only two further sitting weeks scheduled 
before the summer break, providing limited time for the multinational bill to 
be reworked before 1 January.

Tax office did not go to police over fears wealthy would be kidnapped – inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/22/tax-office-did-not-go-to-police-over-fears-wealthy-would-be-kidnapped-inquiry>
The amendments were moved by the Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson after 
protracted negotiations with Labor and crossbench senators, and passed the 
Senate 32 votes to 29. The independent senator Nick Xenophon was a key player 
in achieving the compromise.

Xenophon said he had “reluctantly supported” the government’s bill last month 
because he feared disclosure could harm suppliers to Coles and Woolworths, but 
conceded he did not have all the information at the time.

“I apologise to the Senate because I did not do my due diligence as I ought to 
have in relation to that piece of legislation,” Xenophon said on Wednesday.

Bills need to be passed by both houses of parliament before they can receive 
royal assent and take effect.
 