
The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, has ruled out 
conducting “rear view” analysis of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) 
agreement, saying that the government is satisfied with its projected benefits.

The only analysis done on the massive 12-country trade deal was conducted by 
the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Consumer groups such as Choice had 
asked for independent review to be undertaken.

Trans-Pacific Partnership: four key issues to watch out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/06/trans-pacific-partnership-four-key-issues-to-watch-out-for>
When asked by reporters during an address to the National Press Club, Morrison 
flatly refused.

“The work has been done ... in securing these agreements and the sceptics will 
always doubt the trade benefits of these sorts of deals,” he said. “They’re 
welcome to their scepticism. The government is convinced of it.

“Doing rear view analysis on these things after the work has been done – that 
can be contemplated – but we’re a bit more focused on getting on to the next 
set of issues that need to be addressed. 

“We don’t intend to run the economy with a rear view mirror. We intend to look 
forward on what we have to do.”

The deal was struck in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/06/andrew-robb-defends-tpp-after-full-release-of-trade-deal-document>
 and officially signed earlier this month. The 12 signatory countries are: 
Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, 
Singapore, the United States and Vietnam.

TPP trade deal will expand Australia's economy by less than 1%, World Bank 
reveals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tpp-trade-deal-will-grow-australias-economy-by-less-than-1-world-bank-reveals>
Morrison praised the trade minister, Andrew Robb, who announced his retirement 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/trade-minister-andrew-robb-to-retire-from-politics-as-truss-considers-future>
 and will hand the baton to Steve Ciobo at the swearing-in ceremony for the new 
ministry on Thursday.

“There is the outstanding record of the trade and investment agenda we have 
been pursuing over the last few years,” Morrison said.

“[Robb] has spearheaded that charge and delivered generations of prosperity 
for Australians from his great work and I want to thank Andrew on behalf of 
myself, and other colleagues here for the tremendous work he has done.”

Robb will take on the role of special trade envoy to ease Ciobo’s transition 
into the role, as Australia pursues free trade deals with Singapore and India.

Earlier this month, Robb rejected calls for a cost-benefit analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/04/tpp-signing-andrew-robb-rejects-calls-for-cost-benefit-analysis-of-trade-deal>
 of the 6,000-page deal, after it emerged that Australia’s economy would grow 
by just 0.7% as a result of signing the agreement.

The World Bank analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tpp-trade-deal-will-grow-australias-economy-by-less-than-1-world-bank-reveals>
 showed that Australia fared worse than all other countries except for the US 
from the deal.
 