
When I arrived in Glasgow in the late 1990s, my first impression was how 
European it felt. I was 22 and had travelled “abroad” from England but never to
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. The architecture was 
different, the outlook of the people, the political will. The art scene was 
vibrant.

It was the tail end of the Havergal, Prowse and MacDonald era at the Citizens 
theatre <http://citz.co.uk/>, where classic European and contemporary plays 
came magnificently to life and made the Citz world famous.Tramway 
<http://www.tramway.org/Pages/home.aspx> was the epicentre of internationalism. 
The legacy of Glasgow’s year as European Capital of Culture in 1990 – with the 
programming of monumental international artists such as Peter Brook and Robert 
Lepage and Scottish artists such as Gerry Mulgrew – began to influence a whole 
generation of theatre practitioners. There was the illicit, exciting 
experimentalism ofthe Arches <http://www.thearches.co.uk/> and the CCA 
<http://www.cca-glasgow.com/programme>.

The closure of the Arches in Glasgow will be felt around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/10/arches-glasgow-theatre-closure>
As someone influenced by European theatre and little interested in the English 
tradition of playwriting, Glasgow and Scotland felt like a great place to be. 
It still is. Things have been lost and gained. Tramway is no longer the 
international powerhouse it once was; the Arches has gone. But there is an 
innovativeNational Theatre of Scotland 
<https://www.nationaltheatrescotland.com/content/>, which was conceived to take 
its shows to people all across its nation, rather than sit in the centre of its 
capital to be enjoyed by the few. There is a supremely confident Citz, which 
offers reinterpretations of classical plays and populist new work, and 
brilliant young artists, from all backgrounds, working wherever they can. As 
for my company,Vanishing Point <http://www.vanishing-point.org/>, it has been 
creating theatre in Glasgow for 16 years and co-produces work with partners all 
around the world.

Vanishing Point’s theatre has always been Glaswegian. The city breathes life 
into our work – its light, its winters, its industry, its radicalism, its 
rebelliousness, its humour. Yet our theatre doesn’tthink about being 
Glaswegian. That’s whatmakes it so. My show The Destroyed Room is a 
co-production withBattersea Arts Centre <https://www.bac.org.uk/>, part of A 
Nation’s Theatre Festival 
<http://www.bac.org.uk:3000/content/39416/whats_on/whats_on/shows/a_nations_theatre_festival>
.

When I first talked to the producers, I asked: “Which nation are you talking 
about?” The way I see it, Vanishing Point’s co-production with BAC is an 
international one, like our previous co-productions with theatres in Portugal, 
Argentina, Italy and Russia. That’s because, although I am English, I have 
lived inGlasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> for 20 years and see 
Scotland as a distinct nation, politically and culturally.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fscottish-independence-theatre-vanishing-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c5d63b0f24276e1d5a6732429171da64882dc01%2F150_269_3142_1886%2F3142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20independence%3F%20In%20theatre%2C%20it's%20long-established&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fscottish-independence-theatre-vanishing-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20independence%3F%20In%20theatre%2C%20it%27s%20long-established&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fscottish-independence-theatre-vanishing-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c5d63b0f24276e1d5a6732429171da64882dc01%2F150_269_3142_1886%2F3142.jpg>
 Pauline Goldsmith in Vanishing Point’s The Destroyed Room 
In the years I’ve been in Glasgow, I’ve become aware of how little Scottish 
culture is celebrated in England. Generally speaking, it garners more attention 
when it’s about something that can be identified as stereotypically Scottish. 
There is little real interest in contemporary Scottish culture, at least in the 
mainstream. Maybe that’s what the worst kind of internationalism is – nations 
merely wanting to import cliches about other nations. Maybe that’s why it 
sometimes feels as if most of England’s TV, film and theatre stars have come 
from Eton and Harrow?

The Destroyed Room review – from barbed chit-chat to apocalypse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/28/the-destroyed-room-review-tron-glasgow-vanishing-point-matthew-lenton>
Is London the pinnacle, towards which all the best work and greatest artists 
inevitably gravitate? Most artists without private wealth seem no longer able 
to live there. Perhaps that marks the beginning of the end of London’s supposed 
place at the heart of UK culture. If things remain on their current trajectory, 
with the Eton brigade in charge of the government and the arts, England 
possibly heading out of Europe, and an independent Scotland staying in, it 
won’t be long before the centres of culture are established elsewhere.

Scotland is a nation of theatre artists from Wick to the Borders. Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> here is diverse, democratic and 
largely unburdened by the class system that defines English theatre. It is 
outward-looking, internationalist, uninterested in cultural museum pieces and 
focused on the new.

In the independence referendum, Scotland came close to achieving politically 
what it already has culturally. That wasn’t about nationalism, but about 
asserting the confidence of its own culture. Whether or not such borders should 
exist, they aren’t always a bad thing and aren’t always about division. When 
Vanishing Point collaborates with artists from other countries and cultures, 
the borders between us don’t alienate us from one another. They make us 
curious, respectful and celebratory of our differences as well as our 
similarities.

• The Destroyed Room is at Battersea Arts Centre, London 
<http://www.vanishing-point.org/show-dates/>, 27 April–14 May.
 