
Bafta <http://www.bafta.org/> and the British Film Institute 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/> recently hosted lectures on screenwriting. In extracts 
from their lectures, top writersAbi Morgan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/abimorgan>, Brian Helgeland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96810/sin.eater>, Julian Fellowes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/julian-fellowes>, Peter Straughan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/nov/18/bbc-hbo-wolf-hall-tv-drama> and 
Scott Frank <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0291082/> offer advice for career 
hopefuls.

Abi Morgan (The Hour <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/the-hour>, Shame 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142860/shame>, The Iron Lady 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140396/iron-lady>)

Openings are important to me. My first play took me two years to write. I 
think it was because I wrote and re-wrote the first page maybe 100 times. I now 
think of that play as my apprenticeship. It was the mental warm-up, the place 
where I was starting to piece together all the other moments. It's where I 
bring form to the chaos. Most of the writing journey is a process of this – 
finding form to chaos.

The ability to change is key in writing drama. That doesn't mean one has to 
concede on every point. Having written several screenplays, I want to stay in 
the state where I think I know something and then discover I know nothing 
again. It drives me, it motivates me. And it also makes me realise that the 
process of drafting, re-drafting and throwing away material is never for 
nothing.

Brian Helgeland (LA Confidential <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119488/>, 
Mystic River <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96638/mystic.river>)

The first thing to do is to is pick something worth writing about, which seems 
fairly obvious. You want to make it compelling and commercial. The thing about 
a commercial movie is all it has to do is make more money than it cost. So if 
your movie cost $10 to make and it makes $20, it's commercial.

You only have around 120 pages so it has to be structured. It has to drive 
forward. If you write a scene that is lateral, cut it out or make it do 
something. Make it drive you to the next moment because there's no time to mess 
around. Novelists can write 900 pages if they want. For a film, you can write 
between 100 and 140 pages, but there's not a lot of difference there. When you 
start writing a script, you're an architect and there's nothing creative about 
it – that's a slight exaggeration, but it's true.

Julian Fellowes (Downton Abbey <http://www.itv.com/downtonabbey/>, Gosford Park
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/90433/gosford.park>)

I think you always have to remember when you're writing a script, that it 
isn't necessarily going to be that script that gets made, but what it acts as 
is an audition that opens the door for you.

I never had any training at all in screenwriting and, like almost everything 
else in my life, it all came about completely by accident. People often say to 
me, "Wouldn't you rather this had all happened when you were 30?". Well, the 
short answer to that is yes, but the long answer is that by the time you're 50 
you've made a fool of yourself so many times that the thought that you might 
make a fool of yourself is no longer a deterrent. So you just cheerfully take 
it on board and have a crack.

Peter Straughan (Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142611/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy>, How to 
Lose Friends and Alienate People 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125169/how.to.lose.friends.and.alienate.people>
,The Men Who Stare at Goats 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131632/men-who-stare-at-goats>)

Pretty much all the work you get offered as a writer comes in the form of some 
kind of source material. People often say that there are so many adaptations 
now because the film industry wants to minimise risk by picking stories that 
have been proven to work with a large audience.

Obviously that's sometimes true. It's true of something like Fifty Shades of 
Grey, I suppose. But I don't think it's true of Paul Thomas Anderson when he 
adapted Upton Sinclair's little-known novel Oil into There Will Be Blood. And I 
don't think Kubrick was relying on the box office power of Thackeray when he did
Barry Lyndon <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/80044/barry-lyndon>.

Original screenplays are harder to write, not surprisingly; you have to come 
up with all the raw material yourself. But the interesting thing is that the 
process of writing both originals and adaptations is much more similar than 
you'd think because, even when you're adapting someone else's work, you still 
haven't decided what you're going to say with it.

Scott Frank (Minority Report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/92062/minority.report>, Marley & Me 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0822832/>, Out of Sight 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120780/>)

I'm not a big believer in writing tips, because when you get down to it, it's 
all so personal, and whenever someone gives me a tip, it just makes me feel 
like I've been doing it all wrong.

We spend far too much time agonising over the why. We are told to write only 
this kind of movie or that kind of movie and, stupidly, we believe these 
people. We are told to write only things that are emotionally honest or true or 
have some socio-political content or something with depth or whatever. What if 
we have no depth? What if we just like robot movies?

I guess the answer would be to write a robot movie that's emotionally honest. 
You could try to write a really good one. But who sets out to write a bad 
movie? Let me tell you something – I say this from experience – the bad movies 
are just as hard to write as the good ones. So please go ahead and write your 
robot movie. Or the superhero movie. Or whatever movie you want to. Just don't 
write it because you think I or anyone else is waiting for you to do it.

• For more tips and advice from screenwriters, visit the Bafta Guru 
<http://www.bafta.org/guru>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 