
This week, British sculptor Sir Antony Gormley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley> was flying from London to 
New York City.


He was nervous.

“There’s always a bit of a – what’s the right word? – a bit of nervousness 
involved,” said Gormley on speaker phone from Sean Kelly Gallery in New York, 
where he opens a solo show on Friday.

“I was hoping I remembered the volume and condition of the gallery right, so 
that the work activates the space rather than occupies it.”

Construct is Gormley’s latest solo exhibition at the gallery, which runs until 
18 June. Showing 11 sculptures and two drawings, all of which have never been 
exhibited before, it is spread across the gallery’s two floors. The show offers 
insight into urban density and our digital lives, as well as the future of 
Manhattan.

“We spend much more time now with human-made artefacts than we do with natural 
elements,” said Gormley, explaining that by 2050, 75% of people will live 
within urban grid.

“Firsthand experience is becoming a luxury. This whole show is a meditation on 
the human future as an indistinguishable from our built habitat.”

Known for his public artworks, the artist has been casting his own body for 
the past 40 years in steel, fiberglass and iron; and has put his naked form in 
grand scenarios such as atop of Lord of the Rings-esque cliffs and in the 
middle of vast Star Wars-ish landscapes.

Seemingly normal, they’ve provoked a controversial response – Gateshead’s 
Angel of the North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/29/how-we-made-the-angel-of-the-north>
 hasconfused onlookers 
<https://s3.amazonaws.com/lowres.cartoonstock.com/art-angel_of_the_north-north-art_statue-art_sculpture-public_art-jmcn253_low.jpg>
 who compare it toa sanitary napkin 
<https://s3.amazonaws.com/lowres.cartoonstock.com/art-angel_of_the_north-antony_gormley-sculptues-santary_towel-sanitary_products-cha0057_low.jpg>
, whileEvent Horizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2015/nov/26/antony-gormley-hong-kong-sculptures-in-pictures>
, which has31 life-sized figures 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3323692/Don-t-jump-Life-sized-Antony-Gormley-sculptures-Hong-Kong-high-rise-buildings-cause-panic-residents-mistake-people-contemplating-suicide.html>
 atop Hong Kong skyscrapers, was mistaken for real people contemplating a 
suicidal jump. It caused a panic with concerned locals who called police.

Gormley has drawn with his own semen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2002/nov/20/art.artsfeatures> for 
pieces collected in the British Museum, was knighted in 2014 and won the Turner 
Prize in 1994 forField for the British Isles 
<http://www.antonygormley.com/sculpture/item-view/id/245#p0>, 35,000 terracotta 
figures made by a Mexican family of brick makers.

But here, the show opens with “Bodycases,” Bridge, one of his earliest mould 
pieces from 1985, where the artist casts his own body in plaster and wrapped in 
fiberglass and lead.

He also shows pieces made with more fragile materials, like Mother’s Pride IV, 
which was made in 1982 but reconstructed in 2012. It’s a silhouette of the 
artist in the foetal position made from sliced white bread.

Ask Gormley to explain the meaning behind his artwork and you’ll be met with 
mouthfuls of babble. The artist uses phrases like “incremental expansion” and 
“background radiation phenomenon”. Some have called his vocabulary aweird 
wasteland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2002/nov/20/art.artsfeatures>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-new-york-exhibit-construct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e9e4d8ee85d463507895974be8fa716aa016e38%2F82_345_2881_1728%2F2881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sculptor%20Antony%20Gormley%3A%20'the%20selfie%20is%20charming'%20but%20it's%20a%20modern%20paradox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-new-york-exhibit-construct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sculptor%20Antony%20Gormley%3A%20%27the%20selfie%20is%20charming%27%20but%20it%27s%20a%20modern%20paradox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-new-york-exhibit-construct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e9e4d8ee85d463507895974be8fa716aa016e38%2F82_345_2881_1728%2F2881.jpg>
 Antony Gormley, Scaffold, 2015. Photograph: Stephen White, London, Courtesy: 
Sean Kelly, New York 
It’s a challenge to cut through his scripted art prose. On one BBC documentary 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJ8UAlLQv6A>, someone commented that he “eats 
dictionaries”. And they’re right. Gormley talks like a well-read professor. 
Just like sitting in a university lecture, one feels like falling asleep while 
interviewing him.

“I’m sorry, I’m not being very clear,” he said in the middle of a sentence 
when asked to explain his new show.

He won’t wear his heart on his sleeve, but will talk about feelings as a 
starting point.

“It sounds like I’m being asked to prescribe a reaction,” he said. “This isn’t 
about illustrating either the look of a body or a particular emotion; it’s to 
give rise to thoughts and feelings that wouldn’t otherwise exist.”

Some of the new work in the show includes Scaffold from 2015, which is a human 
body made of grid-like stainless steel bars and five new pieces from his Big 
Beamer series.

There’s also Big Pluck 2, which was made earlier this year, a cubistic body of 
blocks, and a pair of two-and-a-half-ton pieces in the gallery’s basement 
called Stretched Blockworks, which arrived by boat across the Atlantic Ocean.

The artist typically leaves his sculptures outside for a year before showing 
them, “the results of good London acid rain”, he said.

This time, he weathered the sculptures before they went on the boat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-new-york-exhibit-construct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813fb059781161fb3973726d0321abb0cf50c35d%2F340_250_2025_1215%2F2025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sculptor%20Antony%20Gormley%3A%20'the%20selfie%20is%20charming'%20but%20it's%20a%20modern%20paradox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-new-york-exhibit-construct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sculptor%20Antony%20Gormley%3A%20%27the%20selfie%20is%20charming%27%20but%20it%27s%20a%20modern%20paradox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-new-york-exhibit-construct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813fb059781161fb3973726d0321abb0cf50c35d%2F340_250_2025_1215%2F2025.jpg>
 Antony Gormley, Bridge, 1985. Courtesy: the artist and Sean Kelly, New York 
“They were literally like Egyptian mummies, wrapped in wet rags so they would 
rust and mature like a good cheese on their way over,” he said. “It took three 
months.”

Stretched Blockworks are two works influenced by early 20th-century New York 
high rises. Gormley makes a connection between the architecture and high 
density of living in Manhattan.

“It feels like a meditation chamber on our human future, which will be subject 
to compression, condensation and elevation,” he said. “Los Angeles is urban 
sprawl, Manhattan is concentration.”

Time is always an issue in Gormley’s work, as we won’t last forever. “We will 
be extinct at some point, there’s no point in putting a date on it,” he said 
drily.

“Sculpture is not instant gratification; it’s a dialogue with time. It can 
return you to your own existence with a sense of alert awareness that you 
wouldn’t otherwise have without it. My argument for sculpture is that it helps 
us slow down and not do things in bites and bits.”

Even though Gormley casts his own body for all of his pieces, he doesn’t 
consider himself a self-portrait artist. “It’s irrelevant,” he said.

“It’s not about representation; it’s about trying to capture a feel of the 
body.”

But one can’t help but notice that there are a lot of people taking selfies 
<https://www.tripadvisor.com/LocationPhotoDirectLink-g3612508-d1549301-i181411676-Antony_Gormley_s_Another_Place-Crosby_Merseyside_England.html>
 with his sculptures all over the world, some people pose with mouths agape 
covering his genitals, othersdress the sculptures 
<http://www.southportvisiter.co.uk/news/southport-west-lancs/iron-men-crosby-beach-19-9446974>
 in women’s clothing, likepink bikinis 
<http://www.zimbio.com/photos/Anthony+Gormley/A+Sculpture+in+Edinburgh/6VoyViDQ3e0>
. The funniest have to be shots ofdogs with the sculptures 
<http://www.southportvisiter.co.uk/news/southport-west-lancs/iron-men-crosby-beach-19-9446974>
 or peoplehanging from them 
<https://misty4srk.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/gormley-statues.jpg>.

Gormley has deep thoughts on why people take selfies in general. “The selfie 
phenomenon is an expression of our deep uncertainty for our own identities,” he 
said.

“We have to reaffirm our own experiences by taking these tragically fragile 
memorials for a brief moment of time we have shared with an object, person or 
place that we think seems to have a higher value than ourselves.”

But does he take selfies with his fans? After all, he’ll be at the opening on 
Friday night.

“Doing selfies? I’m always obliged because it’s the least I can do,” he laughs.

“In many ways, the selfie is charming. It’s another sense of community, but at 
the same time it represents a lack of physical community. It’s one of the 
paradoxes of our time, we live closer and closer together, but we spend more 
and more time apart.”
 