
Settling into 'full-time' living 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, I 
stepped away from theplaces where I'd explored my gender 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/16/transgender-journey-trans-counter-culture>
, spending time with old friends as we intuitively worked out if my transition 
would affect our relationships. No longer feeling that I could only be myself 
in 'safe' spaces, I stopped going to 'T-friendly' mainstream gay clubs (where I 
was often the only T, sitting in the corner grinding my teeth as yet another
musical abomination <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YNSxNsr4wmA> piped up), 
deciding that the best way to normalise my gender was to maintain as much 
continuity as possible with my pre-transition social life.

For the most part, this was fine. Fortunately, I lost very few friends and, 
being discerning about where I socialised, I encountered little frictionaway 
from the streets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman>. Having 
discussed my transition so much on coming out, the resumption of long-standing 
arguments with old friends felt strangely cathartic. But I missed Brighton's 
queer scene: I no longer needed it in the same way, but I still liked the 
atmosphere at its events, as well as thetunes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FLJCLD3X-PM&feature=related> (sometimes they 
let mechoose them <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFWdobNIcPQ>, the fools) – 
and I'd made some good friends there.

As well as strengthening my few existing ties, I wanted to make new friends 
who understood the specific challenges of transsexual life. 'Tranny' nights, 
which felt more suited to those who would not transition (especially
transvestites <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transvestite>) didn't appeal, even 
before I came to define as transsexual, and I started to look beyond clubs 
(which often, on some level, cater for people of shared sexuality rather than
gender identity 
<http://gayteens.about.com/od/glbtbasicsforteens/f/sexsogender.htm>) for 
community support.

Through the volunteer-led Clare Project <http://www.clareproject.org.uk/> 
drop-in sessions, I met people who were considering gender reassignment, or 
who'd finished it, or were partway through the pathway. I was invited to attend 
meetings withSpectrum <http://www.spectrum-lgbt.org/>, the local LGBT community 
forum, and Brighton and Hove'sPrimary Care Trust 
<http://www.brightonandhovepct.nhs.uk/>, to discuss our dominant concerns: the 
quality of healthcare services (transsexual-specific services, as well as how 
other services treated us), and our social security in a place which, while 
regarded as one of Britain's most tolerant cities, is still not free from
violence against transsexual people <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10237293>.

So I joined discussions towards a citywide strategy that would involve the 
localcouncil <http://www.brighton-hove.gov.uk/> and police 
<http://www.sussex.police.uk/about-us/information-rights/information-we-publish/current-force-policies/transgender-employment-policy>
 as well as Spectrum and the PCT. We explored medical issues, asking how the 
attitudes of different GPs could affect our entry into the pathway; which 
services offered at'Charing Cross' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/22/transgender-charing-cross> 
could be provided locally; and whether or not sufficient physical or 
psychological aftercare was provided for post-operative transsexual people. At 
other forums, we shared experiences on the police's handling of transphobic 
hate crime, and how we might improve institutional understanding of the 
problems we face maintainingemployment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
 and, sometimes, secure housing. How much of this work will be picked up inthe 
new system that follows the abolition of PCTs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10557996> remains to be seen.

Outside of these settings, I still wondered how much of a transsexual 
community existed in Brighton and Hove, what form it took, and how much I'd 
like to be involved. My gay and lesbian friends said that there would always be 
local spaces for them to meet like-minded people, and were (in some cases) 
thoroughly bored or repulsed by them, but trans-specific social spaces were not 
so obvious (most likely, I thought, because of the smaller numbers of 
transsexual people and, often, their complicated relationship with the idea of 
being recognised as such, but that's another argument).

I discovered that there were dedicated meeting spaces for transsexual people. 
These were in pubs or cafes rather than clubs – places where we could discuss 
common concerns. I half-expected a Trans Women's Institute, before finding that 
there were as many, if not more, female-to-male (FtM) than male-to-female (MtF) 
people there.

Making friends, we decided not to focus on our differences, which can easily 
divide FtMs and MtFs ("How can youwant facial hair 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/08/transgender-journey-facial-hair>
? Ugh!"), discussing instead our attempts to understand our transsexual impulse 
and comparing our consequent experiences. We talked about how central we wanted 
our transitional past or present to be to our identities, how this is affected 
by the fact that – for a time at least – we have no option but to be visibly 
transgendered, and how this changes as we move along and then beyond the 
pathway.

They joked about the possibility (if not dangers) of becoming 'a professional 
trans person' (they'd heard I was writing a column). This mirrored the advice 
that sympatheticcisgender <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cisgender> friends had 
given me, suggesting that once I'd finished the process, I might not want to 
focus so much on my gender, and shouldn't do so now to the exclusion of my 
other interests. My transsexual friends, though, offered amusing takes on the
stereotypical idea <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8rRA8GYzU8E> that we only 
ever talk about our transition – usually along the lines of, "That's all anyone 
asks me about!"

The best advice I ever got from a transsexual person was, "Don't get too hung 
up on making friends with transsexual people – just make friends." There's no 
reason why two transsexual women should get on if that's all they have in 
common, any more than any other two women. That said, shared experience 
provides another layer to my relationships with transsexual people who share my 
political opinions or cultural tastes, for example – in short, the same things 
that would make me friends with anyone else.
 