
“It was literally like being let out of prison,” says Sebastian Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sebastian-barry> of his new novel Days 
Without End, an astonishing portrait of mid-19th century America as seen 
through the eyes of a young Irish emigrant. After surviving famine at home and 
the notorious “coffin ships” to Canada, Thomas McNulty is barely 17 when he 
joins the US army with his boon companion John Cole, another waif wandering the 
vast landscape whom he meets under a hedge in Missouri. Thomas and John are 
just “two wood-shavings of humanity in a rough world”, but Barry sets down the 
horrors of the American Indian wars and civil war and the hardships of frontier 
life in a blaze of vivid observations that combine stoical matter-of-factness 
with new-minted wonder.

The novel follows a rich decade for the Irish writer, with two novels 
shortlisted for the Man Booker prize: 2005’sA Long Long Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/03/fiction.bookerprize2005>, about 
Irish soldiers fighting for the crown in the first world war, and 2008’sThe 
Secret Scripture <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/24/fiction1>, in 
which an old woman looks back on the rigid social mores that saw her confined 
to an asylum.The Secret Scripture also took the Costa book of the year, and has 
now been made into a film, released in the UK this month;On Canaan’s Side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/20/on-canaans-side-sebastian-barry-review>
 was longlisted for the Man Booker in 2011, andThe Temporary Gentleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/29/temporary-gentleman-review-sebastian-barry-novel>
 followed in 2014.

But, Barry says, “you do get imprisoned in a kind of style, especially after 
40 years. And I could feel it grievously leaning on me. You become able to do 
something, and that’s almost verging on fatal.”Days Without End, in which the 
beautiful fluency of Barry’s prose gives way to something more impressionistic, 
led to “some of the high days of my life”: writing it felt “as if I’d been 
given the numbers to a safe deposit box in a memory bank and I was taking out 
what was in the box or maybe even stealing it. The sheer excitement of it!”

From the very beginnings of Barry’s career, in poems, short stories and plays, 
he was inspired by the family stories he heard as a child from his mother Joan 
O’Hara, one of Ireland’s most popular actors. His 1995 breakthrough play,The 
Steward of Christendom, was a reckoning with his great-grandfather Thomas 
Dunne, the Catholic head of the Dublin Metropolitan police, a servant of the 
crown who in the wake of independence was considered a traitor to his new 
country. His 2002 novelAnnie Dunne was named after Thomas’s daughter; A Long 
Long Way featured Thomas’s soldier son, Willie; and On Canaan’s Side followed 
his daughter Lily.The Secret Scripture was sparked by the revelation of a great 
aunt who had been put into an asylum and erased, like so many women, from 
family history;The Temporary Gentleman is based on the drink-soaked, 
destructive marriage of Barry’s grandfather, who early on disowned Barry for 
exposing the family’s dirty laundry.

What’s new in Days Without End is that Barry is following the family tree back 
into a hazy pre-history. There was an ancestor called Thomas, but “all my 
grandfather ever said about him was that his great-uncle had been in the Indian 
wars. That’s it. That was exceptionally freeing.” An early version of Thomas 
appears in the 1992 playWhite Woman Street, and there’s a reference in The 
Temporary Gentleman to “my great uncle Thomas McNulty, who was scalped by a 
band of Comanches in the central grasslands of Texas”. So does a scalping lie 
in store for young Thomas? Barry considers it. “That’s not true, I don’t 
think.” Though characters and details recur across his interrelated works, 
“it’s when books contradict each other that gives me the most joy. That to me 
sounds more human. In later generations, everything is a story. History is 
surmises and good sentences.”

Irish famine survivors got off the boats in America very, very angry. They 
were essentially terrorising the population

In the clashes between Native American tribes and the Europeans trying to 
clear them from the land, Barry found a “rather Irish story”; like the 
impoverished Irish during the famine years, Native Americans were “supported by 
government and therefore made destitute, living in white man’s rags”. “What is 
an Irish person, except a culturally appropriated creature? Thomas has that 
perspective – how Cromwell tried to clear us off and create a beautiful new 
land minus this dreadful people called the Irish.” The book also explores the 
“utter violence” of early Irish American history. Famine survivors “quite 
understandably got off the boats in north America very, very, very angry. These 
were people in the prime of life, essentially terrorising the population.”

At the heart of Days Without End is Thomas’s love affair with John Cole, and 
the family unit they create with a Native American girl, Winona. Before puberty 
takes its toll, the young Thomas and John make a few dollars dressing up as 
girls and dancing for miners starved of female company; later, Thomas finds 
he’s more comfortable in women’s clothing. He describes all this with brisk 
matter-of-factness; like the air he breathes, it is almost too fundamental to 
mention. Barry points out that it “wasn’t until the 1880s or 90s when 
psychiatry was being born that doctors started to put names on these things. Up 
to that point there was no verbalising of it.”

The relationship was inspired in part by his son Toby, to whom the book is 
dedicated and on whose behalf Barry wrote an open letter supporting the yes 
vote in last year’s same-sex marriage referendum. “My beautiful son came into 
our bedroom one morning when he was 16, and said, ‘Dad, I’m gay.’ I said ‘Oh, 
thank God, because now you can go around all that ghastly heterosexual thing 
that we’ve been struggling with all our lives.’ It just seemed like freedom.” 
Barry looked at Toby’s relationship with his boyfriend and saw something very 
different from his own “bonkers” early love affairs. “There’s an area of 
wonderment that I didn’t expect. They were kids but they knew something that I 
didn’t know. It was the beginning of thinking, well, we’re being asked as 
straight people to be tolerant towards gay people but maybe that’s wrong, maybe 
what we should be is envious.”

Gender fluidity is a hot topic at the moment – though “not in the Wicklow 
mountains”, quips Barry. “One of my son’s great fascinations is in drag, we 
watchRuPaul’s Drag Race together, so I realise that’s a very important part of 
the landscape. But I’ll have to be issued with some sort of dispensation 
because I am just a mountainy Wicklow man writing about these things. In a way 
the novel is the art of getting everything wrong.”

The book is also imprinted with the memories of his own 17-year-old self, when 
he hitched 4,500 miles around the US. After studying English and Latin at 
Trinity College Dublin, in his 20s Barry set to wandering some more, pursuing 
the penniless writer’s life in Europe. In Paris he kept away fromSamuel Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett>, Ireland’s most famous 
expatriate, believing that “you had to not pay court to anybody. These enabling 
weird arrogances are very important to a young writer.” He did put a dinner 
with friends of Beckett into a piece of writing, much to their chagrin; on 
reading it, Beckett remarked, “you should never write about friends or family”. 
“I did think that was a little bit ironic when you later read Deirdre Bair’s 
biography and that’s all he’d done himself, but he’d hidden it better!”

Barry took the comment as “a great lesson of some sort, because then I wrote 
very experimentally … I thought you had to continue on from Beckett; you 
couldn’t just go on in theWilliam Trevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/william-trevor> direction.” The mid-80s saw 
the transition between experimentalism and Barry’s mature work. After writing
The Engine of Owl Light, six intertwined stories “a la David Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/davidmitchell>. I don’t think it sold three 
copies”, he was all set to abandon Ireland for good, but a week before leaving 
for Amsterdam he met his wife, the actor Alison Deegan, through a mutual 
friend, in the course of trying to borrow a fiver from her. “How else are you 
supposed to do it if you’re not particularly gifted in human matters?”

“So I was then obliged to be an Irish person in Ireland with an Irish partner, 
which was interesting in itself. Also she was Presbyterian, which I knew 
nothing about. A lot of those plays and some of the books were about those 
states of otherness and what that meant – after independence, to be told you’re 
not really Irish.” This was the point at which he was “stolen away by the 
theatre”, though “I’m not sure I ever wrote a proper play, as such.Seamus Heaney
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney> went to see Prayers of Sherkin
, and he said, ‘That lyric thing is risky, isn’t it? But I think you got away 
with it.’ I wrote 12 or 13 plays – maybe a third of the time I got away with 
it.”

It wasn’t until he was approaching 40, says Barry, that “I found my so-called 
voice, because that’s when I understood something better.” Traumatic aspects of 
his childhood, ignored when he was young through “an effort of creative will”, 
now came into focus – though it’s not something he can address explicitly. 
“There’s no document I can produce that will not sound like an accusation or 
revealing something irresponsibly, or just self serving. What can you say – 
it’s almost a common experience, but it’s the thing that hurt me into trying to 
put something back in its place. To set up a thousand kingdoms to heal that one 
blasted site that has nothing on it.”

When The Secret Scripture was pipped to the Man Booker prize in 2008, the 
chair of judges Michael Portillo described it as “another book about Ireland”. 
Since then there’s been an extraordinary renaissance in Irish literature, and 
Barry has found the new wave –Eimear McBride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eimear-mcbride>, Donal Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/donal-ryan>, Kevin Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-barry>, Lisa McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/lisa-mcinerney> and many more – 
inspirational. “I think that’s partly why I was able to – in my terms – start 
afresh. There’s a licence, a freedom. Some of these writers are so good that 
they’re actually revivifying, like an elixir.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fsebastian-barry-interview-days-without-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53b43192d0fa0f168ccb2313fa87b7d73e333cd2%2F0_209_2669_1602%2F2669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sebastian%20Barry%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20get%20imprisoned%20in%20a%20kind%20of%20style%2C%20I%20could%20feel%20it%20leaning%20on%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fsebastian-barry-interview-days-without-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sebastian%20Barry%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20get%20imprisoned%20in%20a%20kind%20of%20style%2C%20I%20could%20feel%20it%20leaning%20on%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fsebastian-barry-interview-days-without-end%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53b43192d0fa0f168ccb2313fa87b7d73e333cd2%2F0_209_2669_1602%2F2669.jpg>
 Rooney Mara and Jack Reynor in film adaptation ofThe Secret Scripture. 
Photograph: Voltage Pictures 
Now after two decades living in the Wicklow mountains bringing up their three 
children, he and Alison have moved temporarily to Harlesden, north London. The 
children have left home, and this is an opportunity for Alison to be closer to 
the film world after the screenplay she wrote 19 years ago “in her bed of 
pregnancy”, and convinced Alan Rickman to star in and direct, became 2014’s A 
Little Chaos <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-little-chaos>. The screen 
version ofThe Secret Scripture, described in a Guardian review as “sorely 
lacking in subtlety” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/10/the-secret-scripture-review-vanessa-redgrave-rooney-mara-toronto-film-festival>
, has been a less happy experience. The film makes major changes to plot and 
setting, and Barry felt “sad, and to be honest disappointed”, to discover that 
“there aren’t three words from the book in the film. I’m not seeing anything 
that I wrote.” As a theatre person, he explains, “my fealty is to actors. I 
think Vanessa Redgrave is really wonderful in it. All the actors, they’re 
really fine. But I’m sort of innocent of it, because I don’t know what it is.”

And after their six months in Harlesden, “who knows?” The “days without end” 
for which Barry names the new book are “the days of our lives when we have our 
kids and you’re not thinking about being old or young, you’re just in the 
maelstrom of life. An incredibly privileged time. You may be miserable and 
making a terrible mess of it, but nevertheless that was your gift of days.” 
Now, “suddenly I’m 61. Because after your days without end, when they do 
actually end, you’re like Rip Van Winkle waking up in the Hollow.”

Perhaps this is why the new novel conjures the eternal present of a far-off 
place and time that is “so remote from the singular mess of my own childhood”. 
“The important thing for me about Thomas and John Cole is that” – he whispers – 
“they’re still alive with Winona. They’ve created a family, which is the only 
proper outcome for the world. I can feel them there.”

• Days Without End is published by Faber. To order a copy for £14.75 (RRP 
£17.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/days-without-end.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.

 