
A series of events has put a tiny Florida county of less than 40,000 residents 
at the center of national and international controversy regarding monkey 
breeding and research. They include lawsuits, protests and federal complaints, 
and threaten to put southern Florida’s Hendry County on the map for the wrong 
reasons.


Animal Legal Defense Fund <http://s.bl-1.com/h/mF5T3J1?url=http://aldf.org/> 
(ALDF), a Northern California-based nonprofit organization, has sued to block 
the development of a new breeding facility that would allegedly house up to 
3,200 macaque monkeys. That facility would be in addition to the county’s three 
existing facilities, where local authorities have recently arrested multiple 
protesters for trespassing.

An Ohio-based activist group has also filed a complaint with the US Department 
of Agriculture after staff at one lab, Primate Products, found three macaque 
monkeys dead from electrocution. The complaint urges the USDA to revoke the 
facility’s license to sell monkeys for research.

The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection <http://www.buav.org/> 
(BUAV) has also gotten involved, arguing that macaques caught in the wild on 
the African island of Mauritius are used to produce offspring that are then 
sent to Florida, and Primate Products.

“The trapping and removal of wild primates from their natural habitat and 
social groups has a substantial negative impact on these individuals,” says 
BUAV spokeswoman Sarah Kite. “Over the years, official bodies and organizations 
have called for a move away from this practice.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fflorida-monkey-reasearch-facilities-government-open-legal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F28%2F1425146515648%2F68d013e5-74b4-4330-8178-9d4448ecb06c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Secretive%20research%20monkey%20facilities%20come%20under%20scrutiny%20in%20Florida&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fflorida-monkey-reasearch-facilities-government-open-legal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Secretive%20research%20monkey%20facilities%20come%20under%20scrutiny%20in%20Florida&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fflorida-monkey-reasearch-facilities-government-open-legal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F28%2F1425146515648%2F68d013e5-74b4-4330-8178-9d4448ecb06c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Macaques sit on a snow covered tree at Wulingyuan National Park in China this 
month. Photograph: Xinhua /Landov / Barcroft Media 
The county seat of LaBelle only has around 4,600 residents, meaning that the 
number of monkeys in the area could soon overtake the number of residents.

It’s hardly used to being the center of attention, says Michael Budkie, whose 
organization,Stop Animal Exploitation Now,  <http://www.all-creatures.org/saen/>
filed the January complaint with the USDA after three monkeys were 
electrocuted. It is his second such complaint in the last year.

“It’s unusual that there’s so much activity (surrounding primate breeding and 
research) in one place … making (these facilities) the focus of opposition,” 
Budkie says.

Animal Legal Defense Fund’s day in court is 5 March. Nick Atwood and six other 
protesters who were arrested 22 November for allegedly trespassing on the site 
of theMannheimer Foundation 
<http://vet.osu.edu/education/mannheimer-foundation-inc>, a research facility, 
are scheduled to appear in court 12 March.

macaques have been responsible for outbreaks of an Ebola strain in United 
States research facilities

The lawsuit alleges that county should not have approved a project that would 
bring monkeys to a facility still in the planning stages without public notice 
or input, violating Florida’s open government law.

Chris Berry of the ALDF says his organization has filed the suit on behalf of 
area residents, who feel they should have had a say in the decision to allow 
the facility in Hendry County. “We’re concerned about facilities involved in 
animal suffering being in compliance with the law (and) care about community 
involvement in decision-making processes,” he said.

County spokeswoman Electa Waddell says the lawsuit is “totally without merit”. 
She says: “None of the meetings or communications involved in this decision 
violated the Sunshine Law.” County staff studied the proposal and recommended 
that it be accepted, according to Waddell.

Barbara Petersen, president of Florida’s First Amendment Foundation, 
<http://floridafaf.org/> says she doesn’t understand why the county approved 
the facility the way it did. “Why didn’t they let the public know they were 
doing this? This is what I find alarming,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fflorida-monkey-reasearch-facilities-government-open-legal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F28%2F1425147126443%2Ff2ba6a53-76fa-4a74-a270-dedc2ac16d9a-2060x1409.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Secretive%20research%20monkey%20facilities%20come%20under%20scrutiny%20in%20Florida&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fflorida-monkey-reasearch-facilities-government-open-legal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Secretive%20research%20monkey%20facilities%20come%20under%20scrutiny%20in%20Florida&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvital-signs%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fflorida-monkey-reasearch-facilities-government-open-legal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F28%2F1425147126443%2Ff2ba6a53-76fa-4a74-a270-dedc2ac16d9a-2060x1409.jpeg>
 A wild Rhesus monkey grins while up in a tree in Silver Springs, Florida. A 
huge population of wild monkeys is sweeping across Florida - after being 
introduced during the filming of Tarzan. It’s now estimated that hundreds of 
Rhesus monkeys roam the sunshine state - all descended from three pairs 
released in the late thirties. Photograph: Graham McGeorge / Barcroft Media 
It is not clear who is behind the proposed facility. A company called Primera 
has published a letter to the community in a local newspaper attempting to 
alleviate the public’s concerns. But protestor Nick Atwood supplied the 
Guardian with a document that appears to show that Primera is managed by a 
Chicago-based company called PreLabs.

PreLabs didn’t respond to requests for comment. Primate Products president and 
chief operating officer Thomas J Rowell also declined to comment.

Last month, businessman and conservationist Ady Gil purchased approximately 
1,250 monkeys for an estimated $2m from a breeding facility in Israel. The 
country has cracked down on monkey breeding for research, andsome have reported 
<http://www.sun-sentinel.com/local/palm-beach/fl-monkey-arrests-20141125-story.html>
 that the animals were about to be transferred to a facility in Florida. It is 
not clear whether Gil’s purchase of these monkeys will have any effect on the 
opening of Primera’s venture.

Macaques can be sourced from all over the world, adding to opponents’ concerns 
about the dangers of monkey-breeding centers in spreading disease. According to 
one of the complaints filed against Hendry County:

Unlike domestic livestock, non-human primates are known carriers of a wide 
array of serious infectious diseases such as Ebola, Herpes B, tuberculosis, and 
parasites that may be transmitted to humans. In fact, macaques have been 
responsible for outbreaks of an Ebola strain in United States research 
facilities, and macaques have also escaped from other Florida breeding 
facilities in the past resulting in bites and other injuries.

Michael Budkie, a former primate research worker, has been pushing to get 
primates out of labs since 1986. If the Primera facility does wind up housing 
around 3,000 monkeys, as suggested by its rudimentary website, it would be 
unusual, he says: “Facilities of this size do not open regularly.”

Atwood, who works for the Animal Rights Foundation of Florida, 
<http://www.animalrightsflorida.org/> says he is “concerned about our state’s 
reputation, and the economy being based on industries involved in animal 
suffering”. He also notes that the proposed Primera facility raises quality of 
life issues, since it is close to residential areas.

The USDA’s response to Budkie’s complaints about Primate Products could 
include follow-up calls to the company for more information, or a site visit, 
says spokeswoman Tanya Espinosa. The agency can then give the company a chance 
to enter into compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, which governs treatment 
of monkeys in captivity for breeding and research. It can also levy fines of up 
to $10,000 for each act of noncompliance.

But there is no deadline for the agency to respond. “We want to make sure 
we’re thorough,” Espinosa says. “We take as much time as needed.”

Kari Bagnall notes that many research facilities in recent years have 
“retired” monkeys from experiments, prompting sanctuaries likeJungle Friends, 
<http://www.junglefriends.org/> where she is executive director, to grow in 
size. Her Gainesville, Florida, center is home to 207 monkeys, with an 
additional 90 scheduled to arrive in the next six months.

“The release of these monkeys sends welcome signals of shifting beliefs about 
the ultimate fate of monkeys in research,” Bagnall wrote in an email. “However, 
the excitement is dampened when we hear of a new breeding facility expecting to 
house 3,200 monkeys.”
 