
The proposed new nuclear power station at Hinkley Point in Somerset has turned 
into the first headache for Theresa May’s government. The issue is now about 
far more than Britain’s energy policy. It is about foreign policy too.

May is yet to say anything publicly about the government’s decision to review 
the £18bn project. The only official comment was from Greg Clark, the new 
business, energy and industrial strategy secretary, who welcomed EDF’s approval 
of the project but added: “The government will now consider carefully all the 
component parts of this project and make its decision in the early autumn.”

On the face of it, taking time to review such a controversial project is 
sensible. After all, there are genuine doubts about whether EDF, which is 85% 
owned by the French government, can build the plant and its European 
pressurised reactor (EPR) on time, on budget and safely. The National Audit 
Office has warned that taxpayers could end up paying more than £30bn through a 
range of subsidies designed to support the project.

But the role of China has taken centre stage. The China General Nuclear Power 
Corporation (CGN) has a 33% stake in Hinkley, with a gentleman’s agreement that 
it will go on to build its own nuclear plants in Britain. Last week it emerged 
that CGN and a consultant to the companyhave been charged in the US with 
conspiring to help the Chinese government develop nuclear material 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/hinkley-point-c-case-against-cgn-has-the-feel-of-a-modern-spy-thriller>
.

We now know, thanks to Vince Cable, that May raised security concerns about 
that while home secretary in the coalition. Her joint chief of staff, Nick 
Timothy, wrote last year that David Cameron’s government was “selling our 
national security to China”.

No one in May’s new government has done much to move people away from the idea 
that it is concerned about China’s involvement in Hinkley. That is presumably 
why China’s ambassador to the UK said last week that Beijing’s relationship 
with the UK was at a “crucial historical juncture”.

Britain’s relationship with China, the world’s second-biggest economy, is 
clearly at risk because of the plant. The fact that the Hinkley saga – which 
has rumbled on for a decade – is reaching a climax just weeks after Britain 
voted to leave the European Union adds another ingredient to the mix.

Lord Mandelson, the former business secretary, says Britain must show that it 
is open for business and “can’t be too fussy about who we do trade with”. 
Mandelson’s comments represent the extreme end of one side of the argument, 
with Timothy’s at the other.

Britain must find a way to work with China, a key investor in London Heathrow, 
Canary Wharf and football clubs. It could also back other key infrastructure 
projects such as High Speed 2. China has already shown it is keen to invest in 
Britain, where the legal and regulatory system offer the reassurance of a safe 
haven for assets.

Security, of course, should be a concern. But when Britain agreed to sell 
BritishEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> to EDF for 
£12.5bn in 2008, it became inevitable that foreign investment and expertise 
would be needed to build new nuclear power stations.

The only way, therefore, to develop a home-grown energy policy is to move away 
from large Hinkley-type projects, either towards forms of renewable energy or 
towards smaller nuclear power plants, which Rolls-Royce can build.

But if the government does decide to scrap Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>, the decision should not 
be about security: it should be because alternatives offer more value, 
efficiency, and safety. The potential cost to the taxpayer through subsidies to 
EDF and China, and the question marks about the EPR reactor – there still isn’t 
one in service anywhere in the world – are more pressing concerns than Chinese 
involvement.

If the government does scrap Hinkley Point C, it must outline the alternative 
route it intends to take – and then ensure there are no hard feelings in 
Beijing.

Inheritance tax law needs reform


The Dukes of Westminster have had almost as much influence on tax law as they 
have on the garden squares of Mayfair and Belgravia. The £9bn property fortune 
now passing to a new generation would probably not exist today without a legal 
environment moulded over time by the very richest families.

The second duke, famous for his four wives and a love affair with Coco Chanel, 
was more cautious with his finances than his personal life might suggest. In 
1936 he won a case in which the judge stated that every man was entitled to 
arrange his affairs so that the tax owing was “less than it otherwise would 
be”. The ruling has been a thorn in the revenue’s side ever since.

The trust structure from which the 25-year-old Hugh Grosvenor and his sisters 
will benefit dates from his death in 1953. For the Grosvenors, the 40% death 
duties incurred by normal estates do not apply. Trusts can last for up to 125 
years, with wealth flowing freely from one generation to another.

Campaigners are calling for the beneficiaries of family trusts to be named on 
a public register, and for trusts to publish annual accounts, as private 
companies do.

Lobbyists in the thriving wealth management industry argue that opaqueness 
provides protection. Research suggests as many as a quarter of the 
beneficiaries are either children or vulnerable adults. A public register would 
expose individuals who have access to significant sums.

But the secrecy arguments are weak. These vulnerable individuals do not 
control the money from which they benefit – that responsibility lies with 
competent adult trustees.

The latest available data shows the number of trusts registered with the tax 
office has fallen slowly over time, to 160,500 in the financial year ending in 
March 2013. But their total annual income has risen to £2bn.

The degree to which trusts should be taxed is up for discussion, but the 
argument for transparency has surely been won.

Stop whingeing about apprenticeships


Depending on who you listen to, the government’s planned apprenticeship levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
 is a desperately needed scheme to address Britain’s chronic skills shortage or 
a badly designed payroll tax that will drive down the quality of training.

Both sides were out in force to make their case on Friday when the government 
confirmed it was launching the levy next April and ignoring the calls from 
business for a postponement in the wake of the Brexit vote.

Just days earlier, Downing Street had faced down calls from corporate 
lobbyists to slow the implementation of the national living wage.

Critics who say that the design of the apprenticeship levy needs tweaking to 
get the kind of schemes we need may be proven right. But Theresa May’s 
government is right to press ahead with an April launch.

May said last week that she wants to tackle inequality, and creating more 
routes into secure jobs with good career prospects is a key part of that.
 