
It might not be the most romantic night out in the city of love, but if you're 
in Paris before Bastille Day, there's a music/theatrical happening at the 
Bastille opera house that you must see: artistAnselm Kiefer 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/80b23f64-6764-11de-925f-00144feabdc0.html> 
collaborating with composerJörg Widmann 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/mar/13/jorg-widmann-clarinettist-wigmore-hall>
 forAm Anfang 
<http://www.operadeparis.fr/cns11/live/onp/site/saison/operas/operas_details.php?event_id=16&CNSACTION=SELECT_EVENT>
 (In the Beginning). As you can see fromthe picture 
<http://photos4.meetupstatic.com/photos/event/2/f/e/b/highres_8772267.jpeg>, 
Kiefer's production looks like a typically Kiefer-esque vision of a culture in 
ruins, but infused with the possibility of transcendence and beauty: 12 
toppling concrete structures that represent the 12 tribes of Israel, in which 
lonely figures speak, sing, and lament.

I'm intrigued by how all this might work with Widmann's music. On the face of 
it, there are genuine expressive parallels betweenKiefer 
<http://www.whitecube.com/artists/kiefer/> and a composer who is fascinated by 
the expressive power of the non-pitched sounds that instruments can make; those 
often unloved phenomena once pejoratively called "noises": a clarinettist's 
breath through their instrument, the clacking of the valves of a French horn, a 
violinist bowing the outside of the instrument's sound-box. Kiefer's deliberate 
construction of decaying ruins and destroyed fragments is a similar kind of 
expressive inversion that you hear in Widmann's music (orHelmut Lachenmann 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kkq9uaG8aDw>'s, for that matter); the 
transmuting of the "ugly" into the "beautiful". For Kiefer, and for Widmann, 
the blasted, ruined landscape of Am Anfang is as much a symbol of the hope for 
rebirth as it is a metaphor for cultural nihilism. Or at least it has the 
chance to be; I can't get to Paris to see the show – thoughts on a postcard if 
you're lucky enough to see it!

One final thought. This production was Gérard Mortier's 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gérard_Mortier> farewell to the opera house where 
he's been director since 2004. In that time, Europe oldest operatic enfant 
terrible (Mortier ran the Salzburg festival through the 1990s, dragging 
Austria's most conservative festival – screaming at times – into contemporary 
relevance) has scandalised, infuriated, uplifted, and catalysed audiences in 
Paris. Exactly what an opera house should be doing. What are the chances of one 
of Britain's opera house directors building up the same spirit of radicalism 
and adventure in their institutions?
 