
The Labor frontbencher Gary Gray has criticised his own colleagues for 
standing in the way of Senate voting reform, saying he was sad to lose the 
internal battle because fixing the system was “as important as one-vote 
one-value”.

As the shadow special minister of state, Gray has responsibility for electoral 
issues and fought strongly for the changes but was overruled by the shadow 
cabinet. The opposition’sdecision to vote against the Turnbull government’s 
legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>
 was locked in at a Labor caucus meeting on Tuesday.

Senate voting explainer: what could change when Australians go to the polls?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/senate-voting-explainer-what-could-change-when-australians-go-to-the-polls>
Gray was obliged to report the party’s position to the parliament in a speech 
on Wednesday, but not without making his displeasure clear.

“I lost the argument in my party room on Senate reform, so Labor will oppose 
the substantive reforms that are enshrined in this bill,” he told the House of 
Representatives. “I think that’s sad but it is the reality, and my party has 
moved that it will be opposing this bill and therefore I oppose this bill.”

Labor would, however, seek to amend the bill to improve political donation 
laws including reducing the disclosure threshold to $1,000 and move to faster 
publication of donation details.

Gray, who is due to retire from parliament at this year’s election, held up 
copies of lengthy “unwieldy and massive” Senate ballot papers from Queensland 
and Victoria to illustrate his point about the complexity of the current 
system. He said the papers in New South Wales were so cluttered voters needed a 
magnifying lens to see the names of candidates.

“It is self-evidently the case that our parliament needs to act on electoral 
reform,” he said. “Fixing the Senate system is as important as one-vote, 
one-value. It’s as important as the franchise itself … Section 7 of the 
constitution demands that our senators be chosen directly by the people, so 
Senate reform is about upholding the integrity of the constitution.”

Senate voting reform stirs up hornet's nest between likely winners and losers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/senate-voting-reform-stirs-up-hornets-nest-between-likely-winners-and-losers>
He said nearly 97% of people voted “above the line” on Senate ballot papers 
because it was more complex to fill in all squares below the line and errors 
could void the ballot. Contrary to claims the government’s changes might 
increase informal voting, Gray said the bill improved the allowance for 
mistakes.

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/penny-wong>, and the deputy, 
Stephen Conroy, vehemently opposed the government’s proposal, arguing it would 
increase the risk of a Coalition majority in the upper house and was “not 
particularly democratic”.

The legislation – supported by the Greens and the independent senator Nick 
Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 – aims to abolish group voting tickets, the party-submitted mechanism to 
decide how preferences flow for supporters who vote above the line.

In would also enshrine an optional preferential system above the line. Instead 
of just voting 1, people would be advised to fill in at least six boxes in the 
order of their preference. The ballots would still be valid if people just 
voted 1: if their preferred choice did not win election, the ballot would 
“exhaust” and not be reallocated to others.

Wong expressed concern about the impact of this on about 3.3 million 
Australians who did not vote for theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>, Labor or the Greens.

Crossbench senators seething at being 'dumped' in deal to curb micro-parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/crossbench-senators-seething-at-being-dumped-in-deal-to-curb-micro-parties>
“I think it’s undeniable that if you take 3.3 million votes and you either 
exhaust them out of the system or essentially corral them to the major parties, 
that’s going to benefit the Coalition, the Greens and Labor,” she told the ABC 
on Tuesday.

But in the parliamentary speech, Gray said it was wrong for anyone to claim 
more than 3 million voters would be “disenfranchised”.

“We’re told that their votes will be wasted or voided. I don’t agree with 
that,” he said. “Votes count and I’m astonished that the kind of dumb view that 
if you vote for someone who loses that your vote is wasted has taken some hold 
during this discussion.”

Gray said the joint standing committee on electoral matters, of which he was a 
member, hadunanimously called for reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/09/major-political-parties-agree-on-voting-changes-targeting-micro-parties>
 because pop-up, micro-parties had “manipulated” the system through preference 
harvesting.


He told parliament he had sought his party’s permission to meet with the 
government to “negotiate a better bill”, but lost the debate internally. Gray 
said the legislation would be improved if it reflected the committee’s 
recommendations in full, “but it still would not have won the support of my 
party”.


“These reforms simply mean that political parties including my own will have 
to convince the public rather than backroom-deal makers that they deserve their 
votes …The counting of a ballot paper should reflect the intention of the voter 
and not the desires of ballot manipulators. TheLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> will be opposing this 
bill,” Gray said in closing.

Senate voting changes likely to stand up to high court challenge, experts say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/senate-voting-changes-likely-to-stand-up-to-high-court-challenge-experts-say>
The Liberal MP Andrew Nikolic, addressing the parliament immediately 
afterwards, said he agreed very much with Gray’s “very good speech”.

The immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, said he wanted to 
“pay tribute to Gary Gray who, as he said, was rolled by his own caucus on this 
but nonetheless he still provided support over a long period of time for 
significant and sensible change”.


The Greens MP Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> said the reforms should 
enjoy broad support because they allowed voters to be “absolutely confident 
that your preferences have gone where you want them to go”.

But Labor’s infrastructure spokesman, Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese>, said the 
legislation was an “abuse of process” and differed from the joint standing 
committee’s recommendations. It arose from “a dirty deal between the Greens 
political party and the Liberals to rush through legislation without any proper 
scrutiny”.

The legislation would advantage the conservatives because the Coalition tended 
to achieve a high primary vote by combining the Liberal and National parties on 
ballot papers, Albanese said.
 