
Serena Williams has warned her Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final opponent Angelique 
Kerber that she is playing even better than last year when she won three grand 
slam titles.

Williams is yet to drop a set at the first grand slam of the season and she 
enters Saturday’s final as the strong favourite to clinch a seventh title in 
Melbourne. The American has been in tremendous form,crushing Agnieszka 
Radwanska in the semi-finals on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/serena-williams-demolishes-agnieszka-radwanska-in-australian-open-semi>
, when she took the first set 6-0 in only 20 minutes.

It has been an impressive response from a player who arrived with doubts 
surrounding her fitness and focus after hershock semi-final exit at last year’s 
US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/sep/11/us-open-2015-serena-williams-v-roberta-vinci-live>
. Williams, however, has returned as dominant as ever and believes she is 
showing even better form now than in 2015.

“I would say this is probably the best slam I’ve played in a year, and I’ve 
won a lot in a year,” said the 34-year-old. “I know my practices are better. 
Hopefully I’m playing better. So I definitely can play more consistent and more 
mentally stable, so to say.

“I haven’t won this one. But even if I don’t win, I really can take away that 
I’ve been really consistent, and I want to continue that.”

Victory on Saturday would see the world No1 draw level with Steffi Graf’s Open 
era record 22 grand slam titles and put her within two of Margaret Court’s 
all-time mark of 24.

“Everyone has expectations,” Williams said. “I’m the favourite. I was the 
favourite in New York. I feel like I could have done better in New York. But 
that was a learning experience. So I’m going to hopefully take that to the 
court for not only this tournament but for the rest of these slams.”

Standing in her way is Kerber, a baseline battler who has been a regular in 
the world’s top 10 since 2011 but will be making her debut in a grand slam 
final. The German has lost her past four meetings with Williams, all in 
straight sets, but she did beat the American 6-4, 6-4 at Cincinnati in 2012.

“I thought she played unbelievable in that match. That’s something that I’ll 
never forget,” Williams said. “I just remember her serving really well, her 
moving well, her being determined to win that. I think from then on out I’ve 
been really focused that she’s someone that I, and everyone, really has to take 
very seriously.”

Kerber, who has taken on Graf as something of a mentor, took out the 
much-fancied Victoria Azarenka in the quarter-finals beforeseeing off Britain’s 
Johanna Konta in the last four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/28/johanna-konta-v-angelique-kerber-australian-open-semi-final-live>
.

“I have actually nothing to lose,” Kerber said. “I can go out there and try to 
play like I’m playing, without pressure, without nothing. I think when you ask 
a lot of people, I think most will say: ‘OK, Serena will win.’ But this is the 
challenge I can take. I don’t have so much pressure like she has.”
 