
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> claimed 
her 10th grand slam singles title after routing Dinara Safina 6-0, 6-3 in the 
Australian Open final. The victory moves the 27-year-old back to No1 position 
in the WTA rankings, replacing Jelena Jankovic.

The American's fourth Melbourne victory, following her triumphs in 2003, 2005 
and 2007, never really looked in doubt after she rattled off the first set for 
the loss of no games in just 22 minutes.

Safina, playing in her second grand slam final and first in Melbourne, 
struggled with her serve throughout, gifting her opponent five double faults 
and hitting 21 unforced errors in a match that lasted less than an hour.

Safina had promised that playing in her first grand slam final at the French 
Open last year had left her well prepared for the challenges of another major 
final, but that did not show as the Russian got broken in the second, fourth 
and sixth games of the opening set.

"I don't have much to say," said a slightly embarrassed Safina afterwards. "I 
didn't even spend one hour on the court. [Serena] was too good today. I was 
just a ballboy on the court today. I'm sorry it [the final] was not longer. I 
hope that next year I will come and hopefully do better."

Safina, the third seed, briefly put up a fight at the start of the second set 
when she hit a backhand cross court winner to break serve but the errors soon 
crept returned to her game enabling Williams to break back immediately. 
Williams comfortably held serve to love in the next game before breaking her 
opponent again to move into a 3-1 lead.

Three-one soon became 4-1 as another return flew beyond the baseline and 
Safina took her frustrations out on her racquet. The American, now the highest 
prize money earner in women's sport with over Â£15m to her name, knew victory 
and her 10th grand slam title were in sight.

Two irresistible forehands helped secure her own serve for a 5-2 lead and 
although Safina held her serve for only the second time in the match in the 
next, Williams held her own to clinch the match and complete the double at 
Melbourne Park following her women's doubles success on Friday with sister 
Venus.

"Dinara is going to have a great future," said Williams after her 18th Grand 
Slam success in all forms of the game. "She is hitting so hard I had at the 
moment that I had to go for broke against her today. That's all I could do."
 