
Sergio Agüero will risk his fitness by playing for Argentina despite admitting 
he ruled himself out of severalManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> games when previously 
taking a similar gamble.

City host Everton on Saturday with Pep Guardiola intent on ensuring they 
bounce back afterthe 2-0 defeat at Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 in their last league outing before the international break.

The Catalan has been clear that all of his players need to recover and prepare 
properly to cope with the demands of elite football to minimise the risk of 
injuries.

Yet despite being taken off in Argentina’s 2-2 draw against Peru on Saturday, 
Agüero has been cleared for the second World Cup qualifier against Paraguay in 
Cordoba on Tuesday night.

Pep Guardiola urges Sergio Agüero to be ‘smart’ on his return from ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero-manchester-city-nolito-vincent-kompany>
During that match in Lima the 28-year-old was withdrawn due to what was 
revealed as an adductor problem. Yet Agüero is keen to face Paraguay despite 
not being able to train fully, and the fact that he ended up missing six City 
matches as a result of pushing himself to face Ecuador forArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> in October last year.

He said: “I’m better, we did tests, I did well and I’m trying to get as fit as 
possible for Tuesday. Bauza [the head coach] has the decision: for Tuesday I’ll 
be available. I’m much better. After the Peru game I had two days to recover 
and [on Sunday] I played a little football. You always want to play in the team 
and try to do your best. For now I feel good physically,” he told Ole.

“Within five minutes of the second half against Peru I began to feel the 
tiredness on the calf, [the coach] noticed and took me out. But I’m quite well 
now: you get physical fitness playing, not training.

“When you’re at the national team you always want to take part, but the last 
time, for wanting to continue, I ended up injured against Ecuador. Sometimes 
you think: ‘Why didn’t I stop?’ Because then I’m out for a month and a half and 
I miss six or seven games for City. But when they call you for the national 
team, you want to play at any cost. That’s how it is.”

Agüero stated he hurt his groin in the 3-3 draw at Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 in a Champions League group game three days before the trip to Tottenham. “It 
was hard, it had rained, the grass was high and muddy, and since then I’ve been 
having a bit of an overload,” he said. “I recovered well for two days, then I 
played against Tottenham. And travelled.

“Sometimes the matter of travelling – resting, the schedule changes, doesn’t 
help. But I’m pretty good. I wanted to play against Peru, to be available, and 
I endured everything I could.

“I’m much better. After the Peru game I had two days to make the recovery and 
I did a little bit of football [in training]. I’m quite well. Luckily the pain 
I had before Peru went away, it was on the adductor, and certainly to protect 
the adductor I overloaded the calf a little. I’m better: we did studies, they 
were good and I’m trying to get as fresh as possible for Tuesday.”

Agüero’s City team-mate Bacary Sagna has been ruled out for up to three weeks 
following a hamstring injury sustained duringFrance’s 4-1 win against Bulgaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/world-cup-2018-qualifiers-roundup-gameiro-france-bulgaria-holland>
 on Friday night. The 33-year-old right-back was substituted after just 27 
minutes of the World Cup qualifier in Paris.
 