
Following recent events, you could be forgiven for thinking that you need a 
postgrad degree in American Studies to decipher some of the more bizarre 
expressions that have been coming out of the White House.

Messrs Bush and Rumsfeld may have been doing to the English language what 
their army has been doing to Baghdad, but some postgraduate courses manage to 
focus study on many of the good things to have come out of the US.

American studies, so long the degree choice of those whose main aim was to 
spend a year in the US, has come of age. Today there are more than 30 MAs on 
offer at 18 universities around the UK and they not only cover a range of 
disciplines, but also an increased geographical area. Courses focusing on 
Canada and even Latin America now sit happily alongside those concentrating on 
the 52 states, and you can even opt for a course in nativeAmerican studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies>. It's worth noting 
right at the start that this is not the most vocational course in the 
university prospectus. Lots of students use it as a stepping-stone to further 
research, while others simply study it for the undeniable academic interest.

The majority of courses on offer are split into one of two areas: American 
literature and culture, and history and politics, with more courses falling 
into the former category. So, if you find the heady delights of the avant-garde 
in New York poetry and cinema of the 50s irresistible, then the University Of 
East Anglia has a module for you.

Over at Keele, which incidentally claims to be the first UK university to 
offer a degree in this subject, modules include Henry James, writing and 
desire, Ezra Pound and modernist poetics, the 20th-century African American 
novel, and 1968 and its legacy in the visual arts.

At Sussex they run two courses, one in American literature and theory since 
1945, the other a straight MA in American history. Those enrolling on the 
latter can choose modules on American foreign relationism, American working 
class and most intriguing of all, the multicentric south. Birmingham Uni has a 
list of eye-catching courses covering areas such as US film & TV, foreign 
policy and even the US intelligence services.

Interestingly, several universities (Nottingham is one) now offer courses with 
a big Canadian component, and there's a wide choice of institutions offering 
Latin American studies.

In most cases, students need a 2:1 in a humanities-related degree or social 
sciences, and there is some funding available. Clive Webb, of Sussex 
University, reports that several Americans have travelled across the pond to 
study his courses. He says plenty of students go on to take PhDs - both here 
and in America.

 Other graduates have gone on to a variety of employment including teaching, 
journalism and publishing.

Â· miles.brignall@tiscali.fr <mailto:miles.brignall@tiscali.fr>
 