
When Mark Carney unveiled a broad package of measures to ward off a post-EU 
referendum recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 on Thursday, he emphasised that the Bank of England had only limited power to 
shore up the economy. The government will have to play its part too, the Bank’s 
governor said.

All eyes are now on the Philip Hammond’s autumn statement due later this year. 
The new chancellor has already told Carney thatthe government will “take any 
necessary steps” 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/chancellorletter040816.pdf>
 [pdf] and come up with its own measures.

There are a number of things the government will be considering.

Tax cuts

There have been calls for a cut to the VAT rate from 20% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/brexit-austerity-george-osborne-david-blanchflower-economic-experts-leave-campaign>
 to fire up consumer spending, which is the main driver of the UK’s economic 
growth. The government, however, will want to see more surveys and official 
data on how spending has held up since the referendum before it decides to take 
a hit to its already squeezed public coffers.

The former chancellor George Osborne has said cuts to business taxes are 
needed in response to the Brexit vote. Before he was replaced by Hammond,
Osborne said the government should get on with cutting corporation tax to below 
15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/george-osborne-looks-at-corporation-tax-cut-to-attract-overseas-investors>
 in a bid to encourage businesses to invest in Britain outside the EU.

His successor will be wary of cutting without more evidence that companies are 
shunning the UK, and given that the prime minister, Theresa May, has talked 
about reforming capitalism so the system works “for everyone, not just the 
privileged few”, a cut to business taxes is probably not be the message she 
wants her new chancellor to send.

More infrastructure spending

Businesses 
<http://news.cbi.org.uk/news/after-brexit-put-national-interest-ahead-of-political-interests-on-infrastructure-cbi-president/>
 are urging the government to spend more on infrastructure such as roads and 
rail links. They argue that record low interest rates make this a good time for 
it to borrow money to invest. The spending would get money flowing through the 
economy, create jobs and the projects would yield long-term economic gains.

Delaying the planned apprenticeship levy

Disgruntled business lobby groups have already labelled Osborne’s plans to 
introduce a near-£3bn levy on bigger firms next April 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/apprenticeship-levy-how-it-will-work/apprenticeship-levy-how-it-will-work>
a “payroll tax” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/fury-over-osbornes-116bn-business-payroll-tax>
. Now that the vote to leave the EU has hit business sentiment and demand, 
there are calls for it to be delayed. Hammond could agree to this to appease 
business leaders and boost confidence.

Boosting productivity

If the new chancellor does delay the apprenticeship levy he will have to come 
up with other ways to tackle Britain’s skills shortages in areas such as 
construction and IT, and so help raise the country’s productivity out of the 
doldrums. The government has committed to boosting apprenticeship numbers and 
creating 3m new apprentices by 2020. If May is serious about tackling 
inequality she will have to show that her government can provide routes into 
decent careers beyond university degrees.

The UK lags behind other advanced economies on productivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/uk-productivity-gap-widens-to-worst-level-since-records-began>
, a measure of what is produced by employees per hour worked. Carney said 
boosting productivity was key to raising the UK’s economic prospects, but 
experts say it could be years before the UK sees the gains of any measures to 
boost productivity, such as investment in innovation, education and 
infrastructure.

Reduce planned rises to the national living wage

The “national living wage” of £7.20 for over-25s was introduced in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
, and the government has committed to increasing it each year. With economic 
prospects looking bleaker after the Brexit vote, however,some employers say 
such rises will be less affordable 
<https://www.eef.org.uk/campaigning/news-blogs-and-publications/publications/2016/jul/eef-response-to-the-lpc-2016-consultation-on-the-nlw-and-nmw>
. They want the low pay commission, the independent body that advises the 
government on minimum wages, to recommend only a small rise in April 2017.

Here again, May’s government will be cautious about being seen to penalise the 
low-paid, given her pledge to raise living standards. Anti-poverty campaigners 
also argue that low pay is a significant part of the UK’s productivity problem 
and that only higher pay thresholds will make firms improve management, 
training and overall efficiency.

Helicopter money

Carney has questioned the effectiveness of so-called “helicopter money” 
schemes, under which a central bank prints cash so that finance ministries can
hand it out to citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/cash-handouts-are-best-way-to-boost-growth-say-economists>
 or spend it on big infrastructure projects. With the government under pressure 
to boost spending on infrastructure, however, and both Hammond and Carney 
vowing they have more tools to help the economy, some sort of unconventional 
scheme along these lines could still become a reality.

One option would be for the Treasury to issue new infrastructure bonds for 
public investment projects. The Bank would then buy the bonds using newly 
created money, so financing the projects.

Trade deals

The biggest task for May’s government will be negotiating new trade deals. Any 
action taken by theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> or the Treasury 
will have only limited impact as long as the UK’s trading relationships with 
the EU and the rest of the world drift into an uncertain future.
 