
There’s nothing quintessentially Australian about Severed Heads 
<http://www.sevcom.com/>, which is one of the group’s strengths. Predominantly 
a vehicle for Sydneysider Tom Ellard, the best Severed Heads tracks are 
strange, subliminally malignant fever dreams you can dance to.

Aided by a roster of frequently changing collaborators, Ellard’s sharp pop 
sensibility worked best when it clashed with the group’s eerie synth 
arrangements. It sounded of another world, or at least it did if you happened 
to grow up hearing it on Triple J in the '90s.

The best known Severed Heads track is probably a reworking of their own 1983 
singleDead Eyes Opened <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLIi_ZMBfQs>, 
re-released 11 years later. It’s an anomaly in the group’s catalogue (few 
Severed Heads songs feature creepy spoken word monologues), but it exemplifies 
the outfit’s ineffable quality.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkLIi_ZMBfQs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkLIi_ZMBfQs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkLIi_ZMBfQs&media=>
You see, Severed Heads is many things: a dance group, pop group, experimental 
group, but above all else Severed Heads isweird. Unforgivingly synthetic and 
often garishly detailed, Ellard’s productions never strive for commonly prized 
characteristics such as warmth or humanity. Severed Heads is icy and 
unsentimental, but it’s also very funny. It’s inhuman, but it’s not dead. It’s 
the polar opposite of most canonical Australian pop music.

The group’s 1994 LP Gigapus <http://severedheads.bandcamp.com/album/gigapus> 
is not considered among its best, but boy is Heart of the Party a track. The 
song’s sad hook is constantly at war with its joyous backbeat and tempo, while 
the matter is confused further when Ellard begins to sing, “Who will tell my 
drunken friend that she will die and go to hell?”

Heart of the Party is probably a song about the extremes of rave culture in 
the '90s; about how it had degenerated into a scene for dispassionate booze 
hounds (“Hear my call from the floor / at the heart of the party”).

Whatever Ellard’s true intention, Heart of the Party works best as a kind of 
corrupted public service announcement. It sounds like a well-meaning cautionary 
tale delivered with a dreadful and inadvertent hidden message, while its 
allegiance with Sydney's then booming dance scene is fraught with ambivalence. 
Ellard has never had the most emotive voice and that works perfectly in this 
context, as he sounds like an automaton delivering platitudes which the music 
itself seems to contradict.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVPdfzahZOrM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVPdfzahZOrM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVPdfzahZOrM&media=>
Severed Heads is a gateway to some of Sydney’s most mysterious and weird 
experimental pop scenes. Before Ellard worked with prominent '90s dance labels 
Nettwerk and Volition, he operated his own cassette label called Terse Tapes. 
Severed Heads was also associated with Sydney’sM Squared 
<http://www.msquaredrecords.com/> label, which operated out of a Surry Hills 
terrace in the late '70s and released recordings by notorious industrial group
SPK <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=36axHuS3MZI> (then known as SoliPsiK), 
Scattered Order <http://www.scatteredorder.com/index.html> and Makers of the 
Dead Travel Fast <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4QO2-JSCpw>. It’s a 
forgotten alternative to Sydney’s better known pub rock heritage.

 In the end, there’s a severity and strangeness about the music of Severed 
Heads which doesn’t gel with Australia’s self-image, but for the country’s more 
marginalised music subcultures (and even for the likes ofThe Presets 
<http://nofun.thepresets.com/>) Ellard and company continue to be influential. 
In a country where handwringing over the nature of its identity sits 
uncomfortably alongside American cultural imperialism, Severed Heads still 
sounds new because it seems oblivious to both impulses; a band that exists in 
its own territory.
 