
A credulous yokel who propositioned girls half his age. A death-obsessed ghoul 
who kept a photo of his mother's corpse. A cranky, backwards-looking 
obsessive. The composer of some of the 19th century's greatest, grandest and 
most ambitious symphonies.Anton Bruckner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/anton-bruckner> was all of these things. One 
thing he wasn't, however, was a writer of beautiful music offering serene 
escapism.

Mariss Jansons and Amsterdam's Concertgebouw <http://www.concertgebouw.nl/>, 
who visit London's Barbican this week 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=14429> to perform three 
Bruckner symphonies, will unleash sounds of orchestral ugliness and visions of 
existential disturbance that will – that should – have you quaking 
in your seats.

These works – Bruckner's 4th, 7th and his unfinished 9th – opened up a new 
musical and spiritual terrain. The titanic shocks that these paradoxical pieces 
delivered were achieved by a man who worshipped the gods of musical 
conservatism at a time when the rules of composition were being dismantled by 
the likes of Gustav Mahler and Richard Strauss. Bruckner, by contrast, spent 
his life exploring musical principles that had been laid down centuries earlier 
– the laws of counterpoint, the way one musical voice interacts with another – 
which marked him out as a cranky weirdo in the context of the progressive 
artistic and intellectual scene of late 19th-century Vienna.

Vienna wasn't Bruckner's hometown. Born in the village of Ansfelden, he 
trained in St Florian, a monastery town that he didn't properly leave until his 
middle age, having spent his youth in a self-annihilating study of musical 
arcana and hours of lonely training in order to become one of the world's 
greatest organists. It was only in his 40s in Vienna that Bruckner felt 
confident enough to embark on the symphonic project that would sustain the rest 
of his musical life. But in doing so, he had to face the wrath of his critics, 
who called him everything from "a drunkard" to the composer of "symphonic 
boa-constrictors 
<http://www.musicweb-international.com/Programme_Notes/bruckner_sym9.htm>" 
(that one was Brahms). He also had to put up with caricatures of him as a 
devoutly, credulously Catholic country bumpkin who propositioned teenage girls 
in his old age, and who once tipped a conductor with cash for getting through a 
rehearsal of one of his symphonies.

Actually, both of those anecdotes are all too true. And as John Butt, 
professor of music at Glasgow University 
<http://www.gla.ac.uk/schools/cca/staff/johnbutt/> and a Bruckner devotee, told 
me, Bruckner really was – well, a bit of an oddball. In his diaries, he kept 
lists of the girls he fancied (usually in their late teens), he had a mania for 
counting the bricks and windows of buildings, and for counting the numbers of 
bars in his gargantuan orchestral scores, making sure their proportions were 
statistically correct. And there were even stranger sides to this kind of 
behaviour: when his mother died, Bruckner commissioned a photograph of her on 
her death bed and kept it in his teaching room. He had no image of his mother 
when she was alive, just this grotesque-seeming token of her death staring out 
at him as an unsettling memento mori. Butt also recalls accounts of Bruckner 
having "fingered and kissed the skulls of Beethoven and Schubert" when their 
corpses were exhumed and moved to a different cemetery; that Bruckner had 
requested permission to see the skull of a dead cousin (he was refused), and 
also that of theEmperor Maximilian 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximilian_I_of_Mexico>, whose body was returned 
to Vienna after his execution in Mexico in 1867.
 'He had a mania for counting the bricks and windows of buildings, and for 
counting the numbers of bars in his gargantuan orchestral scores' … Anton 
Bruckner in 1896. Photograph: Imagno/Getty Images 
Bruckner: death-obsessed maniac. Well, partly. But as Butt says, "in the way 
that some obsessives don't get anywhere in life, others get there in a very 
quirky way". Bruckner's peculiar brand of musical obsessiveness produced 
visions of grandeur that are at once ancient and modern. You hear that in the 
opening of the4th symphony's final, fourth movement 
<http://youtu.be/uR_E7MASPsc?t=43m11s> – a chilling, dehumanised orchestral 
landscape in sound;in the emotional desolation of the 7th symphony's slow 
movement <http://youtu.be/xRAl2hHE2_I?t=20m33s>, a tribute to the recently dead 
Wagner; and throughout thethree completed movements of the 9th 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oPdilg69cqk>.

For me, this is Bruckner's boldest compositional achievement. The symphony is 
the only one of his that's explicitly dedicated to God. In a sense all of 
Bruckner's music is a tribute to his devout faith, but the 9th dares something 
darker, more doubting, more apocalyptic, and more ear-shatteringly aggressive 
and even deliberately ugly than he had attempted before. The massively loud and 
dissonant orchestral pile-up of a chord near the end of the third movement is a 
vision of a despairing abyss that the quiet music that comes after it can't 
possibly console. It's as if Bruckner shrinks back from the vision his 
exquisitely arcane brain had led him to. That chord is the product of a passage 
of music that behaves entirely according to the laws of musical structure that 
the composer revered. Yet all that careful construction reveals something so 
strange, so shocking, and so disturbing – all the more so because the music has 
the irresistible power of a force of nature rather than a subjective, personal 
scream. It's a moment that's a transfiguration of all that obsessiveness. This 
isn't Bruckner's shout into the void, but the cosmos itself in pain. At least, 
that's what it sounds like to me; in the Concertgebouw's performance, it will 
confront the Barbican audience with violent sonic terrors. I hope that audience 
is ready.
 