
For years, workers at the San Francisco HQ of the clothing chain Gap walked 
past an enormous piece of fruit. At the entrance to the company cafeteria sat 
the 8ft-highGeometric Apple Core by Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen – 
the “Gapple”, a classic of contemporary art. Though held in great affection, 
however, the sculpture was, in those offices, rather commonplace. Art was 
everywhere, including a 1963 silverTriple Elvis by Andy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol>, a roomful of monumental 
Chuck Close portraits and an array of dazzlingEllsworth Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/08/ellsworth-kelly-want-to-live-another-15-years-monograph-phaidon-tricia-paik>
 abstracts.

Gap’s founders, Donald and Doris Fisher, used their millions from the 1970s 
onwards to amass 1,100 works of prestigious mid and late 20th-century art – 
including 21 Warhols, 23 works by Gerhard Richter and 45 Alexander Calder 
mobiles. It was recognised in art circles as a hugely significant collection, 
but, outside their firm, was kept largely under wraps.

All that changed in 2009 when, just two days before Don died, a longstanding 
agreement (unusual in the art world) was reached to show the collection at the
San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> Museum of 
Modern Art for at least 100 years. It was a momentous occasion for SFMOMA, 
which began to plan a major expansion to accommodate the new treasures. Having 
been closed for nearly three years for the redevelopment, the museum – now 
doubled in size, with three times the gallery space – reopens on 14 May.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ac5718baba0fdb8f0b8ae189db5670aa604acf%2F0_137_1067_1463%2F1067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SFMOMA's%20reopening%3A%20a%20'game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SFMOMA%27s%20reopening%3A%20a%20%27game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ac5718baba0fdb8f0b8ae189db5670aa604acf%2F0_137_1067_1463%2F1067.jpg>
 An external view of Snøhetta’s expansion. Photograph: © Henrik Kam, courtesy 
SFMOMA 
Alongside 260 pieces from the Fishers – the first trawl – will be not only the 
old permanent collection but hundreds of new works donated by the region’s art 
collectors, as part of a special campaign led by the museum’s director, Neal 
Benezra. The new SFMOMA is about to join the very highest rank of galleries of 
contemporary art in the world.

The museum, which opened in 1935, got its own building 60 years later – the 
postmodern structure by Mario Botta, recognisable by its stacked boxes of red 
brick and central cylinder wrapped in zebra stripes of black and white stone. 
This exterior has been left alone, but wedged around it is a distinctive new 
building on seven floors, created by Norwegian architects Snøhetta: its white 
rippled facade, we’re told, evokes the waters of the bay surrounding San 
Francisco and the rolling in of the city’s famous fog.

The interior has been designed to merge the two buildings seamlessly. Benezra 
and I walked around as the installation of the art was in its final stages, and 
only a few pieces were left in crates or cellophane. Much of the ground floor 
is near-complete: a hugeRichard Serra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/serra> sculpture, Sequence – two 
spirals of weathered steel transported to the museum on 11 flat-bed trucks – 
has long been in place at one glass-walled gallery entrance; a dozen people had 
just lifted a 26ft-wide Calder mobile to help in its suspension over the main 
atrium.

The director talks of the reopening being a “game changer for San Francisco”, 
but is careful to emphasise that the museum is now world-class in 
“contemporary” art – work, that is, from the last four decades of the 20th 
century and since – rather than “modern”. “I define modern art as going up 
through abstract expressionism,” he explains, “then with Warhol andLichtenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lichtenstein> and the pop artists, 
Johns and Rauschenberg, there is a return to the visible world in one way or 
another. And to me that’s … contemporary art.”

When the Botta building opened in 1995, reviews noted how “spotty” or “skimpy” 
the museum’s permanent collection was: its highlights include Matisse’sFemme au 
Chapeau and works by Paul Klee <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/klee> 
and the Mexican masters, but it has no examples of futurism or Russian 
constructivism and no significantPicasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>. There are plenty of 
first‑rate pieces to fill the galleries now, but SFMOMA still has a different, 
less historical, story to tell than its New York equivalent, the core 
collection of which comes from the early 20th century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc789455f33229582b538bc713f7d470c18f55030%2F0_0_1500_1502%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SFMOMA's%20reopening%3A%20a%20'game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SFMOMA%27s%20reopening%3A%20a%20%27game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc789455f33229582b538bc713f7d470c18f55030%2F0_0_1500_1502%2F1500.jpg>
 Gerhard Richter’s Geäst (Branches) (1988). Photograph: © Gerhard Richter 
So there is not much in the way of cubism, but plenty of pop art and 
minimalism – as well as postwar German masters (Richter, Anselm Kiefer, Joseph 
Beuys) and the works of such California painters as Richard Diebenkorn, Wayne 
Thiebaud and Joan Brown. There is a whole room of Calders, a sun-filled gallery 
devoted to modern British sculpture (by Anthony Caro,Anish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor>, Antony Gormley, Richard Long 
and many more), and a new centre that, Benezra hazards, “might just” make 
SFMOMA the most prominent photography museum in the US.

Benezra offers no apology for where SFMOMA’s strength lies, and as we tour the 
galleries his excitement at the remarkable bounty of the new museum is obvious. 
“You’ll be hard pressed to see a better room of Warhols,” he says, pointing out 
celebrated new acquisitions includingSilver Marlon, with Brando on his Triumph 
motorbike fromThe Wild One, and the Triple Elvis, as well as the museum’s own 
famous study of Elizabeth Taylor on horseback,National Velvet. There is also a 
“museum within a museum” of 26 works by Kelly, who became a good friend of 
Doris Fisher. These include the jazzy arrangement of rectanglesCité from 1951, 
and the vivid stripes ofSpectrum I, as well as the sliced shapes of Red Curves 
(1996) andBlue Panel (1985). The Kelly rooms, Benezra says, are “strikingly 
beautiful”: “We expect our colleagues in other museums to be green with envy.”
Geometric Apple Core proudly sits on the fifth floor (after a special party was 
held at Gap HQ to say farewell).

The Fishers collected certain artists, among them Kelly and Calder, in great 
depth. Partly in consequence, according to Benezra, the new SFMOMA “runs 
counter to normal museum practice these days. Most museums – the Tate is a 
pretty good example of this – are working more thematically. You’ll go to a 
gallery and … the curator has authored an idea and the pictures illustrate that 
idea. We’ve done something just the opposite, and terribly old-fashioned … 
we’re refocusing on the artists and letting each one speak. The curators are 
not imposing their will on the paintings at all … You work with what you have, 
and with artists in such depth, why would we do anything else?”

❦

Benezra talks of how big public art galleries have changed their role, from 
being “good stewards of the works of art in their custody” to more popular and 
fully public institutions, places where people come to meet and spend time. To 
reflect this, the new museum has more free-access space: the architects have 
knocked out the forbidding stairwell that dominated the old atrium to create a 
brighter entrance – where two enormousJulie Mehretu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/20/painting-art> murals will 
eventually adorn the walls – and built a new wood, cantilevered “grand stair” 
that leads to an admission-free “art court”. The architects’ buzzwords include 
“reaching out” so that the museum becomes “more extroverted”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14363a4d1f60306ad04d9733b0e4ee90b59736d7%2F21_29_2048_1426%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SFMOMA's%20reopening%3A%20a%20'game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SFMOMA%27s%20reopening%3A%20a%20%27game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14363a4d1f60306ad04d9733b0e4ee90b59736d7%2F21_29_2048_1426%2F2048.jpg>
 Andy Warhol’s Triple Elvis (1963). Photograph: © The Andy Warhol Foundation 
for the Visual Arts/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York 
Allied to this now obligatory inclusiveness is Benezra’s desire to explode the 
cliche that contemporary art is difficult. “For me,” he says, “if you want 
something really hard to understand, you’ll stand in front of a multipanel 
Renaissance altarpiece – you have to know who all the saints are, and why 
they’re there.” Contemporary art such as minimalism is, in contrast, much more 
accessible, and people shouldn’t think it esotericbecause of its simplicity – 
gallery goers “should feel very confident about what they bring to the work”.

There are several new welcoming features at the museum. One is the vivid green 
“living wall” that lines a courtyard on the eastern side and comprises nearly 
20,000 plants, all California native species. This triumph of vertical 
gardening involved planting in huge sheets of porous felt. Another is the 
expanded restaurant, called In Situ, run by chef Corey Lee, who Benezra calls, 
with a straight face, “our curator of food” – the idea being that, as well as 
serving up his own dishes, Lee will “borrow recipes from chefs around the 
world” much as “a curator putting on a Picasso exhibition would identify and 
borrow the best pictures”.

To help with the design, a tiny replica of SFMoMA has been constructed, with 
replica paintings half an inch long

To help with the design of the galleries, an astonishing, tiny replica of 
SFMOMA has been constructed: over the past four years, a model-maker has made 
maquettes – detailed, accurate and some as small as half an inch long – of at 
least 2,000 artworks, which have been moved around by the curators to see how 
effective different hangings are, and what connections between pieces are 
suggested from different viewpoints.

Benezra calls the gifts recently acquired in the “campaign for art” an 
“outpouring”: news of the museum’s expansion “enabled us to tap more fully into 
the energy all around us, in a region known for its special creativity” and 
philanthropy. Much of this campaign involved approaching known collectors: “We 
tried to be as specific as possible with our requests”, asking for work by a 
particular artist or from a critical period in an artist’s career. “We know who 
owns what.” Before recent efforts, for example, SFMOMA had almost no works by 
Beuys: now there are drawings, a vitrine, a blackboard. Other donations include 
major works by Rauschenberg, Philip Guston, Lee Krasner, Pollock, Cy Twombly 
and Brice Marden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d39e9e580b7892249590754aa841b4fc465d7d7%2F0_435_1116_1165%2F1116.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SFMOMA's%20reopening%3A%20a%20'game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SFMOMA%27s%20reopening%3A%20a%20%27game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d39e9e580b7892249590754aa841b4fc465d7d7%2F0_435_1116_1165%2F1116.jpg>
 A sculpture by Alexander Calder beside a living wall on the Pat and Bill 
Wilson Sculpture Terrace. Photograph: © Henrik Kam, courtesy SFMOMA 
The campaign shines a fascinating light on how a major American art gallery 
such as SFMOMA operates; it is also the latest chapter in the story of how the 
museum has been transformed by the tech-led boom in the Bay Area. One aspect of 
this is the neighbourhood, SoMa, in which the museum stands: as recently as the 
early 90s it was, Benezra points out, “not a place where polite company would 
go looking for culture. Today it is one of the centres of the tech industry, 
dynamic and lively.” Another aspect is the availability of great wealth. 
“Entrepreneurship is a big thing in San Francisco, and the visual arts are 
particularly amenable to it,” investment mogul and chair of the SFMOMA board 
Charles Schwab said in 2000. “The art world moves … quickly … It reflects our 
changing society.” According to Benezra, the city has, outside of New York, 
“the greatest body of private collectors of contemporary art” in the US.

On SFMOMA’s board are real estate magnates, venture capitalists and the CEO of 
Yahoo,Marissa Mayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/19/yahoo-marissa-mayer-sale-buyout>
. The museum’s trustees have dug deep into their pockets and it has benefactors 
that represent really big money – the families behind the Hyatt hotel empire, 
for instance, and Levi Strauss retail. And when the museum held a party to 
celebrate its 75th birthday,Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> came along.

The Fishers are, of course, the most obvious embodiment of immense wealth 
combined with a loyalty to San Francisco and an intense desire to collect art. 
The LA Times has described their collection as “very 1980s … big, brash, 
expensive, even vaguely avaricious in tone. Call itDynasty-style acquisition” 
focused on “big-ticket artists … born of the American art world’s first, big, 
market-driven era”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F155d8f4805c864421165183e3ea4aee7033112ef%2F0_243_1575_1763%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SFMOMA's%20reopening%3A%20a%20'game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SFMOMA%27s%20reopening%3A%20a%20%27game-changer%20for%20San%20Francisco%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20contemporary%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fsfmoma-san-francisco-museum-of-modern-art-reopening-warhol-richter-gap-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F155d8f4805c864421165183e3ea4aee7033112ef%2F0_243_1575_1763%2F1575.jpg>
 Dan Flavin’s untitled (to Barnett Newman) two (1971). Photograph: Don 
Ross/Katherine Du Tiel 
Yet the quality and range of Fisher pieces on show at SFMOMA, from David 
Hockney <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney> to a Louise 
Bourgeois black spider, speaks for itself. At one end of the fourth floor is a 
hexagonal Rothko-type chapel of superb near-monochrome minimalist works byAgnes 
Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/22/agnes-martin-the-artist-mystic-who-disappeared-into-the-desert>
. When I ask associate curator Sarah Roberts to choose a few favourites, she 
mentionsuntitled (to Barnett Newman) two by Dan Flavin, a rectangle of red, 
yellow and blue fluorescent tubes; the coils and drips ofNote 1 by Twombly; and 
Bracket by Joan Mitchell, a 15ft-wide late-career work.

Perhaps the best instance of an artist the Fishers collected in depth is 
Richter, the world’s most revered (and expensive) living painter. He is also 
the practitioner of contemporary art par excellence thanks to the famed 
plurality of his output. “The whole set of assumptions about modern art was 
that it was incumbent on an artist to define for him or herself a particular 
signature style, something that was indisputably their own,” Benezra explains. 
“So Jackson Pollock poured and dripped paint, and so on. But with contemporary 
art you don’t allow yourself to be boxed in.”

On the sixth floor of the new museum it’s possible to see Richter “in all his 
conceptual glory”. The variety of his work is immediately evident in one room, 
which juxtaposes the conventional-seeming grey-blueSeascape with the 
“near-abstract aerial view of a city” titledTownscape Madrid and 256 Colours, 
one of his canvases based on paintshop colour charts.

Nearby is the well-known, Vermeer-influenced study of Richter’s wife, Sabine, 
The Reader, and – yet another contrast of style – examples of his big 
abstractions made using a squeegee. Propped against a wall, waiting for 
hanging, is the Richter work Benezra describes as perhaps the most important 
for the Fishers in their entire collection: the delicately blurredTwo Candles, 
which the family took off the wall and slipped into the back of their car twice 
a year, as they moved back and forth between their house in San Francisco and 
their place just south of the city, on the Peninsula.

❦

The reopening's most noteworthy piece is a steel sculpture of a clothed black 
woman, clearly homeless, asleep on a bench

The top floor of the museum leaves the Fisher collection behind and brings the 
museum’s holdings up to date, by showingmedia arts 
<https://www.sfmoma.org/artists-artworks/media-arts/> and works made since 
1980. “We wanted it to be the most contemporary space,” Benezra says: instead 
of a ceiling, the ductwork has been left exposed for a rather predictable touch 
of industrial chic. We walk past a Jeff Wall light box not yet switched on, and 
pieces byAi Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei>, 
Matthew Barney and Richard Prince.

Perhaps the most noteworthy piece for the reopening, however, is Sleeping Woman
, a solid stainless steel sculpture by Charles Ray of a clothed black woman, 
clearly homeless, asleep on a bench. With the influx of tech money, the 
homeless situation in some neighbourhoods of the city has become acute: it’s a 
“powerful piece for San Francisco”, Benezra comments.

Strenuous efforts are being made in the marketing of the new museum to link it 
to all parts of the local community. (One initiative is free admission for 
under-18s.) Benezra expresses the hope that San Francisco remains “not just a 
great consumer of culture but also a producer of culture”. That’s “a big 
challenge” because it’s increasingly “hard for people of ordinary means to 
live” in the city, and those “who produce culture” – the up-and-coming artists 
themselves – “are often-times doing so on a shoestring”.

With its Calders, Warhols, Richters and Kellys, SFMOMA is about to rise high 
up the table of art museums and become an unmissable attraction on the west 
coast. Without doubt this achievement is in part a product of the money-fuelled 
transformation of the Bay Area – and the gallery’s expansion is unlikely to 
silence the increasingly loud talk of how the tech industry has stripped San 
Francisco of its culture and its soul. Yet both the Snøhetta building and the 
augmented collection will surely continue to please and impress after any 
number of Silicon Valley bubbles have burst. And as its director reflects: the 
new museum represents something that simply “would not have been possible in 
another place at another time”.

• SFMOMA <https://www.sfmoma.org> reopens on 14 May at 151 3rd Street, San 
Francisco. sfmoma.org.
 