
With its portrayal of William Shakespeare as a drunken buffoon who could 
hardly read, let alone write some of the finest poetry in the English language, 
Roland Emmerich's Anonymous was unlikely to be popular with the Stratford set. 
Now protestors in the Bard's home countyare striking back against the drama 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=shakespeare%20anonymous&source=newssearch&cd=1&ved=0CC0QqQIwAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bbc.co.uk%2Fgo%2Frss%2Fint%2Fnews%2F-%2Fnews%2Fuk-england-coventry-warwickshire-15440882&ctbm=nws&ei=UaimTsuVII3wsgaxxKH_DQ&usg=AFQjCNFkIHWvGCIuiRDX4Jy7K8noWvFWXQ&cad=rja>
, which debuts at the BFI London film festival tonight, by temporarily removing 
the playwright's name from road and pub signs across Warwickshire today.

The campaign by the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, a charity which promotes 
study of the county's most famous son, is designed to highlight a world without 
England's greatest playwright. The Shakespeare pub in Welford, where the Bard 
is said to have enjoyed his last drink, becomes as anonymous as the subject of 
Emmerich's film, which suggests that the Earl of Oxford, Edward De Vere, was 
the true author of 16th-century plays such as A Midsummer Night's Dream and 
Hamlet. Nine other pubs are being stripped of their names and nine road signs 
are being taped over as part of the protest.

"This film flies in the face of a mass of historical fact, but there is a risk 
that people who have never questioned the authorship of Shakespeare's works 
could be hoodwinked," said the Trust's head of knowledge and research, Paul 
Edmondson.

"Shakespeare is at the core of England's cultural and historical DNA, and he 
is certainly our most famous export. Today's activity barely scratches the 
surface, but we hope it will remind people of the enormous legacy we owe to
William Shakespeare <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare> of 
Stratford-upon-Avon."

Emmerich's film has so far proved a surprise hit with critics who might not 
take kindly to the German director's usual canon: exuberant, big-budget CGI 
disaster movie fare such as The Day After Tomorrow and Independence Day. The 
Guardian's Damon Wise labelled the film a "meticulously crafted and often 
well-acted expos√© 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/10/anonymous-film-review-william-shakespeare>
".

The period drama, which was shot at the world famous Babelsburg studio in 
Germany on an extensive handbuilt set recreating Elizabethan London, stars Rhys 
Ifans as De Vere, Vanessa Redgrave as Queen Elizabeth I, Rafe Spall as 
Shakespeare and Sir Derek Jacobi as the narrator. Jacobi himself has warned 
that the film would stir up controversy among the playwright's acolytes.

"It's a very risky thing to do," he told the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/06/08/AR2010060804593.html>
 last year. "Obviously the orthodox Stratfordians are going to be apoplectic 
with rage."
 