
Shelagh Delaney's A Taste of Honey seems to be more popular than ever, with 
three major revivals having appeared within the past 18 months. The former 
Shameless and Waterloo Road starRebecca Ryan 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2007-01-05/rebecca-ryan-the-greatest-child-actor>
 has been in two of them. Last year she played the part of the teenage 
mother-to-be Joat the Royal Lyceum in Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/23/a-taste-of-honey-review>; she's 
currently doing it again in aHull Truck <https://www.hulltruck.co.uk/> 
production set to go out on tour.

"It was shortly after the Edinburgh run ended that I got the call asking if 
I'd like to read for the part at Hull Truck," she says. "I said yes like a 
shot. You can never get enough of this play."

She's certainly enough of an authority to be willing to try the Guardian's 
Taste of Honey quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/quiz/2014/mar/24/morrissey-or-shelagh-delaney-quiz>
 to determine whether she can identify lines written by Shelagh Delaney from 
those of her most ardent literary admirer, Morrissey.
 Rebecca Ryan as Jo and Lekan Lawal as Jimmie in A Taste of Honey 
''Boot the grime of this world in the crotch''? That's got to be Morrissey, 
right?' she says. And it is, as Ryan scores an impressive 80% success rate even 
though, at 22, she was a little too young for the Smiths.

"Well, you can't grow up in Manchester without being aware of them," she says. 
"Although to be honest, what I really love is country music."

Country music?

"Oh yeah. Can't get enough of it." And the sparky young Mancunian who most 
people would still instantly recognise as littleDebbie Gallagher from the 
Chatsworth estate <http://shameless.wikia.com/wiki/Debbie_Gallagher> goes on to 
tell me that she's really a stetson-and-snakeskin-boots kind of girl at heart. 
"I just saw the Dixie Chicks and Zac Brown Band at theCountry 2 Country festival
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/13/country-music-taylor-swift-nashville-radio-2>
," she enthuses. "And Nashville is absolutely the best thing on TV."

I point out that one of the stars of that show, Sam Palladio, actually comes 
from Cornwall. Maybe she should go up for it?

"Oh I would love to," she says. "If only I could sing."

Singing may turn out to be the only thing Ryan can't do. She was set to follow 
in the footsteps of her mother – a world champion Irish dancer – before 
television child-stardom occurred almost by accident. "My older brother Charlie 
did loads of acting as a kid, and would get these parts where they were looking 
to cast a little sister," she explains.

She first followed her brother on to the stage at the age of six in a 
production ofthe Who's Tommy <http://thewho.com/album/tommy/> at Manchester 
Opera House; and they later appeared together in the BBC dramaState of Play 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/drama/stateofplay/>, whose writer Paul Abbott went on to 
create Shameless. Ryan took the part of Debbie Gallagher, the preteen matriarch 
responsible for keeping the family in order.

"I was 11 when Shameless <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shameless> 
started and still too young to realise how unusual that was," she says. "It was 
only when people started recognising me that it became a bit weird." As if on 
cue, a party of school kids shriek "GALLAGHER!" across the foyer. Ryan 
flinches. "I still find it hard to get used to that," she says.

Having become almost "completely embarrassment-proof" as Debbie grew up and 
lost most of her onscreen inhibitions, Ryan transferred seamlessly from 
Shameless to Waterloo Road, departing before the schoolbecame an academy and 
moved to Scotland 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/whats-on/film-and-tv/stars-shocked-as-waterloo-road-moves-869018>
. In 2008 she made her adult stage debut at the Royal Court inFiona Evans's 
play Scarborough <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/feb/13/theatre>. But 
it was her first taste of Shelagh Delaney's play in Edinburgh that left her 
hungry for more.
 Rebecca Ryan as Jo in A Taste of Honey – 'you can never completely understand 
her' 
"There aren't that many parts that you'd want to play again straight away," 
she says, "but you can never completely understand Jo because she doesn't 
completely understand herself. How can she? She's 15, and 15-year-olds change 
their mind all the time."

Is that what keeps the part fresh for her over a long period of time? 
"Absolutely. Anything she says she will contradict later on. She's keeping the 
baby. She's not keeping the baby. In the first half she says she never wears 
makeup, in the second half she wouldn't be without it. It all depends which 
version you choose to believe at the time."

Delaney, who was only 19 herself when she wrote the play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney-working-class-women>
, left the drama unresolved; which is either an uncompromising statement of the 
play's groundbreaking realism, or its biggest structural weakness, depending on 
your point of view. But how does Ryan envisage Jo's unwritten future?

"The biggest question is what's going to happen to her baby. But there's so 
much we just don't know. Has Helen – her mother – just popped out for a drink, 
or is she never coming back? Will Jimmie, the father of her child, return when 
he leaves the navy? The awful likelihood – which I think is what Delaney 
understood so brilliantly – is that she's never going to be able to avoid 
turning into her mother. But I have my own private version of what I'd like to 
happen."

Which is?

"I want her gay friend Geoff to move in and look after her. Maybe that's me 
being a softie. But I've been living with Jo for so long now she feels like a 
sister. I just want the best for her, you know?"

• A Taste of Honey is at Hull Truck theatre until 19 April (01482 323638) then 
touring until 12 July <http://www.hulltruck.co.uk/whats-on?action=view&id=731>

• Morrissey or Shelagh Delaney? – quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/quiz/2014/mar/24/morrissey-or-shelagh-delaney-quiz>

• A Taste of Honey: four-star revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/09/a-taste-of-honey-review-rebecca-ryan>
 