
I’m Darren, I’m 42 and I’m from Stoke-on-Trent. I’ve been living in the mixed 
up world of multiple and complex needs for almost 30 years. When I was six, 
because I was visually impaired, I was sent to a special needs school in 
Coventry for a “short time”. That “short time” lasted 11 years. It was a lonely 
experience.

After leaving school, I found myself caught in the world of alcohol and drug 
use which, over time, turned into addiction. From there, things got more out of 
hand and I spent 20 years forging a career in organised crime. This was how I 
funded my addiction, but I now recognise that it affected the lives of many 
others too. Finally, I went to prison for conspiracy to supply class A drugs in 
2010.

A wish for 2015: Let's give service users more responsibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/08/service-users-care-act-co-production-tony-hunter>
In my life leading up to this point I have attracted a lot of labels from 
professionals and others. Problem child, four eyes, blind idiot, nutter, manic 
depressive, mentally ill, drunk, junkie, and criminal are just a few. These are 
things that people who were supposed to be helping me have called me. For some 
people with my background, these labels are like millstones weighing them down 
and stopping them from making changes in their lives. Millstones can become an 
identity and remove any desire for change.

Fortunately, there are people who take a different approach. People that have 
recognised me as a person with skills and interests rather than a stereotype. 
People who believed that I could make changes even when I doubted it myself.

​When I was in prison, a member of staff recognised my interest in cooking and 
helped me to work in the kitchens.
Darren Murinas 
When I was in prison, a member of staff recognised my interest in cooking and 
helped me to work in the kitchens. I’m a good cook, even if I say so myself. It 
was nice that someone recognised my skills and put them to good use. This 
helped me to want to develop wider skills and to move on.

I was released from prison in December 2012. I was fortunate to find the help 
I needed, including supported accommodation, and I was willing to take 
opportunities that came along. Two local organisations, Saltbox and Brighter 
Futures, helped me to get back on my feet after prison life. Then in 2013, 
Brighter Futures invited me to a focus group to talk about what I thought 
needed to change in services for people with complex needs, given my 
experiences.

Over the next few months, with other people with lived experience (we like to 
be known as expert citizens) and local agencies, we designed what was to become 
theVoices project in Stoke-on-Trent <http://www.voicesofstoke.org.uk/>. I’m 
really proud that I am part of a team that helped to make that happen for my 
city. Something that’s already helping people with multiple needs to recover.

 As part of that development, the Big Lottery Fund  
<https://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/>and Brighter Futures  
<http://www.brighter-futures.org.uk/>offered training in storytelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/feb/12/service-users-designing-lottery-funded-programme>
 from the digital media companysounddelivery <http://www.sounddelivery.org.uk/>
. This training gave me the confidence to tell my story in public. I realised 
that discussing my life experience could help others. It could also help 
agencies – those prepared to listen – to design better services.

How can social workers maintain boundaries with service users?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2014/dec/17/social-work-appropriate-boundaries-children>
The last 12 months have been amazing. I’ve been on the radio, I’m now helping 
to lead Voices as vice chair of the expert citizens group, I’ve been helping 
others to tell their stories through short films, and I feel that I’m making a 
positive contribution. People are listening and I hope that can change 
attitudes.

Now, thanks to the Voices project, I’m helping to put together 1,001 life 
stories so others can tell agencies about their experiences. I’m also working 
in a team to design a set of clear service standards for agencies that work 
with people that have complex needs and I’ve taken part in the local council’s 
My City My Say consultation with the expert citizens group.

Working to help other people who have experience of addiction, mental health 
difficulties, homelessness or offending behaviour to tell their stories has 
shown me what my real purpose is.

This month I’m going on another storytelling day but this time, I will be 
returning to theSocial Media Exchange <http://www.socialmediaexchange.org.uk/> 
as Darren Murinas, an expert citizen, public speaker, blogger, filmmaker, 
storyteller, and agent of systems change.

Darren Murinas will be speaking at the Social Media Exchange 
<http://www.socialmediaexchange.org.uk> on 9 February. This event is run by 
sounddelivery <http://www.sounddelivery.org.uk>, partnered by JustGiving and 
supported by Tennyson Insurance

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free 
–online here <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
 