
The Shallows is an important film for a couple of reasons. First, it teaches 
us that nobody should ever go anywhere near the sea, not even once, even for a 
second, because everything that lives in it is a full-pelt bastard. But perhaps 
more significantly, it joins the hallowed group of movie one-handers: films 
where we only see one actor on screen for the overwhelming majority of the 
running time.

The Shallows review – deep breath: Blake Lively shark-fighting thriller is 
superb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/the-shallows-review-blake-lively-shark-thriller-jaume-collet-serra>
The key to a good one-hander is peril. The sole character we meet has to be in 
an absolute ton of trouble if they are going to sustain our attention for an 
hour and a half. Indeed, many of them hinge on the uncertainty of whether they 
will even survive the movie. This is certainly the case withThe Shallows 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EgdxIlSuB70>, a film about Blake Lively making 
small talk with a seagull while a shark tries to eat her face off. Here are the 
most notable movie one-handers, ranked in order of increasing peril.

127 Hours
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOlhLOWTnVoQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOlhLOWTnVoQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOlhLOWTnVoQ&media=>
We spend the vast majority of our time with James Franco, acting his chops off 
with his arm trapped under a rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/28/127-hours-danny-boyle-review>. 
However, there is virtually no peril in this film. Will he live or die? The 
fact that the movie’s real-life subjectwrote a book about the experience 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Between-Rock-Hard-Place-Ralston/dp/0743495802>, then 
formed a substantial part of the film’s promotional campaign, might tip you off 
a little. Instead, this is just a film for people who want to watch James 
Franco hacking his arm off with a penknife. It’s a film for weirdos.

Peril rating: 3

Locke
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Ao2r6qD22A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Ao2r6qD22A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Ao2r6qD22A&media=>
This is a film about one man, in a car, discussing the intricacies of concrete 
distribution for 84 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/17/locke-review-tom-hardy>. Oh, 
sure, other things happen in it as well. We get to see the lengths that this 
man will go to in order to prove that he is capable of decency, at the expense 
of everything he loves. But it is still mainly just a bloke in a car talking 
about concrete.

Peril rating: 4

The Man Who Sleeps 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn4mjVts0DF4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn4mjVts0DF4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn4mjVts0DF4&media=>
The most relentlessly French thing in the history of creation, The Man Who 
Sleeps is a 1974 black-and-white film abouta dispassionate young man wandering 
the streets of Paris alone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n4mjVts0DF4>, while 
a dispassionate young woman says things such as: “You are such a negligible 
speck” in voiceover. He stares at a tree. He stares at a river. He reads a 
book. It’s a terrific film – and it contains perhaps the most meaningful 
closeup of a burning basin in all of cinema – but that doesn’t necessarily mean 
it is particularly perilous.

Peril rating: 4.5

Secret Honor 


Made during Robert Altman’s wilderness years in the 1980s, Secret Honor is a 
fictionalised account of one night in Richard Nixon’s house post-resignation. 
Starring Philip Baker Hall as Nixon, the film takes the form of a long, angry 
monologue. And there is peril, too, thanks to the gun that lies on his desk 
throughout. You never know how the film will end, because you are never sure 
how much a work of fantasy this Nixon is. If you don’t mind spoilers,the final 
scene is available on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LAwpVJ7ZSTA>. It 
is ridiculous.

Peril rating: 6

Wrecked
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhKUtFGg09xk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhKUtFGg09xk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhKUtFGg09xk&media=>
Adrien Brody wakes up in a car wreck, next to a dead body, in a ravine, with 
amnesia and a gun, covered in blood and surrounded by mountain lions. That is 
pretty much the entire film, as we watch Brody crawl back to civilisation and 
work out what happened to him. It’s not a good film in any sense – it is 
basically a longform version ofColdplay’s The Scientist video played backwards 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB-RcX5DS5A> – but, hey, at least there are 
guns and car crashes and mountain lions. God knows how much more entertaining 
Locke would have been with mountain lions in it.

Peril rating: 7


 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/17/film-review-moon-sam-rockwell>

Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/17/film-review-moon-sam-rockwell>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtwuScTcDP_Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtwuScTcDP_Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtwuScTcDP_Q&media=>
It’s hard to know for certain whether this is a one-hander or not. Sam 
Rockwell plays the only substantial character we see on screen, but there are 
two of him. Can a film still be a one-hander if a man is playing clones? And 
can it also be a one-hander if Kevin Spacey plays the voice of a chatty 
computer? Since the emotional heft of the film falls solely to Rockwell, we can 
probably get away with calling it a one-hander - and a perilous one at that. 
After all, what possible stakes could be higher than learning that you are an 
expendable pawn to an unethical corporation –plus, you are on the moon by 
yourself?

Peril rating: 8

All Is Lost  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/26/all-is-lost-review>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dno1rl9Gvx-s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dno1rl9Gvx-s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dno1rl9Gvx-s&media=>
Alone in the middle of the ocean, Robert Redford is on a boat that has been 
punctured by a loose shipping container. He races against time and nature in a 
desperate bid to save his own life. Immediately, this film confronts us with 
all the very worst kinds of peril: solitude, desperation, vast bodies of open 
water, thirst, imminent death and the prospect of being passed over at the 
Oscars in favour of Christian Bale’s crappy American Hustle wig. This is almost 
as bad as it gets.

Peril rating: 9


 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/30/buried-film-review>

Buried <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/30/buried-film-review>



Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj1Yyhxq56Xg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj1Yyhxq56Xg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj1Yyhxq56Xg&media=>
Being buried alive is a primal fear, one that is only topped by the prospect 
of being buried alive with Ryan Reynolds in the middle of his most annoying “I 
am a serious actor now” period. Kidnapped and thrown in a coffin in the middle 
of the desert with only a phone for company, the film follows Reynolds’s 
increasingly frantic attempts to escape. Slightly more than the sum of its 
parts, this film is terrifyingly claustrophobic.

Peril rating: 9.5

Cast Away  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/jan/12/culture.reviews>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPJvosb4UCLs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPJvosb4UCLs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPJvosb4UCLs&media=>
Oh Wilson, you twonk. If it wasn’t for Wilson – a mute, inert volleyball with 
a bloody handprint on it – this film would have no peril at all. It would 
simply be a film where Tom Hanks has a nice time on a lovely island with his 
happy volleyball chum. But when Wilsongets washed out to sea in a storm, and we 
see Hanks screaming hopelessly after him 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7Rv_7kWfBc>? Jesus Christ, that is peril of 
the very first order. Everyone go home and hug your volleyballs a little bit 
tighter tonight.

Peril rating: 10 
 