
The painter Sheila Girling, who has died aged 90, has often been acknowledged 
for her influence on the work of her husband, the sculptorAnthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/24/sir-anthony-caro>, in 
what the couple themselves described as a “64-year conversation about art”, but 
her own acrylics and collages also deserve attention.

Girling’s pictures often dazzle with their intense hues, and it was she who on 
occasion chose the colours in Caro’s sculptures, from his steel and aluminium 
compositions of the 1960s to more recent pieces in Perspex. As Girling put it: 
“Tony was into form. And he really didn’t care what colour a form took.” 
Fortunately, this carelessness allowed Girling to turn the initial colour of 
Caro’s seminalEarly One Morning 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/caro-early-one-morning-t00805> (1962), an 
unappealing green, into a vivid red, and the history of postwar British art was 
undoubtedly the better for it.

As well as their chromatic brilliance, Girling’s own works demonstrate her 
strong sense of texture and material. She also created a subtle interplay 
between figuration and abstraction, evoking the natural world while always 
expressing the specific qualities of the media that she used. In short, she was 
a true modernist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fsheila-girling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424692137600%2F63bd6b09-7625-4b85-8c84-576953ca0539-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheila%20Girling%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fsheila-girling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheila%20Girling%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fsheila-girling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424692137600%2F63bd6b09-7625-4b85-8c84-576953ca0539-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sheila Girling in 2014. Her pictures dazzled with intense hues and she created 
a subtle interplay between figuration and abstraction. Photograph: Graham Turner
Girling was born in Birmingham into a family that included a number of 
accomplished artists as well as a moderately disreputable London dealer, who 
apparently ran a studio for the production of Old Masters. Hers was the rare 
case of a young woman with scientific and medical interests who was pushed into 
a safer, artistic career: she claimed that her mother was worried she would 
“catch too many germs in hospital”. Her education began with a rigorous 
technical training at the Birmingham School ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, followed by a period at the 
Royal Academy Schools in London, where she won the silver medal for portraiture 
and was runner-up for the gold medal for her painting Return of Ulysses.

It was at the Royal Academy in 1948 that she met Caro, who had used her 
drawing board by mistake. Their arguments about art apparently started at that 
first encounter. They were married within six months. In 1951 they had their 
first child, Tim, followed seven years later by Paul, who was to become a 
painter.

While Girling had already taken up an abstract, post-cubist style, her 
artistic work was put on hold while she was bringing up her sons. The family 
spent time in Much Hadham, Hertfordshire, where Caro was an assistant to Henry 
Moore, and Hampstead, north London, before Caro was appointed in 1963 to the 
sculpture department at Bennington College, Vermont. His reputation began to 
rise dramatically, and Girling also made vital friendships and discoveries. 
Significantly, the painterKenneth Noland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/08/kenneth-noland-obituary> 
introduced her to acrylic, which was to become one of her favourite media.

After the Caros returned to Britain in the late 60s, they set up a studio in 
north London, spreading through former piano and pipe factories in Camden Town. 
Girling’s extended break from painting while she was rearing her family left 
her with a creative block, which she tried to conquer through analysis. 
Eventually, this crisis was overcome and, after an exhibition at the Edmonton 
Art Gallery in Alberta, Canada, in 1978, her career developed steadily, with a 
series of solo shows at Acquavella Contemporary Art in New York and Francis 
Graham-Dixon in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fsheila-girling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424692380962%2F74920301-71fb-44a3-b56b-667d0d36c379-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheila%20Girling%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fsheila-girling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheila%20Girling%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fsheila-girling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424692380962%2F74920301-71fb-44a3-b56b-667d0d36c379-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beyond a Dream, 1992, by Sheila Girling. Photograph: Bolton and Quinn 
At their base in Camden, the couple worked on separate floors but with a 
remarkable sense of artistic collaboration, though Girling admitted that Caro 
“was always so emphatic about things” that she would wait until she felt fairly 
secure before she would ask for his advice. This “chat between two eyes” 
continued untilCaro’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/05/sheila-girling-anthony-caro-sculpture-ended-too-soon-but-good-life>
 in 2013.

These final decades were a period in which Girling produced works of an 
impressive emotional range within a clearly defined, highly abstracted style. 
Her use of acrylic was combined with a penchant for collage, the technique 
through which, according to her own account, she “found” herself. Collage gave 
her paintings a tactile quality and an engagement with the world outside the 
art studio, but she also practised in the more traditional and 
characteristically English medium of watercolour. In this way she recreated the 
forms and light of nature while never abandoning her modernist aesthetic.

Girling’s paintings transformed external reality, from nature and architecture 
to the human body and still life, but were accompanied by fine figurative 
drawings, not least of her husband. Late in her life, she illustrated books by 
her son Tim, a zoologist, and, after a minor stroke, experimented with creating 
paper cut-outs. She continued to exhibit into her 80s, in 2007 staging a joint 
show with Caro at the New Art Centre near Salisbury.

A retrospective of her work is due to open on 10 September 2015 at Annely Juda 
Fine Art <http://www.annelyjudafineart.co.uk> in London.

She is survived by Tim and Paul, and by three grandchildren, Barnabas, 
Benjamin and Emma.

• Sheila Girling, painter, born 1 July 1924; died 14 February 2015
 