
Shelley Rudman, Amy Williams, Kristan Bromley and Adam Pengilly were today 
unveiled as the final selections for Team GB ahead of theWinter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> in Vancouver. The skeleton 
athletes completed the British team, which consists of 52 athletes from six 
sports and 11 disciplines.

"Team GB has a fantastic record in skeleton, and these names really do inspire 
anybody who loves Olympic sport," said the BOA chef de mission, Andy Hunt. "We 
have four truly world-class athletes here including Shelley Rudman who won our 
only medal at the last Olympic Winter Games. They reflect exactly what it takes 
to get to the top of sport â€“ talent, dedication, energy, focus and competitive 
spirit. I am sure each of them will rise to the occasion on the biggest stage 
of all.

"This is the biggest team we've sent to an Olympic Winter Games since 
Albertville in 1992, and we are ready to take on the world."

Rudman said: "I have very special memories of the Olympic Winter Games, and 
the silver medal I won in Turin four years ago was the greatest moment I've had 
in sport. But my appetite to succeed remains as strong as ever, and I'm going 
hoping that it all comes together and that luck is on my side.

Team GB for Vancouver Winter Olympics

Skeleton: Women - Shelley Rudman and Amy Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amy-williams>. Men - Kristan Bromley and 
Adam Pengilly.

Bobsleigh: Nicola Minichiello and Gillian Cooke, Paula Walker and Kelly 
Thomas. Men's four - John Jackson, Henry Nwume, Dan Money, Allyn Condon.

Curling: Men - David Murdoch (skip), Ewan MacDonald, Peter Smith, Euan Byers, 
Graeme Connal. Women - Eve Muirhead (skip), Jackie Lockhart, Kelly Wood, Lorna 
Vevers, Karen Addison.

Figure skating: Ice Dance - John Kerr & Sinead Kerr, Nick Buckland & Penny 
Coomes. Pairs - David King & Stacey Kemp. Singles - Jenna McCorkell.

Speed skating (short track): Men - Jon Eley, Anthony Douglas, Paul Worth, Jack 
Whelbourne, Tom Iveson. Women - Sarah Lindsay, Elise Christie.

Alpine Skiing: Andy Noble, Dave Ryding, Ed Drake, Chemmy Alcott.

Biathlon: Lee-Steve Jackson.

Cross Country Skiing: Andrew Musgrave, Andrew Young, Fiona Hughes.

Luge: Adam Rosen.

Snowboard cross: Zoe Gillings.

Snowboard half-pipe: Ben Kilner, Lesley McKenna.

Ski aerials: Sarah Ainsworth.

Ski moguls: Ellie Koyander.

Ski cross: Sarah Sauvey.
 