
Shelagh Delaney, who died on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney?CMP=twt_fd>, was 
almost as important for what she symbolised as for what she wrote. She was,as 
Jeanette Winterson wrote in the Guardian last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/18/jeanette-winterson-my-hero-shelagh-delaney?CMP=twt_gu>
, "the first working-class woman playwright". And even if nothing she later 
wrote achieved the success of her first play,A Taste of Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/20/theatre1>, Delaney proved that 
an 18-year-old Salford girl could breach the walls of what, even in 1958, was 
still a mainly middle-class, male-dominated British theatre.

The story of how A Taste of Honey came to be written is well-known. Delaney 
had been taken to see Terence Rattigan'sVariations on a Theme 
<http://www.jeremybrett.info/st_variation.html> at Manchester's Opera House and 
came away convinced she could do better. So, in little more than a fortnight, 
she banged out a play about a feisty Salford girl, Jo, who is left alone by her 
flighty mum one Christmas, goes to bed with a transient Nigerian sailor, gets 
pregnant and is lovingly tended by an effeminate art student. Having written 
the piece, Delaney had the nous to send it toJoan Littlewood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/23/guardianobituaries.arts>, who had 
turned the Theatre Royal, Stratford East into a vibrant home of new drama.

In her autobiography 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Joans-Book-Littlewoods-Biography-Autobiography/dp/0413773183>
, Littlewood made no bones about the fact that a lot of work was needed to 
knock Delaney's play into shape. She liked the sparky dialogue but felt many of 
the scenes were undeveloped and the plot anecdotal. So she got Avis Bunnage, as 
Jo's mum, to use her talent for direct address and brought in a jazz quartet, 
consisting of trumpet, drums, guitar and sax, to set the mood. Delaney's 
slightly artless script quickly became a critical success. "There are plenty of 
crudities in Miss Delaney's play," wroteKenneth Tynan 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/critic/feature/0,,567652,00.html> in the Observer. 
"There is also more importantly the smell of living." He also pointed that 
Delaney would have plenty of time in the future to worry about words such as 
"form", which mean something, and concepts like "vulgarity", which don't.

That question of form is fascinating. After the success of A Taste of Honey, 
Joan Littlewood tried to offer her young playwright concrete guidance. "Read a 
good play," Littlewood wrote to Delaney, "an Ibsen for example, then analyse 
it, note the construction. Playwriting is a craft, not just inspiration." As 
far as we know, the advice went unheeded: Delaney's second play,The Lion in Love
 <http://www.librarything.com/work/2459772>, made little impact and her 
theatrical career quickly petered out.

Delaney did, however, write a number of short stories, several radio scripts 
and a handful of rather good screenplays includingThe White Bus 
<http://www.lindsayanderson.com/the_white_bus.html> for Lindsay Anderson and 
Charlie Bubbles, directed by and starringAlbert Finney 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001215/>. I've not seen the latter since it first 
came out in 1967 but I have a memory of an extraordinary film in which Finney 
plays a successful writer who makes a pilgrimage back to his northern roots. 
Since Finney, like Delaney, hailed from Salford, the film had a strong personal 
favour. But Delaney also wittily pinned down the idea of a writer insulated 
from reality by fame and success. There is one particularly good scene in a 
plush hotel where the waiter asks Finney: "Are you still working, sir, or do 
you just do the writing now?"

Objectively viewed, you could say Delaney's career never fulfilled its initial 
promise. But what she did do was open a door for succeeding generations; and if 
we now think there is nothing freakish or unusual about women dramatists making 
a mark in their teens or coming from a working-class background, we haveShelagh 
Delaney <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/shelagh-delaney> to thank for it.
 