
A weaker pound and a stronger oil price has sent the UK market sharply higher, 
withRoyal Dutch Shell leading the way.

Shell’s A shares are up 49.5p to 1963.5p while its B shares are 51.5p better 
at 2048.5p, whileBP has climbed 7.3p to 457.3p. Brent crude is up 1% at $50.69 
in the wake of last week’s moves by oil producers to curb output.

Sterling fell back after UK prime minister Theresa May set out the timetable 
for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, although it has regained some ground after much stronger than expected 
manufacturing PMIs for September. The weaker pound helps exporters - which 
dominate the FTSE 100 - and commodity companies.

So pharmaceutical group Hikma is 50p higher at £20.68 while Anglo American has 
added 19.6p to 987.2p.

Overall the FTSE 100 has hit a 16 month high, adding 65.58 points to 6964.92. 
Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG, said:

 Over the weekend we all got a little more clarity on what Brexit actually 
means, although Theresa May continues to say relatively little in order to keep 
her options open, a course of action used to good effect in recent months by 
Fed chair Janet Yellen. A slump in sterling made life easier for UK markets, 
with price action so far this morning seeing high-quality international firms 
receiving a flood of buyers.

Another rise in the UK’s manufacturing PMI helped sterling to recover some of 
its losses, and while the move this morning has garnered plenty of attention it 
is a pale imitation of the action seen in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit 
vote.

The bullish activity in markets this morning has been helped in no small 
measure by the closure of German markets for a holiday, which has had the 
beneficial effect of sparing us any Deutsche Bank headlines. The rumoured DoJ 
deal failed to materialise over the weekend, which might mean that the shares 
are due another trimming when the Dax reopens tomorrow.

Other risers include Babcock International, up 17p to £10.52 after JP Morgan 
raised their target price from £14.27 to £14.40.

But defensive stocks such as utilities were down as investors moved back into 
riskier assets.Severn Trent has slipped 21p to £24.84 while British Gas-owner 
Centrica is down 1.4p to 226.8p as RBC analysts moved from 0utperform to sector 
perform, and cut their target price from 250p to 240p.

BT is down 4.5p at 384.55 following a report the telecoms company is 
struggling to agree a deal with regulator Ofcom about the future structure of 
its Openreach business. 
<https://www.ft.com/content/2b45f8e0-8732-11e6-a75a-0c4dce033ade>

Among the mid-caps fund management firms were on the rise as US asset manager 
Janus Capital agreed on a $6bn merger withHenderson Group, up 12% to 260p. The 
news has sentAberdeen Asset Management 14.2p higher to 340.5p and Jupiter Fund 
Managementup 18.6p at 444p.
 