
Shelagh Delaney, the acclaimed playwright whose ground-breaking debut, A Taste 
of Honey <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-taste-of-honey>, challenged many 
of the taboos of 50s Britain, has died. She was 71 and had been suffering from 
cancer.

The feisty Salford-born writer, who drew on the gritty reality of 
working-class life, was one of the pioneers of the "kitchen sink" realism 
movement of the late 1950s and 1960s.

She was just 19 when A Taste of Honey premiered in 1958 and became an instant 
success, with runs in London and New York. An earthy and moving story of a 
teenage girl's pregnancy following a one-night stand with a black sailor, and 
her supportive relationship with a gay artist, it would become one of the 
defining feminist plays of the 1950s.

It was subsequently turned into a film, starring Rita Tushingham and earning 
Delaney and the film's director, Tony Richardson, Bafta and Writer's Guild 
awards for best screenplay.

Tushingham told the Guardian: "Shelagh was such an important person at the 
start of my career. I am deeply saddened that we have lost such an amazing 
talent."

Jane Villiers, Delaney's agent for the last 15 years, told Channel 4: "No word 
was wasted. Every word meant something. She was extraordinarily accurate about 
characters."

The daughter of a bus inspector of Irish descent, Delaney wrote A Taste of 
Honey, aged just 18, after seeing and disliking Terence Rattigan's play 
Variation on a Theme, partly because she felt his work showed insensitivity in 
the way it portrayed homosexuality.

She wrote it in two weeks, adapting it from a novel she was already working 
on. Her second play, The Lion in Love, which portrayed an impoverished family 
and a difficult marriage, did not enjoy the same critical success when it 
opened in 1960. She did not write for the theatre again until 1979, when she 
revised her BBC series The House that Jack Built.

In between she wrote screenplays: The White Bus (1965), Charlie Bubbles 
(1967), The Raging Moon (1970), and the screenplay for the 1985 film Dance with 
a Stranger, based on the story of Ruth Ellis, the last woman to be executed for 
a crime in Britain.

Driven, in part, by rebellion against a theatre which, she claimed, did not 
portray "life as the majority of ordinary people know it", she found a vitality 
in Salford that infused her writing. "The language is alive, it's virile, it 
lives and it breathes and you know exactly where it's coming from. Right out of 
the earth," she said in a 1960 film by Ken Russell. "Down by the river it's 
even romantic, if you can stand the smell."

Acknowledging her as an inspiration, the author Jeanette Winterson has said 
Delaney's talent had been allowed to fade because of her gender. "She was like 
a lighthouse â€“ pointing the way and warning about the rocks underneath. She was 
the first working-class woman playwright,"Winterson wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/18/jeanette-winterson-my-hero-shelagh-delaney>
 last year. "She had all the talent and we let her go."

The singer Morrissey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/morrissey> frequently 
referenced her writing in his lyrics, particularly in the song This Night Has 
Opened My Eyes, and her face appeared on the cover of The Smiths' compilation 
album Louder Than Bombs and single Girlfriend in a Coma. The Beatles were also 
said to be fans, recording their own version of the theme from the film 
adaptation of A Taste Of Honey.
 