
A cold January morning. In a room backstage at London's Theatre Royal 
Stratford East, I am looking through theShelagh Delaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/shelagh-delaney> archive, a small, 
by-appointment-only affair put together and lovingly maintained by Murray 
Melvin, the actor who first played Geof inA Taste of Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36232/taste.of.honey> on both stage and 
screen. Made up of reviews, recordings, photographs and, displayed in a glass 
box, Elizabeth Bury's original model for the set design – it features, at stage 
right, an aspidistra the size of my big toenail – this is a peculiarly 
evocative collection, one that effortlessly conjures a sepia world of 
antimacassars and steamy-windowed caffs, of lonely telephone boxes, sloping 
attics, and theatre critics who refer to actors as "Miss" or "Mr".

For me, though, it's the programme for A Taste of Honey that tells you most 
about 1958, the year the play was first staged. Pale and spare, it looks more 
like a political manifesto than a theatrical programme (in the late 50s, the 
Theatre Royal, home ofJoan Littlewood's radical Theatre Workshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/23/guardianobituaries.arts>, was at 
the cutting edge of contemporary graphic design) – and sure enough, inside are 
two rather extraordinary, not to say contradictory, declarations. The first of 
these advises that "in accordance with modern theatre practice, national 
anthems will only be played in the presence of royalty or heads of state". The 
second is a short biography of the company's latest discovery. "Shelagh Delaney 
is a 19-year-old Salford girl who works in an engineering factory," it reads. 
"Her father works on the buses and her brother is an apprentice engineer." 
Someone, however, clearly felt these scant details were not enough, for it goes 
on: "Coming from a Lancashire city which is devastated not by war but by 
industry and by years of prewar unemployment, she is the antithesis of London's 
'angry young men'. She knows what she is angry about." Stopping only to praise 
Delaney's "fierce independence of mind", it then offers its gratitude to WD & 
HO Wills for supplying the production with Bristol cigarettes.

Murray Melvin is much in demand at the moment; thanks to the fact that the 
National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> is 
shortly to stage a new production ofA Taste of Honey – it will star Kate 
O'Flynn as Jo and Lesley Sharp as her mother, Helen – everyone wants to hear 
from him. So it's lucky that he remembers the opening night ofA Taste of Honey 
as if it were yesterday. Although he and the rest of the cast had been warned 
that there might be might be trouble – "we were told the iron [safety curtain] 
would fall if that happened" – in the end, the performance ran without 
incident, and when the actors came to take their call, they heard "an amazing 
noise" that turned out to be a roar of approval. The play, about a Salford girl 
who gets pregnant by a black sailor and lodges with a gay man (Geof), was an 
immediate hit, loved by critics and audiences alike, and in 1959, it 
transferred to the West End. Naturally, Murray was thrilled; the play made his 
name. But he also thinks that it was, and still is, widely misunderstood. "Miss 
Littlewood's theatre [Joan Littlewood, who directedA Taste of Honey, ran the 
Theatre Workshop at Stratford, and had also knocked Delaney's first draft into 
shape] was one of imagination and theatricality," he says, mock haughty. "There 
were no kitchen sinks here." As for its author, whom we seem only to be able to 
picture now smoking a cigarette in some grimy, cobbled street, she was 
"beautiful in many different ways… seductive, and ravishing".

What, though, did she feel about her play? This is more complicated. Delaney 
was certainly proud ofA Taste of Honey, and she enjoyed the material things it 
brought her. When she sold the film rights (it would be directed by Tony 
Richardson and star a young Rita Tushingham), she was determined to buy "that 
red sports car I've had my eye on", for all that she did not know how to drive. 
(She was outraged when Gerry Raffles, Littlewood's partner and the theatre's 
manager, told her the money would remain in her bank account until she was 21: 
"You have no right whatsoever to order me about like some Inland Revenue 
employer… I've been offered a lot of money for the film rights and I want that 
car.") As for fame, that pleased her too – at first. In her memoirs, Littlewood 
notes that she took it "in her stride, giving interviews, considering offers… 
She was seen in the right pubs coping with the latest drinks and entertaining 
her hosts with laconic comments in her broad Salford accent." Even the hate 
mail she received – the 50s version of internet trolling – amused her to the 
degree that she published some of it in her 1964 book,Sweetly Sings the Donkey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sweetly-Sings-Donkey-Shelagh-DeLaney/dp/1258349264/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390482872&sr=8-1&keywords=sweetly+sings+the+donkey>
: "What a disgrace not only to the name of THEATRE but to womanhood you are 
with your dirty clothes and grubby skin and hair. Aren't you ashamed of 
yourself… By the way, how are your teddy boy friends? Do they carry 
flick-knives? It would be rather fun if they jab their flick-knives into you 
one night, it might teach you to improve your tastes and company."

But A Taste of Honey would also become a cross she had to bear, for 
disappointment was built into its success, as is often the case with early 
triumph. Delaney's next play,A Lion in Love, was not half the hit its 
predecessor had been (Littlewood read it, and thought: "She had learned 
nothing") and her subsequent career as a screenwriter at first stuttered, and 
was then snuffed out altogether (her biggest hits wereCharlie Bubbles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/98360/charlie-bubbles>, a 1967 movie in 
which Albert Finney plays a successful but unfulfilled writer, andDance With a 
Stranger <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088987/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>, Mike Newell's 
1985 film about Ruth Ellis, the last British woman to be hanged). Most of 
Delaney's late work was written for the radio. No wonder, then, that only 
rarely did she allow theatres to stage new productions of her first play; she 
wanted to be thought of as more than the writer ofA Taste of Honey. "She just 
kept saying no," says her daughter, Charlotte. "When she got ill 10 years ago [
Delaney died of breast cancer in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney>], she said to 
me: 'You're in charge now. You can say who'll put it on when I'm gone.' That 
was quite funny, really, because I'd never even seen it on stage. I had to go 
away and read it."

Charlotte Delaney believes that the National Theatre production has caught the 
essence of her mother's play (she has met the cast, and seen some rehearsals). 
"To me, it's a play about women – about mothers and daughters – and they've 
brought that out." But this doesn't mean she can honestly tell me her mother 
would have approved of it. "When she was dying, she told me she was glad she 
was leaving it behind, this body of work. But the truth is that if she had been 
alive, she wouldn't have said yes, not even to the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. She just didn't like the 
attention." What was her mother like? She sounds so stubborn, so formidable. 
"She was a good friend, loyal, a fabulous grandma. She was always playful – she 
never lost that – and she never had her head turned by fame, not even after 
Katharine Hepburn took her for a drive in Spencer Tracy's car. She was a 
socialist. She could talk to anyone, no matter who they were: Ringo Starr, or 
her mum's neighbour. She was infuriating, she was adventurous… she was a 
renegade."
 Rita Tushingham and Murray Melvin in Tony Richardson's film of A Taste of 
Honey. Photograph: Moviestore Collection/Rex 
She knows what she is angry about. The phrase in the programme has an air of 
men- ace, but it was also accurate. You bet Delaney was angry. Fed up with 
Britain's still rigid class system, and especially the role of women within it, 
she had big things to say both about the way social reforms had failed to 
improve the lot of the poor, and about sexuality (A Taste of Honey is generally 
agreed to be the first modern play to depict a gay working-class man). Her 
play, written on a borrowed typewriter the day after her very first trip to the 
theatre – a young man, "anxious to improve" her mind, had taken her to the 
Manchester Opera House, whereupon she had finally "discovered something that 
meant more to me than myself" – is muscular, plain- speaking, funny and 
furious. It is the polar opposite of polite and decorous, the things that women 
were then still expected to be.

But it's wrong to see the blazing Delaney as a lone star, as the new wave's 
only female member, which is how she is now most often portrayed. There were 
other angry young women around, girls every bit as determined and stubborn as 
her. It was Littlewood, after all, who'd taken a punt on her (when she first 
received the manuscript ofA Taste of Honey, the director's heart had sunk at 
its lack of plot and the "pedantic" way its characters spoke). Shortly before 
Delaney's play opened, moreover, Ann Jellicoe'sThe Sport of My Mad Mother was 
staged at the Royal Court; it was set in cockney London, and had a powerful 
feminist theme (Jellicoe would go on to have a huge hit with her 1962 play,The 
Knack). Had Delaney seen J Lee Thompson's 1956 movie Yield to the Night 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0049019/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>? I don't know. But she 
would surely have been aware of it (and it may have influenced her screenplay 
forDance with a Stranger).

Co-adapted from her own novel by Joan Henry, a gambling deb who'd done time 
for fraud (an experience she'd put in an impassioned and bestselling bookWho 
Lie in Gaol <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Who-Lie-Gaol-Joan-Henry/dp/B000XCVCWU>, 
which demanded reform of women's prisons), it tells the story of the last weeks 
on earth of a shop girl, Mary Hilton (Diana Dors), who is to be hanged for the 
murder of Lucy, the woman with whom her lover, Jim, was unfaithful. Dors puts 
in a powerful performance, sullen and unsmiling, and it is her simmering and 
unapologetic rage that you take away from the picture, even as she goes to the 
gallows. All her character wants is a better life, and when she shoots her 
victim it is not only out of jealousy and curdled love, but out of class rage 
(Lucy is rich). The film, which makes its opposition to the death penalty plain 
(and this was before Ruth Ellis was hanged), anticipates the much more famous
Victim <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78876/victim> (1961), starring 
Dirk Bogarde, a movie that pleaded for homosexual law reform.Victim, too, was 
co-written by a woman: Janet Green. Even the high-testosterone new wave 
novelists – John Wain,Alan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/25/alan-sillitoe-obituary> et al – 
were shortly to be joined by a woman. In 1960 Lynne Reid Banks would publishThe 
L-Shaped Room 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099469636>
, in which a pregnant and unmarried girl courageously struggles to survive in a 
damp boarding house.

None of this is to suggest that Delaney wasn't special, or immensely talented; 
she was. To watch Ken Russell's 1960Monitor documentary about her is to be 
mesmerised. But presenting a brilliant woman as one of a kind is rarely 
helpful; it suggests a freakishness, implying somehow that any success she 
enjoyed was accidental – and there were no accidents here. At Stratford, there 
is a copy of the extraordinary letter that Delaney wrote to Littlewood when she 
sent herA Taste of Honey, and it fairly takes the breath away. The grit of it, 
the spirit. It should be sent to teenage girls everywhere as an example of how 
its done. I've quoted from it already in this piece, but now I'll take you to 
its end. Apologising for the mess of her typing, Delaney tells Littlewood that, 
if she can "gather any sense" from her play (or even "a little nonsense") she 
would be grateful for her criticism – "though I hate criticism of any kind". 
And then, one last stab, modest but not, you will notice, falsely so: "I want 
to write for the theatre, but I know so very little about it. I know nothing, 
have nothing – except a willingness to learn – and intelligence. Yours 
sincerely,Shelagh Delaney <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/shelagh-delaney>."
 