
Sherlock Holmes has had many incarnations since he was first brought to life 
by the pen ofArthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> in 1887. This summer, that 
most British of detectives, who has appeared as everything from a vampire 
hunter to a crime-fighting teenager, is being immortalised in Japanese manga.

Out in June, Sherlock: A Study in Pink adapts the BBC series, which started in 
2010, transforming Benedict Cumberbatch’s Holmes and Martin Freeman’s Dr John 
Watson into classic manga images. Publisher Titan Comics said the release would 
be the first time the manga series, illustrated by manga illustrator Jay, would 
be printed in English. It launched in Japan four years ago, and according to io9
 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/the-sherlock-manga-is-coming-to-america-and-heres-your-1765490414>
 its popularity has meant there have been a plethora of fan translations since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fsherlock-holmes-japanese-manga-series-benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a9bd26213a591be8fb80d7ff3bd650258d83f7%2F0_0_4016_3047%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20Holmes%20to%20be%20immortalised%20in%20Japanese%20manga%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fsherlock-holmes-japanese-manga-series-benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20Holmes%20to%20be%20immortalised%20in%20Japanese%20manga%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fsherlock-holmes-japanese-manga-series-benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a9bd26213a591be8fb80d7ff3bd650258d83f7%2F0_0_4016_3047%2F4016.jpg>
 A spread from inside Sherlock, the manga comic. An adaptation of the TV show 
starring Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman. Photograph: Titan Press 
“It’s really interesting seeing such a British thing being reinterpreted in 
Japanese manga,” said Titan Comics editor Andrew James, who acquired the manga 
series for the publisher. “It’s still dynamic and full of action, but compared 
to American comics, there’s often a quietness and reflectiveness about manga.”

Titan is offering extended page counts, as well as new art and covers by 
artists including Alice X Zhang, in its manga series, the first issue of which 
opens with Holmes and Watson’s first meeting and ends with the pair moving in 
together.

The pair’s relationship, James said, is “not made any more explicit than it is 
on the television, but it’s certainly something the television has hinted at 
... so [the manga] is not a thing with love hearts appearing, but it’s 
definitely something in which the subtext is just as strong”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fsherlock-holmes-japanese-manga-series-benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86938b9f5d31f64c1597db4ed990faceca81b57b%2F0_0_4284_2569%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20Holmes%20to%20be%20immortalised%20in%20Japanese%20manga%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fsherlock-holmes-japanese-manga-series-benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20Holmes%20to%20be%20immortalised%20in%20Japanese%20manga%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fsherlock-holmes-japanese-manga-series-benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86938b9f5d31f64c1597db4ed990faceca81b57b%2F0_0_4284_2569%2F4284.jpg>
 The relationship of Holmes and Watson, played by Benedict Cumberbatch and 
Martin Freeman, will be explored in the comics. Photograph: Robert 
Viglasky/BBC/PA 
Danie Ware, from retailer Forbidden Planet, said the manga series was “pitched 
just right”, and an “interesting crossover”. “It’s a very new thing, putting 
something which is very British into the manga format. It’s very unusual,” she 
said. “But ever since Benedict appeared on the television,Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> has been on the up and up. 
[And] there’s a huge following for manga amongst young women of around 21, and 
I think the same group follows Benedict, so there is a crossover.”

Titan is also the publisher of the Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/further-adventures-of-sherlock-holmes-the-devil-s-promise.html>
 series, in which the detective variously deals with alien attacks and 
vampires, as well as James Lovegrove’s forthcoming Cthulhu Casebooks series, in 
which he takes on occult forces. In Mycroft Holmes, by the basketball player 
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, the life of his older brother is imagined.

Basketball veteran Kareem Abdul-Jabbar pens story of Sherlock Homes's brother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/24/nba-basketball-kareem-abdul-jabbar-sherlock-homes-brother-mycroft>
“As a core starting place, Holmes is the detective – the first one, the one 
everyone references,” said Titan Books editor Miranda Jewess. “It’s nice to 
have that point of familiarity, then you can have writers from any genre 
playing with it ... We’ve had Holmes fighting everything – even Frankenstein’s 
monster.”

According to book sales monitor Nielsen BookScan, hundreds of Holmes-related 
titles were published in 2015. The most popular was Anthony Horowitz’s 
authorised sequel,The House of Silk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/27/house-silk-anthony-horowitz-sherlock-holmes>
, followed by a miniature edition of Conan Doyle’s Essential Mysteries. Other 
popular titles included Andrew Lane’sYoung Sherlock Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/27/review-andrew-lane-young-sherlock-holmes-stone-cold>
 books, Tim Dedopulos’s Holmes puzzles, and psychologist Maria Konnikova’s 
Mastermind: How to Think Like Sherlock Holmes.

Jewess speculated that Conan Doyle himself probably wouldn’t have approved of 
the industry his creation has spawned. “Luckily, he’s out of copyright, because 
I don’t think he’d like it,” she said. “He tried to kill Holmes off once, and 
I’d think he’d want him to die again. But on the other hand, perhaps the fact 
that he has become more than a character, that he’s an icon, might help ease 
his mind.”
 