
After Sherlock Holmes as Hamlet, now Moriarty will take on the part. It has 
been announced thatAndrew Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/live/2015/nov/13/andrew-scott-webchat-the-dazzle-spectre-sherlock>
 is to followBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/hamlet-barbican-review-benedict-cumberbatch-imprisoned-prince>
 by tackling Shakespeare’s toughest role.

The Almeida Theatre <http://www.almeida.co.uk/> in north London announced a 
2016-17 season, with Scott playing Hamlet in a new production directed byRobert 
Icke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/12/robert-icke-vanya-chekhov-almeida-theatre>
.

The Dazzle review – some of the best acting in London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/27/the-dazzle-andrew-scott-found111-observer-review>
Just as eye-catching is the announcement that Ralph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes> will play Shakespeare’s most 
notorious villain in a new production of Richard III in whichVanessa Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/27/vanessa-redgrave-rosalind-as-you-like-it>
 returns to the stage as Queen Margaret.

Scott has become known for his portrayal of villains – including Moriarty in 
BBC’s Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/10/sherlock-victorian-era-christmas-special-watch-the-trailer>
 and the British security chief Max Denbigh inSpectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/spectre-review-james-bond-is-back-stylish-camp-and-sexily-pro-snowden>
.

The Almeida’s Hamlet, to open in February 2017, will be directed by Icke, the 
theatre’s associate director, who will find out on Sunday if he has won an 
Olivier award forhis production of Oresteia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/23/robert-icke-director-oresteia-1984-interview>
. Juliet Stevenson will play Gertrude.

A new Hamlet is always an event, though it will be difficult to match the hype 
that surroundingCumberbatch turn in the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/mar/26/benedict-cumberbatch-barbican-hamlet>
. His run last year at the Barbican was the fastest-selling play in London 
theatre history with crowds of adoring fans queueing for selfies and autographs 
at the stage door each night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fsherlock-andrew-scott-moriarty-play-hamlet-almeida-theatre-cumberbatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0903df3d62bd3849b074587bfd35d92b2e3b2b2%2F0_227_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20star%20Andrew%20Scott%20to%20play%20Hamlet%20in%20new%20UK%20production&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fsherlock-andrew-scott-moriarty-play-hamlet-almeida-theatre-cumberbatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20star%20Andrew%20Scott%20to%20play%20Hamlet%20in%20new%20UK%20production&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fsherlock-andrew-scott-moriarty-play-hamlet-almeida-theatre-cumberbatch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0903df3d62bd3849b074587bfd35d92b2e3b2b2%2F0_227_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Cumberbatch in Hamlet at the Barbican. Photograph: Johan Persson/PA 
The Almeida’s artistic director, Rupert Goold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/24/american-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis>
, will direct Fiennes and Redgrave in Richard III, opening in June.


The two Shakespeare plays will book end a pair of new ones: They Drink it in 
the Congo, by Adam Brace, which explores the problems of doing something good 
about something bad; and Oil, by Ella Hickson, described as “an epic, hurtling 
crash of empire, history and family”.

Goold, currently directing American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review> 
on Broadway, said all four were “big plays” that explored relationships between 
the individual and hierarchies of power.

He added: “We also wanted to touch base with the idea of the Almeida as an 
actors’ stage which it always has been with a history of heavyweight 
performances.”

• This article was amended on 4 April 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
referred to Queen Margaret as Richard III’s mother.
 