
Shirley Hazzard, the Australian-born author whose 1980 book The Transit of 
Venus brought her international acclaim, has died at the age of 85.

According to a report in the New York Times, Hazzard’s death at her home in 
Manhattan followed a struggle with dementia. The news comes in a sad week for 
the Australian literary world, withthe death of writer and broadcaster Anne 
Deveson on Monday, and her daughter, Georgia Blain, on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/anne-deveson-writer-and-broadcaster-dies-aged-86>
.

Hazzard’s first book, Cliffs of Fall, was a collection of stories published in 
1963, when she was 32. Her first novel, The Evening of the Holiday, was 
published in 1966, and followed three years later by The Bay of Noon, which was 
shortlisted forthe Lost Man Booker prize 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lost_Man_Booker_Prize>.


Ten years later she published The Transit of Venus, her breakthrough novel 
which tracks the lives of two orphaned Australian-born sisters, Caroline and 
Grace Bell, in the postwar world.


Interview: Shirley Hazzard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
The book won the 1980 National Book Critics Circle award. In an essay looking 
back on it for the Book Critics Circle 
<http://bookcritics.org/blog/archive/A_Look_Back_at_Shirley_Hazzards_The_Transit_of_Venus/>
, Michael Gorra wrote of the placelessness that imbued the work of the 
transcontinental author.

“[The Transit of Venus’s] social landscape will be familiar to any reader of 
Lessing or Murdoch or Drabble, and yet it is not an English novel. Hazzard 
lacks the concern with gentility – for or against – that marks almost all 
English writers of her generation ... Nor is the book exactly American, despite 
Hazzard’s long residence in New York. She has more restraint and less bravado 
than her American peers and she isn’t nearly so ingratiating.”

He continued: “There’s something about Hazzard’s prose, about that eye like an 
awl and her willingness to reach for grandeur that reminds me of Patrick White; 
a sense as well of being related to but not quite a part of either Britain or 
America.”

In an essay for the Sydney Review of Books in 2015 
<http://sydneyreviewofbooks.com/transit-of-venus-shirley-hazzard/>, the 
Australian author Charlotte Wood wrote that The Transit of Venus rewards 
revisiting: “It is as if the book itself gives off a kind of anti-magnetic 
field at first, holding the readers off until they are ready to face up to the 
questions it asks of them ... a significant aspect of her artistic motive is to 
set up a sense of certainty – and then destroy it, capsizing the reader over 
and over again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshirley-hazzard-internationallyacclaimed-australian-author-dies-at-85%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f929d94d0450b7b7a284b25bd07fda19a442433%2F0_0_1990_2992%2F1990.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shirley%20Hazzard%2C%20internationally%20acclaimed%20Australian%20author%2C%20dies%20at%2085&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshirley-hazzard-internationallyacclaimed-australian-author-dies-at-85%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shirley%20Hazzard%2C%20internationally%20acclaimed%20Australian%20author%2C%20dies%20at%2085&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshirley-hazzard-internationallyacclaimed-australian-author-dies-at-85%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f929d94d0450b7b7a284b25bd07fda19a442433%2F0_0_1990_2992%2F1990.jpg>
 Shirley Hazzard speaking at the National Book awards in 2003, after winning 
the prize for fiction for The Great Fire. Photograph: NK/Keystone USA/Rex 
Features 
It was a more than two-decade gap between The Transit of Venus and Hazzard’s 
next novel, The Great Fire, which won the 2003 National Book award for fiction 
and the Australian Miles Franklin prize, and was named 2003 book of the year by 
the Economist.

At the National Book award ceremony that year, the novelist Stephen King had 
been somewhat controversially presented the lifetime achievement award, and in 
his speechspoke out against the literary world 
<http://www.nationalbook.org/nbaacceptspeech_sking.html#.WFCUcpN97OQ> for 
largely ignoring popular US fiction. In her own speech,Hazzard hit back 
<http://www.nationalbook.org/nbaacceptspeech_shazzard.html#.WFCUBZN944M>. “I 
don’t regard literature, which [Stephen King] spoke of perhaps in a slightly 
pejorative way, I don’t regard it as a competition. It is so vast ... I don’t 
think giving us a reading list of those who are most read at this moment is 
much of a satisfaction,” she said.

Hazzard also published five nonfiction books through her career, including two 
books critical of the United Nations (Defeat of an Ideal, 1973, and Countenance 
of Truth, 1990), a collection of essays about Italy co-written with her husband 
Francis Steegmuller (The Ancient Shore, 2008), a collection of the Boyer 
lectures she gave in 1984 (Coming of Age in Australia), and a memoir detailing 
her friendship with the author Graham Greene, titled Greene on Capri (2000).

In an interview with the Guardian in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
, Hazzard spoke of the three men who changed her life in the 1960s: the New 
Yorker fiction editor William Maxwell, who published the first story she ever 
wrote; Steegmuller, a translator of Flaubert’s letters and biographer of 
Cocteau and Apollinaire, who she was married to from 1963 until his death in 
1994; and Greene.

Anne Deveson, writer and broadcaster, dies days after daughter, novelist 
Georgia Blain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/anne-deveson-writer-and-broadcaster-dies-aged-86>
The two writers met by chance at a cafe in Capri in the 1960s. Hazzard was 
seated close enough to overhear Greene reciting The Lost Mistress by Robert 
Browning to a friend. Greene had stalled on the last lines, so Hazzard supplied 
them on her way out. They were seated together by chance at a restaurant that 
evening and an enduring, if turbulent, friendship began.

In the same interview, Hazzard expressed her surprise at the frequent 
comparisons between her work and that of Henry James. “There is this myth that 
I was formed on Henry James,” she said. “I had hardly read anything of him when 
I started to write. It must be because I take more trouble, perhaps, with words 
than authors usually do these days.

“James is a consummate writer, but you do feel it’s like the needle on the old 
gramophone, that it’s got stuck and you want to move it on. Also, I have to 
say, I think I’m funnier than Henry James.”

Hazzard was born in Sydney on 30 January 1931 to a Welsh father and Scottish 
mother who worked for the company building the Sydney Harbour Bridge, where 
they met. She went to Queenwood School for Girls, but left the country with her 
family in 1947, moving to Hong Kong, Italy and New Zealand before making a home 
in New York, where she pursued a career at the United Nations through the 1950s.

Joint managing director of Hazzard’s Australian publisher Hachette, Justin 
Ractliffe, said the company was “deeply saddened” by the news. “Shirley was a 
giant talent who produced a small, but perfectly formed, body of work. She 
continues to be beloved in Australia as well as around the world and will be 
missed by the many readers moved by her extraordinary writing.”

Hazzard did not remarry after the death of Steegmuller in 1994. The couple had 
no children.
 