
Shirley Hazzard, who has died aged 85, was a writer of fiction, not poetry, 
but she had a copious memory for verse, and it is fair to say that a line of 
Browning, plucked from memory in an Italian cafe in the late 1960s, led to one 
of the most important friendships of her life. Hazzard was completing the Times 
crossword while sipping coffee in the piazzetta, the central square on the isle 
of Capri, one morning, when she recognised a man at the neighbouring table as
Graham Greene <https://www.theguardian.com/books/grahamgreene>. In the course 
of conversation, he began to quote a poem by Browning, but stalled at the last 
line. Hazzard supplied it (the poem was The Lost Mistress; the line, “Or so 
very little longer”) and left the cafe.


She and her husband, Francis Steegmuller 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/10/22/obituaries/francis-steegmuller-88-dies-writer-and-flaubert-expert.html>
, became close friends with Greene and his companion, Yvonne Cloetta, often 
dining together at Gemma’s restaurant, just off the piazzetta. Both couples 
kept houses on the island, and in 2000, Hazzard published a fine, brief memoir,
Greene on Capri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/jan/16/fiction.grahamgreene>, which 
gave as much space to the elder writer’s difficult and occasionally cruel 
nature as to his attractiveness and talent.

Hazzard was born in Sydney, Australia. Her father was Welsh, her mother 
Scottish, from Dunfermline: both were immigrants who worked for the company 
building the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Shirley attended Queenwood school for 
girls, but left at the age of 16 when her father, an engineer, was sent to Hong 
Kong by the Australian government to explore possibilities for trade.

Interview: Shirley Hazzard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
From there, he took other posts, eventually landing in New York, which was to 
become his daughter’s home; she came to be a joint citizen of Britain and the 
US. Hazzard described the period of shuffling from country to country as 
“ghastly years for me”. Her mother suffered a bipolar condition – Hazzard 
called her “a destroyer, who sees herself as a perpetual victim” – and her 
father was an alcoholic. In one instance, just as their teenage daughter was 
falling in love, the entire family moved again. “It would have been easy to 
die,”Hazzard said in an interview with the Paris Review (2005 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/5505/shirley-hazzard-the-art-of-fiction-no-185-shirley-hazzard>
). “But, oddly, one didn’t.”

The experiences appear to have given her a melancholy relationship with her 
earlier self. She described Australian history as “bad news”, and in her novel 
The Great Fire (2003) the country, once left behind by the young female 
protagonist, is seen as “the great southern wound”. Hazzard was keen to add, 
however, that these impressions derived from the Australia of her youth, and 
were compounded by personal unhappiness.

Out of her tribulations she developed a private, passionate affair with 
literature. The ease with which Helen Driscoll, the 16-year-old at the centre 
of The Great Fire, moves in the world of Shakespeare and the classics was a 
facility mirrored in Hazzard herself. Her books are populated by people who are 
rescued by literature from the disorder of their lives. Of one of her heroines 
she wrote that her childhood, “like all childhoods, was unhappy”.

In discussions of Hazzard’s fiction, particularly The Great Fire and another 
multilayered novel, The Transit of Venus (1980), the name of Henry James is 
likely to be invoked. When I interviewed her for the Guardian in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
, however, she dismissed the influence. “There is a myth that I was raised on 
James. I had hardly read anything of him when I started to write.” She could 
scarcely object to the comparison, except for one thing: “I think I’m funnier 
than Henry James.”

Julian Evans recalls Graham Greene's muse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/mar/27/classics.grahamgreene> 
Tolstoy and Conrad were among her enduring favourites (over the weekend I 
spent on Capri, she read Conrad’s Victory, for the umpteenth time). She also 
recalled how, as a schoolgirl in 1947, she had asked for Greene’s novel The 
Heart of the Matter “for Christmas. After that, I always read his books.”

Once settled in New York, Hazzard began working for the United Nations 
Secretariat, “in the clerical category”. The work itself, she would say, “was 
virtually meaningless and cruelly underpaid”. The experience provided fuel for 
a collection of short stories,People in Glass Houses 
<http://www.spikemagazine.com/shirley-hazzard-people-in-glass-houses.php> 
(1967), in which the UN is identified as “the Organisation”, embracing a way of 
life all its own. Men “fall in love with the Organisation”, then gradually 
cease to do anything that does not entail “Organisation duties ... Organisation 
requirements”. It also gave her material for two highly critical non-fiction 
books about the UN, Defeat of an Ideal (1973) and Countenance of Truth (1990).

To Hazzard, the UN was “an appalling institution”, whose weaknesses and 
self-interest the public chose to ignore. She believed that the western powers 
used the UN to extend their own influence, and in a Times Literary Supplement 
article of 1982 she referred to “the almost unbounded power of the United 
States at the United Nations”. At a personal level, she found herself miserably 
paid, discriminated against, with faint hope, as a woman, of advancement. “A 
more demoralised place I have never met up with since,” she told me in a voice 
that retained some strains of her mother’s Scottish accent, but no Australian 
notes. “Especially a place claiming that it is doing something to advance 
humanity.” When she began to write, she had to “request permission from the UN 
to publish”, and to prove that “there was nothing interesting from their point 
of view”.

The second of her two books on the UN, triggered by the Kurt Waldheim affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/may/02/worlddispatch.kateconnolly>, 
when his wartime service as an intelligence officer in the German Wehrmacht was 
revealed in 1985, began as a series of articles in the New Yorker. Hazzard 
enjoyed a long relationship with the magazine during its “high” period, under 
the refined stewardship of the editor,William Shawn 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-william-shawn-1562613.html?amp>
, and the fiction editor,William Maxwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/aug/26/guardianobituaries>. In 1961 she 
sent a story to Maxwell – “I hadn’t ever written a story before” – to which he 
responded with an acceptance, a cheque, and a request for more. The debut, 
Harold, is included in her first collection, Cliffs of Fall and Other Stories 
(1963). She said that when she entered Maxwell’s office for the first time, “I 
took one look and thought, everything will be all right now.”

Maxwell encouraged her to write a novel. “I told him I couldn’t imagine 
writing a novel, but he said, ‘And yet you will ...’ A year later, I was 
writing The Evening of the Holiday.” The story of a love affair, set in Italy, 
it was published in 1966. These were prolific years for Hazzard. In 1970, a 
second novel, The Bay of Noon, appeared. It is based on a set of tangled 
relationships featuring, among others, a moody Scotsman and an infantile though 
charming Italian.

It was through friends at the New Yorker that Hazzard met Steegmuller, himself 
a novelist, as well as a translator of Flaubert and the biographer of Jean 
Cocteau and other French writers. The matchmaker wasMuriel Spark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/apr/17/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, who introduced the couple at a party in 1963. He was 25 years older and had 
been married before. The union with Hazzard appears to have been an 
exceptionally happy one, ending with Steegmuller’s death in 1994. Conversation 
with Hazzard was always likely to return to what Francis thought about this or 
that, or what she had told him after witnessing some curiosity in Capri, or in 
Naples, where they also kept a house.

In 2008, she published a collection of dispatches from Naples, The Ancient 
Shore <http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/A/bo6021791.html>, with 
Steegmuller named as co-author (his contribution describes a mugging and the 
subsequent treatment by doctors and police). Of her later successes – for 
instance, winning the US National Book award for The Great Fire in 2003 — she 
would say that her only disappointment was that Francis wasn’t there to share 
the pleasure. The couple accrued a distinguished art collection – Picasso and 
Matisse hung in the hallway of her Manhattan apartment – which Hazzard intended 
to bequeath to a museum.

It was evident that Greene played a dominant role in her life, even though she 
shuddered when recalling an act of mischief or malevolence. “He had something 
in his makeup,” she said. “He didn’t want to be happy.” She felt that Greene 
“didn’t care for what I wrote”, but was able to laugh at his reflexive remark, 
whenever someone else praised one of her novels, “Yes, it had marvellous 
reviews.”

Greene on Capri: A Memoir not only describes the friendship, which despite its 
turbulent character endured for more than 20 years, but offers a succinct 
account of the island as an artistic haven in the 19th and 20th centuries. A 
walk through the narrow streets of the elevated town where she had her tiny 
apartment (Greene’s somewhat grander place was in neighbouring Anacapri, the 
island’s second town) was likely to be interrupted by greetings and 
solicitations. She was troubled, however, by corrupt practices in land purchase 
and development intruding from Naples.

At the National Book awards ceremony in 2003 
<http://www.nationalbook.org/nbaacceptspeech_shazzard.html#.WFCnqRN96L4>, 
Hazzard found herself provoked into a spontaneous defence of highbrow 
literature against the populism which, she felt, had come to dominate the TV 
screen and the bestseller list. Stephen King, who preceded her, had taken the 
assembled literati to task for its critical neglect of writers such as John 
Grisham, Tom Clancy and himself. When Hazzard stepped up, she retorted that 
merely “giving us a list of those who are most read at this moment” did not 
amount to an argument, and missed the point of what literature was for and 
what, at its best, we expect from it. In her own case, it was “the expression 
of something in a supreme way. Once it has been said, it’s both an exorcism and 
an exhalation. An intensification of life.”

A visitor to Naples offered the sweet description of Hazzard as having “the 
presence of a prima ballerina now in retirement … graceful and charming, with a 
delicate beauty”. In 2000, she was made an honorary citizen of Capri.

• Shirley Hazzard, writer, born 30 January 1931; died 12 December 2016
 