
For many of us, taking off on holiday provides much-needed work/life balance. 
Yet having to keep up with either high rents or mortgage repayments means many 
of us cannot afford to go away without finding tenants to cover our expenses.

This raises dilemmas: do you rent your place at “mates rates” to friends you 
know and trust, or aim to top up your holiday budget by subletting to strangers 
at a higher rate through a website likeAirbnb <https://www.airbnb.com.au/>, 
Wimdu <http://www.wimdu.com.au/>, One Fine Stay <http://www.onefinestay.com/>, 
Be My Guest <https://bemyguest.com/> or Gay Homestays 
<http://www.gayhomestays.com.au/>?

There are also ethical considerations in an increasingly crowded and 
overcooked property market. In many hipster tourism hotspots like Berlin and 
London, homeshare websites have been pointed to as a key factor in rising rents 
as well as enablingblatant tax dodging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/27/airbnb-uber-taxes-regulation>
.

In San Francisco, city legislators have moved to limit the number of days per 
calendar year people can legally sublet their apartments in order to limit the 
number of landlords 
<http://www.cnet.com/au/news/airbnb-goes-head-to-head-with-san-francisco-lawmakers-again/>
 profiting from the squeezed property market. As property owners or subletters, 
we can choose to add to the problem or become part of the solution.

Subletting on Airbnb


My experiences of subletting to strangers at a high price have been mixed.

A few summers ago I travelled from Melbourne to northern New South Wales and 
rented an old convent in Mullumbimby fromAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> while subletting my own St 
Kilda apartment. It seemed the perfect arrangement – the return on renting my 
St Kilda place was set to cover the costs of much of my summer getaway.

Then at 9am on New Year’s Day, disaster struck. I’d been out all night at a 
rave when my mobile phone started ringing. I answered the phone in a comatose 
state and the thick German voice at the other end of the line sounded urgent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fshort-term-rentals-pros-cons-letting-to-strangers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13d6ba14b7743885715c33a39a76ee2e22bb776d%2F0_12_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Short-term%20rentals%3A%20the%20pros%20and%20cons%20of%20letting%20your%20place%20to%20strangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fshort-term-rentals-pros-cons-letting-to-strangers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Short-term%20rentals%3A%20the%20pros%20and%20cons%20of%20letting%20your%20place%20to%20strangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fshort-term-rentals-pros-cons-letting-to-strangers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13d6ba14b7743885715c33a39a76ee2e22bb776d%2F0_12_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 A house trashed by Airbnb tenants in Calgary, Canada. Photograph: screengrab 
“James, this is Uwe, your Airbnb guest from Hamburg.” 

“Oh, hi!” I replied. It was not a call I had been expecting. 

“I must tell you that your hot water system is leaking water,” he said. “It is 
spreading across your kitchen floor. We are leaving in two hours and I fear 
your place will get flooded out. What should we do?”

When strangers are using your home, things can go wrong. This case illustrates 
the danger in letting your home out to complete strangers. Luckily for me I was 
able to get my mother to go to my place and arrange for a plumber to arrive on 
the scene later that morning.

The temptation to extract a hefty price for your real estate while on holiday 
brings with it clear risks. If things should go wrong, the temporary tenants 
really have no responsibility to deal with problems. And although our German 
guests couldn’t fix the hot water leak, they did manage to fix our broken 
coffee machine.

Subletting on Facebook

For Ruchira Talukdar, a 35-year-old environmental campaigner from Melbourne, 
the task of finding appropriate tenants has proven a mixed experience.

“I left my job and went overseas this January, initially for three months, to 
visit family and friends in India. But as I settled more and more into life 
with my parents, I kept extending my stay,” Talukdar explains.

Initially she tried posting ads via various housing pages on Facebook, before 
eventually finding a 20-year-old woman from Portland, Oregon to stay with her 
partner in the cosy Northcote flat.

“They moved in for two months. They loved the tranquillity of the location and 
the proximity to music venues. They paid the rent on time. Sadly, when they 
left, despite saying how much they loved spotlessness, they didn’t quite leave 
the place quite restored to its spotless glory.”

Instead they left the place in a dishevelled state, departing without cleaning 
the dishes or taking out the rubbish.

“I couldn’t do anything more than wring my hands about it from far away,” she 
says.


When Talukdar decided to stay overseas for another two months, she needed to 
find more tenants. “The next time I posted on the Facebook sites, I got no 
response at my original rent. It was only when I dropped $50 off the amount – 
two days’ worth of subsistence money for me when I am not feeling extravagant – 
that I got a response.” The woman who moved in proved to be an ideal tenant and 
left the apartment spotless.

After lots of Skype interviews and nervous contemplation, Talukdar decided to 
put her apartment on Airbnb for the final month before her return.

“The prospect of putting my tiny nook up for a daily price on a website to be 
compared with other beautifully decorated spaces overwhelmed and discomfited 
me. Like before, I have not exactly been flooded by requests since the listing 
went up yesterday, and I am somewhat anxiously waiting to find out what 
stranger I cross paths with this time,” she says.

House-sitting

Depending on your situation, it’s possible to see your empty apartment as an 
opportunity to help out people in your network. The advantage of such an 
arrangement is that you can negotiate particular needs you may not feel 
comfortable discussing with strangers, such as looking after your pet or 
watering the garden as part of the deal.

Every situation will differ, but if you can afford it, why not consider 
dropping the price and leaving your home in the hands of friends who need it? 
You’ll have a more relaxing holiday, secure in the knowledge your space is 
being enjoyed by people you care about – and whom you can trust to respect it.

The cliche goes that we live in a global village and the internet goes some 
way to making this true. But we also live in local communities where people are 
struggling to find decent housing. Becoming a homeowner can all too often be 
the moment we surrender our better selves and join the dark side of greedy 
landlords.
 