
In the face of limited financial resources, universities across the world are 
increasingly seekingnew ways of cultivating the loyalties 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storycode=418624> – and the 
donations – of their alumni. By employing social media, offering ongoing 
careers services, organising social events and even selling coffins, 
universities hope to build a relationship with their students that will last a 
lifetime.

But how far are universities really prepared to go? The relationship between 
Dalhousie University and its alumni in the 19th century points to an intimate 
embrace that many of today's vice-chancellors might be less than willing to 
countenance.

In 1871 the College founded by the Earl of Dalhousie <http://www.dal.ca/> in 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, was in severe financial trouble. Its total annual income 
was only $4,600 and its governors needed to increase this amount by an 
additional 25% a year just to keep the place afloat. In the face of these 
economic woes, the university did what any higher education institution today 
would do: it began a fundraising campaign. Unsurprisingly, the first people it 
turned to were its alumni.

In fact it was in the desperate conditions of 1871 that the Dalhousie Alumni 
Association <http://www.library.dal.ca/DUASC/FindingAids/UA_32/> began. Founded 
with the aim of "promoting the best interests of the university", the 
association lent its support to future fundraising efforts as well. In 1890, it 
co-sponsored a campaign to raise $50,000 in endowment and in 1893 it was asked 
by the university board to find a further $4,000 a year for five years. By the 
end of the 19th century, Dalhousie alumni had become an integral part of 
university finance.

But the relationship between the university and its former students extended 
further than the balance sheet. All members of the association were free to use 
the library, which was stocked with many books paid for by alumni donations, 
and they also had access to the new gymnasium, which their contributions helped 
to fund. Public lectures were frequently offered and reunions were an annual 
event.

To a contemporary ear this sounds familiar. Indeed, Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
are among the growing number of universities thatprovide graduates with 
continuing access to their digital holdings 
<http://news.yale.edu/2011/10/11/yale-alumni-gain-free-access-jstor-s-extensive-online-scholarly-resources>
. Yet would today's vice-chancellors be prepared go as far as Dalhousie and 
involve alumni in university governance?

The participation of alumni in the machinery of governance was a common 
feature of 19th century universities. At Oxford, "Convocation 
<http://www.oua.ox.ac.uk/enquiries/congandconvthree.html>" – the body that 
functioned as the university's upper house and that carried out all its 
business as a corporate body – was comprised of graduates with MA degrees. This 
model was copied or adapted in the newer colleges in the provinces and 
colonies, and "senates" made up not only of local alumni but also graduates 
from other universities played an important role in endorsing and electing the 
executive at these institutions.

But at Dalhousie the relationship went even further. Not only were alumni 
involved in electing the university's governors, after their efforts in 1893 
they were themselves granted two seats on the board.

More than a century later, such moves are perhaps not so unimaginable. A 2011 
Higher Education Policy Institute report 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/466-1965/University-Governance--Questions-for-a-new-era.html>
 authored by the vice-chancellor of London Metropolitan University, Malcolm 
Gillies, argued that alumni were exactly the kind of people universities should 
seek to fill their boards, because they have the "greatest lifelong stake in 
the institution's reputation and its protection".

If fostering good relationships with past students is something 21st century 
universities are really concerned about, then perhaps they should be taking a 
leaf out of Dalhousie's book.

Dr Tamson Pietsch is lecturer in imperial history at Brunel University 
<http://www.brunel.ac.uk/>, London. She also blogs about academics, 
universities and the history of the knowledge economy atCap and Gown 
<http://capandgown.wordpress.com/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 