
From today's NYT 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/19/us/19giffords.html?_r=4&hp&om_rid=Coqyc8&om_mid=_BNNuQdB8XecFJr>
, I see that store surveillance video exists of the Arizona shootings:

The chief investigator for the sheriff's department here has for the first 
time publicly described the brief and gory video clip from a store security 
camera that shows a gunman not only shooting RepresentativeGabrielle Giffords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords> just above the eyebrow 
at a range of three feet, but then using his 9-millimeter pistol to gun down 
others near her at a similarly close range ...

... The crucial video showing the shooting of Ms. Giffords, Judge Roll and Mr. 
Barber lasts only about five seconds before the gunman steps out of the frame.

At the start of the clip, it shows the "suspect coming from just outside of 
the frame of the video toward the parking lot," Mr. Kastigar said. "He goes 
around a table set up for part of that gathering and walks up to Gabby and 
shoots her directly in the forehead." It was not clear from this video, he 
said, if Ms. Giffords realized what was happening.

The gunman "then turns to his left and indiscriminately shoots at people 
sitting in chairs along the wall," he said. The video does not show those 
people being shot, he said. But quickly the gunman is back in the video, which 
shows him turning to his right and shooting Mr. Barber, who had been with Judge 
Roll "standing side by side with the table to their backs."

Should it be shown publicly? It's morbid, yes. There are the families to think 
about. Obviously, their consent would have to be secured. But maybe people 
should see what this kind of thing actually looks like in real life. Might have 
a salutary impact.

UPDATE: I'm writing these words about six hours after having written the 
original post. Reading the comment thread, I am persuaded that it would be a 
bad idea. Ghoulish sensationalism would inevitably overtake anything that could 
conceivably be learned from it.

â€¢ Poll: Should the Arizona shooting video be shown? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/poll/2011/jan/19/arizona-shooting-gabrielle-giffords>
 