
Anne McElvoy <http://www.economist.com/mediadirectory/anne-mcelvoy>, senior 
editor at the EconomistI left the Tory party conference last week and a 
gauntlet of protesters shouting hate-you-very-much messages at everyone who 
passed through security. To the protestors, any other human beings, whether 
journalists, policy wonks or charity workers, were simply “scum”, “heartless” 
or some other full-spectrum bad adjective, by virtue of being there.

Street protest has a place in democracies, but also limits in a civil society.
Anne McElvoy 
The problem is twofold. One is that it turns into a self-righteous, negative 
argument – “No to X/Y/Z” – and an end in itself, divorced from anything 
constructive or discerning. You see it inthe Air France debacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/air-france-workers-storm-meeting-protest-executives-job-losses-paris>
 – a strike about working conditions that ends up with an employee’s clothes 
torn off and a terrified manager scrambling over a fence to escape the mob. The 
line between triumph and tragedy is horribly easy to see, as is the 
counter-productivity of theanti-gentrification attack on Cereal Killer Café in 
Hoxton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/27/shoreditch-cereal-cafe-targeted-by-anti-gentrification-protesters>
 – trashing someone else’s business, because your beliefs about the 
relationship between capitalism and muesli entitle you to be a bully and feel 
good about it.

The line between protest and violence or mindless damage to property is a 
dangerously easy one to cross. Georges Bataille, a great French radical, feared 
the “politics of atmosphere”, meaning the replacement of reason with 
irrationality, justified by emotion. That is as true today on the left as it 
was on the far right that worried Bataille.

Yes, there are times when street protest is effective and uplifting. But in 
democracies, there are many more examples that alienate moderate people and 
damage their own cause.

Ed Vulliamy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/edvulliamy>, Observer 
journalistI’ve been reading your words of wisdom since the day we met, and last 
met: ambushed by Serbian mortar fire near Vukovar in 1991 – a near escape. I 
pity you – as I do other people I also like – for having to spend so much time 
with those who wield power rather than challenge it. The latter laugh more, in 
my experience; they’re just more interesting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-gentrification%20protesters%20target%20Shoreditch's%20Cereal%20Killer%20Cafe%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-gentrification%20protesters%20target%20Shoreditch%27s%20Cereal%20Killer%20Cafe%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video&media=>
 Anti-gentrification protesters target Shoreditch’s Cereal Killer Café – video. 
I write from Genoa, where I’m trying to get on with a novel about the 
laundering of drug profits by our high-street banks, against whom bold folk 
occasionally protest, thank God; the protesters who shout “SCUM!” at 
millionaires who cleanChapo Guzmán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/13/joachin-el-chapo-guzman-jailbreak-mexican-drug-lord-escape-prison>
’s money.

This is a good place from which to answer because here, in 2001, priests, 
scouts, everyone took part in thedemo against the G8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/17/italy.g8> and all it stood for. 
But after the killing of a protester by police, no one dare march any more. You 
won. To demonstrate in the streets is to be exactly the rabble you pastiche. 
What a terrible victory – the silence of the demos in the squares, where 
democracy began, and lives.

As to Manchester, maybe the corporate mafia on behalf of whom this lot govern 
is just that, scum. Air France? Oh, come on, Anne: we endure every day the 
arrogant impunity of strutting executives condemning people to homelessness and 
unemployment from behind the obscenity of their corporate press releases. It’s
hilarious that they finally got called to account by the humans they 
“resource”. All they suffered was humiliation and the loss of their Chanel 
gear. No guillotine. If that wasn’t funny, I don’t know what is.

AM Challenging power may be as thrilling as a night out among old war 
correspondents. But there’s a puzzle in what you say, especially for someone 
who knows investigative journalism and the power of facts and argument as well 
as you do. Campaigning, building coalitions of opinion and shining a light on 
unpalatable truths about what is wrong in the world are more likely to expose 
corruption and wrongdoing than your “bold folk” making a street racket.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fstriking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444053882971%2FKP_516469_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Striking%20Air%20France%20employees%20rip%20shirts%20off%20managers'%20backs%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fstriking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Striking%20Air%20France%20employees%20rip%20shirts%20off%20managers%27%20backs%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fstriking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444053882971%2FKP_516469_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Striking Air France employees rip shirts off manager’s backs – video. 
It’s cheap to insinuate that anyone who thinks differently is complicit in the 
killing of a protester. Beware overdosing on pathos. “No one dare march any 
more,” is patently untrue.

Efficacy and judiciousness is my case. Watch the more extreme Million Mask 
marchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/mar/26/anti-cuts-march-police-rioters>
 frightening children and the old in a street rampage and surely you’ll concede 
that badly marshalled, inconsiderate protest can be intimidatory and not such a 
larf as you suggest.

Certainly, there are examples of street protest that are honourable. It is the 
best weapon of the powerless where there is no democracy or ways to challenge 
arbitrary power. It has a place in democracies, but also limits in a civil 
society. You haven’t drawn any distinction on the methods of protest you think 
wise or safe. Why not?

A thug in uniform grappling with a protester … it is a measure of who you are 
when you decide whose side you are on
Ed Vulliamy 
EV Thank you for kind words about investigative reporting and the light of 
truth. In my experience, they change nothing.Bosnian concentration camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/27/radovankaradzic.warcrimes2>? The 
war went on for three more bloody years.HSBC laundering narco money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/15/hsbc-has-form-mexico-laundered-drug-money>
? I doubt it cost them a single account. Our Nick Davies and phone hacking? 
Murdoch fine,Rebekah back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/rebekah-brooks-say-it-is-a-privilege-to-be-back-at-news-uk>
. But with regard to protest in our spurious democracies, there are moments of 
success.

You would, I presume, call the United States a democracy. One in which no 
amount of “coalition of opinion”, efficacy or judiciousness could stop the 
atrocity in Vietnam. It was this situation which taught me what I know about 
street protest as a young man, and the world since has done nothing to convince 
me I was wrong, as it has others. Lt Colonel Oliver North, usually a liar, said 
that America did not lose the war in Vietnam but “right here”. He was right, 
for once.Protest <https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest>, usually peaceful, 
sometimes violent, ended America’s repulsive war. Over Iraq, Bush and Blair – 
you are right, the voice of the people was loud, but impotent in the event, but 
then so were your coalitions and efficacy.

More recently: I wonder whether you’d call Mexico a democracy (democratic 
enough for the British establishment to salivate at the notion of “investment” 
therein, anyway). After themurder of 43 students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/24/survivors-mexico-student-attack-guerrero-accuse-army-and-police>
 in Guerrero last autumn, the “democratic” government concluded a version of 
events that exonerated its own agents. Outraged, families of the missing began 
a series of protests that snowballed – usually peacefully, sometimes violently 
– forcing global attention and an international investigation that lacerated 
the official version. Without street protests by those bold folk, the cruel lie 
would have carried the day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F10%2Fdebate-should-we-still-bother-with-street-protests-ed-vulliamy-anne-mcelvoy-air-france-cereal-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bb5e0459537ffd74c3856fcbaf405bc321f1418%2F0_67_4614_2769%2F4614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20we%20still%20bother%20with%20street%20protests%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F10%2Fdebate-should-we-still-bother-with-street-protests-ed-vulliamy-anne-mcelvoy-air-france-cereal-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20we%20still%20bother%20with%20street%20protests%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F10%2Fdebate-should-we-still-bother-with-street-protests-ed-vulliamy-anne-mcelvoy-air-france-cereal-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bb5e0459537ffd74c3856fcbaf405bc321f1418%2F0_67_4614_2769%2F4614.jpg>
 The son of Adan de la Cruz leads a protest over the forced disappearance of 43 
students in Guerrero, Mexico. Photograph: Mariana Gtz Manjarrez/Demotix/Corbis 
AM Street protests didn’t secure intervention in Bosnia – bringing the grim 
facts to the wider world did and the resulting pressure on politicians did. 
Phone hacking ended up in numerous trials, major financial damage to a mighty 
company and a newspaper editor sent to prison.

Some protests work. Vietnam marches were indeed a major factor, but they 
carried public opinion because they were backed up with the very reporting of 
fact from the war you now disdain. The problem is the conflation of 
demonstrations over serious human rights abuses (your Mexican example) with 
your catch-all enthusiasm for shouty marches when democratic election results 
don’t please you or you can’t take more of the public with you because they 
don’t share the thin ideological gruel on offer from a set menu of 
anti-American, anti-capitalism, anti-austerity thinking.

To shift centuries, I would be a suffragist, rather than a violent 
suffragette. They don’t make for such exciting films, but non-violent 
campaigners did more to make clear the rationality and irresistibility of their 
case.

I am going to send you a badge from Berlin, which says “Ich bin gegen alles” – 
“I’m against everything”. It’s funny. And it’s also a sound diagnosis of the 
limits of marching and shouting. While you’re doing that, someone else is 
getting on with doing the things that count for more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F10%2Fdebate-should-we-still-bother-with-street-protests-ed-vulliamy-anne-mcelvoy-air-france-cereal-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18fbeaacdabea0ef58db417a581b3f58175e7c81%2F0_371_3576_2145%2F3576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20we%20still%20bother%20with%20street%20protests%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F10%2Fdebate-should-we-still-bother-with-street-protests-ed-vulliamy-anne-mcelvoy-air-france-cereal-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20we%20still%20bother%20with%20street%20protests%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F10%2Fdebate-should-we-still-bother-with-street-protests-ed-vulliamy-anne-mcelvoy-air-france-cereal-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18fbeaacdabea0ef58db417a581b3f58175e7c81%2F0_371_3576_2145%2F3576.jpg>
 A CND march in Chiswick, London, 1968, protesting against American involvement 
in the Vietnam war. Photograph: Evening Standard/Getty Images 
EV Anne, thanks. I’ll wear the badge with gratitude! Something entirely 
instinctive: when we see a paid thug in uniform grappling with an idealistic 
young protester chained to another at, say, a climate change or environmental 
defence camp, I posit that it is a measure of whoyou are (generally – not just 
you, Anne) when you decide whose side, intuitively, you are on.

Would the British state go to such lengths to kettle for hours, freeze, 
manhandle and terrify thousands of schoolchildren – my daughter among them – 
demonstrating against something as apparently simple as tuition fees if there 
was not something at stake?

I’m not saying protest achieves its aim – I think the powers you implicitly 
defend will probably prevail. But when that power is challenged by human beings 
– as per the very complex emergence ofSyriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> in Greece, for example – it begins 
with the primacy of Mayakovsky’s dictum: “the streets are our brushes, the 
squares our palettes”.

The philosopher Judith Butler recently cited Hannah Arendt’s term “the space 
of appearance”, and quoted her thus: “The Polis, properly speaking, is not the 
city-state in its physical location; it is the organisation of the people as it 
arises out of acting and speaking together”I’ll send you a badge of a droll 
slogan we invented in Mexico this year, (if we ever manufacture one) adapting 
Che’s great dictum: “Hasta La Derrota Siempre!” – “Until defeat, always!”. It 
promises no victory, but urges us on nonetheless. Plus a postcard of Delacroix’s
July 28: Liberty Leading the People 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/july-28-liberty-leading-people> and a 
copy ofSamuel Beckett’s Unnamable <http://www.samuel-beckett.net/unnamable.html>
, which ends: “I can’t go on. I’ll go on.”
 