
The comeback

Critics seem divided on the merits or otherwise of M Night Shyamalan’s 
low-budget horrorThe Visit <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_visit_2015/>: a 
desperate found-footage last stand, or nimble genre retrenchment? But a $25.7m 
US debut – just pipped to the No 1 spot by erotic thrillerThe Perfect Guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/us-box-office-film-the-perfect-guy-m-night-shyamalan-the-visit>
 – settles things in financial terms. It’s the strongest horror opening of the 
year (beatingInsidious 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/insidious-chapter-3-review-solidly-made-effective-horror-sequel>
 andPoltergeist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/poltergeist-2015-review>, both 
$22.6m), jumping up strongly from Friday to Saturday to put the $5m film, a 
collaboration with no-budget outfit Blumhouse, firmly in the black already. 
Like a big group playing a small venue, the Shyamalan name, soiled though it 
is, undoubtedly had some impact on the result. But he is also reliant on the 
downsized context – a small-scale story about a couple of kids staying with 
their freaky grandparents – as a means of proving to audiences and execs that 
he can still responsibly handle storytelling basics after recent mishaps.


The minimal spend means that The Visit is less dependent on success in 
overseas territories, though his reputation there is in need of repair, too. 
Achieving $3.8m across 14 territories this weekend is fine, but the numbers are 
only half the point (they’re actually some of the lowest of his career, though 
the tiny budget alleviates any pressure). Even more pointedly than Kathryn 
Bigelow on The Hurt Locker ($49.2m worldwide) or Ang Lee on Brokeback Mountain 
($178.1m) – both of whom were not struggling as much as Shyamalan – the goal is 
to create the perception of a back-to-basics career rebirth; a more wholesale 
exculpation than the kind of whim-driven, low-budget sabbaticals enjoyed by 
Roland Emmerich onAnonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anonymous> and 
Tim Burton onBig Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/26/big-eyes-film-review-tim-burton-art-60s-kitsch-waif-paintings>
. The next weeks, as The Visit rolls out internationally, will determine how 
widely that perception has taken root. But at the very least, Shyamalan can 
book The Visit 2 into his diary.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb1e2330761f4e6e466b058cbb7de90c4bb67993%2F0_85_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shyamalan%20gets%20career%20reprieve%20as%20The%20Visit%20marks%202015%20horror%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shyamalan%20gets%20career%20reprieve%20as%20The%20Visit%20marks%202015%20horror%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb1e2330761f4e6e466b058cbb7de90c4bb67993%2F0_85_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 M Night Shyamalan … reputation saved by The Visit. Photograph: Mario 
Anzuoni/Reuters 
The young-adult pretender

The release of Mockingjay Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games-mockingjay-part-2>, the 
final Hunger Games, is going to leave a gaping young-adult-size hole to fill. 
It’s unclear how many more Maze Runners there will be (the first James Dashner 
book has two sequels and prequels apiece), but the Fox franchise seems to be 
stealing a march in the succession race. The initial batch of 21 territories 
for the sequel,Scorch Trials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/maze-runner-the-scorch-trials-review-a-ya-franchise-runs-out-of-steam>
, are 40% up on the first film, with a sizeable jump even in the UK (Maze 
Runner: $3.2m; Scorch Trials: $4.4m), one of the first places you’d expect YA 
fatigue to take hold. Most importantly, the series is putting a clear distance 
between itself and its rival,Divergent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/divergent>, which Lionsgate was surely 
banking on to replace its Hunger Games cash cow. The Maze Runner made an 
unexpected $340.6m worldwide in 2014 – on a very frugal $34m budget, crucially. 
Both Divergent andInsurgent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/19/the-divergent-series-insurgent-review-dull-part-two>
, despite a much weightier celebrity quotient in the shape of Ashley Judd, Kate 
Winslet, emerging prospects Miles Teller and overall headliner Shailene 
Woodley, were considerably short of that total with much higher overheads: 
$288m on an $85m budget for Divergent, $295m on $110m for the sequel. Perhaps 
Maze Runner’s stripped-back, almost existential, B-movie stylings are what gave 
it the edge over Divergent’s laboured Hunger Games copycat act. Scorch Trials 
ventures into more conventionally operatic dystopian territory, and the budget 
(currently unpublished) is sure to be higher this time. But for now, it has the 
upper hand.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442248876201%2F3487e785-bb94-4316-a805-e6f17abb2233-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shyamalan%20gets%20career%20reprieve%20as%20The%20Visit%20marks%202015%20horror%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shyamalan%20gets%20career%20reprieve%20as%20The%20Visit%20marks%202015%20horror%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442248876201%2F3487e785-bb94-4316-a805-e6f17abb2233-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Putting a distance between it and its nearest rival … Maze Runner: Scorch 
Trials 
China in your hand

Another week, another stack of Chinese records. Most significant was local 
fantasy CGI/live-action hybrid Monster Huntfinally passing Furious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/monster-hunt-biggest-film-of-all-time-in-china>
 to become the country’s highest-grossing film ever – breaking the 2.426bn yuan 
needed. It should be pointed out that Monster Hunt took twice as long as the 
Vin Diesel caper to get there, also capitalising on the summer blackout on 
Hollywood films. But perhaps Hollywood, in the long run, benefits from taking a 
breather, too, with pent-up demand for US razzmatazz boosting the first run of 
blockbusters to hit the country afterwards: especially welcome if your film is 
drowning,as with Terminator Genisys a few weeks back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/24/global-box-office-terminator-genisys-bride-wars-hitman-agent-47>
.Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/30/mission-impossible-rogue-nation-review>
 orMinions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/25/minions-review-boisterous-and-cheery-despicable-me-spin-off>
 are hardly in that position, but they have certainly made the most of their 
Chinese bows this week. Rogue Nation’s $18.5m opening last Tuesday was a non-3D 
record, setting it coasting to $86m over its first six days – a little off the 
pace ofJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/10/jurassic-world-review-chris-pratt-steven-spielberg-dinosaur-movie>
 ($100.8m over five days) in June. Sunday’s takings of $20.1m for Minions, 
meanwhile, is a record opening day for an animation, and promises the kind of 
spree that might allow Universal’s Despicable Me spinoff a realistic shot at
Frozen’s $1.27bn worldwide animation record 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_highest-grossing_animated_films>. Rogue 
Nation won’t break any records, but a healthy showing out east will put it on 
par, or a little ahead, ofGhost Protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/mission-impossible-ghost-protocol-review>
’s $694.7m take. (Like Tom Cruise, the franchise is having to work harder to 
stay level as the years wear on.)Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-marvel>, 
opening in the country on 16 October, is another marginal underperformer 
looking for a Chinese leg-up.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeav4iE0gYI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeav4iE0gYI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeav4iE0gYI&media=>
Beyond Hollywood

For once, the local hits producing ripples this week are European. 
Turkish-German comedy dynamo Bora Dagtekin is looking to top Germany’s yearly 
homegrown box office for the third time in four years withhis sequel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ueav4iE0gYI> to 2013’s Fack Ju Göhte (a 
misspelt Fuck You Goethe), about a Munich bank robber forced to take a teaching 
job at the Goethe Institute in order to recover his stash. Number two just 
opened at a gigantic $20m, more than twice the original, which took $71.7m (and 
more elsewhere) to become the country’s second-highest local work, behind Til 
Schweiger’s romcomRabbit Without Ears 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dbdzrPtYrHs>. In the UK, meanwhile, Krays 
biopicLegend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/09/legend-review-tom-hardy-krays-reg-ron>
 opened to a magisterial $5.3m, in 14th global spot, buoyed up Tom Hardy’s 
twin-engine performance and plenty of tasty retrospective press coverage. That 
figure easily bests latter-day Brit gangster fodder like 2001’s Sexy Beast 
($142K) and 2004’s Layer Cake ($1.9m), and is one step ahead of UK debuts for 
American crime fare like 2006’s The Departed ($4.2m), 2007’s American Gangster 
($5.2m) and 2010’s The Town ($1.5m). Looks like Working Title has a nice little 
earner on its hands.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07e9cb1039424c03b6870544160efce8e67ac43b%2F0_53_3684_2213%2F3684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shyamalan%20gets%20career%20reprieve%20as%20The%20Visit%20marks%202015%20horror%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shyamalan%20gets%20career%20reprieve%20as%20The%20Visit%20marks%202015%20horror%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fglobal-box-office-shyamalan-the-visit-maze-runner-scorch-trials-rogue-nation-minions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07e9cb1039424c03b6870544160efce8e67ac43b%2F0_53_3684_2213%2F3684.jpg>
 Twin-engine performance … Tom Hardy as the Krays in Legend. Photograph: Greg 
Williams/Studiocanal/PA 
The future

Scorch Trials adds 41 territories, the bulk of the rest of its run, including 
South Korea – one of the top three markets for the first film (it opens in 
France on 7 October, and there’s no sign yet of a Chinese engagement).Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/everest-review-star-studded-adventure-proves-a-difficult-summit>
, the bustlingly ensembled Josh Brolin-Sam Worthington-Jake Gyllenhaal-Keira 
Knightley $65m expedition, digs the crampons into close to 25 countries, 
including the US, UK and the director Baltasur Kormákur’s native Iceland. One 
of the island’s leading commercial lights, Kormákur will be hoping he can climb 
to a higher box-office plateau than his past Hollywood work, 2012’s Contraband 
($96m worldwide) and 2013’s 2 Guns ($131m); the unusualbergefilm setting should 
set him on his way, though the first batch of reviews were underwhelming. In 
India, meanwhile, this past weekend’s big release, the Salman Khan-produced Hero
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/hero-review-salman-khan-bollywood-producer-sooraj-pancholi>
, debuted to a Rs 200m shrug ($3m), but director Nikhil Advani isn’t hanging 
around, with “anti-love story”Katti Batti 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a23GO0NXOtg> heading out seven days later. The 
anti-lovers in question are Imran Khan – megastar Aamir Khan’s nephew – and 
Kangana Ranaut, fromTanu Weds Manu Returns 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wGGmyaurjAI>, one of Bollywood’s few big 
comedy hits this year.


Top 10 global box office, 11-13 September

1. Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mission-impossible-rogue-nation>, $95.5m from 
64 territories. $613m cumulative – 69.3% international; 30.7% US
2. (New) The Visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/the-visit-review-m-night-shyamalans-found-footage-loser>
, $29.5m from 15 territories – 12.9% int; 87.1% US
3. Minions <https://www.theguardian.com/film/minions>, $27.7m from 58 
territories. $1.08bn cum – 69.3% int; 30.7% US
4. (New) Maze Runner: The Scorch Trials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/maze-runner-the-scorch-trials-review-a-ya-franchise-runs-out-of-steam>
, $26.8m from 21 territories – 100% int
5. (New) The Perfect Guy, $26.7m from 1 territory – 100% US
6. (New) Fack Ju Göhte 2, $20m from 2 territories. $21.2m cum – 100% int
7. Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/straight-outta-compton>, $8.4m from 16 
territories. $180.7m cum – 13.8% int; 86.2% US
8. The Transporter Refuelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/the-transporter-refuelled-review-reboot>
, $7.9m from 27 territories. $25.8m cum – 48.4% int; 51.6% US
9. War Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/28/war-room-review-religion-christianity>
, $7.7m from 13 territories. $40.5m cum – 0.3% int; 99.7% US
10. Inside Out <https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out>, $6.8m from 35 
territories. $747.4m cum – 53% int; 47% US


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. This week’s figures are based 
on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

 