
US and Pakistani officials have expressed optimism that Islamabad is close to 
reopening its Afghan border toNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> 
troop supplies after a seven-month blockade, a move that could significantly 
reduce tension between the two countries.

The row over the supply line, which Pakistan closed in November in retaliation 
for US air strikes that killed 24 of its troops, has driven the bilateral 
relationship to new lows, threatening US prospects inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

The two sides have been in deadlock for months because of disagreements over 
transit payments and Washington's refusal to apologise for the deadly attack, 
which it says was an accident.

The Pakistani government has also been worried about the inevitable political 
backlash from reopening the route, given the high levels of anti-American 
sentiment in the country.

While the exact details of a deal remain unclear, signs are growing that a 
breakthrough could be imminent.

Pakistan's prime minister, Raja Pervaiz Ashraf, called a meeting of the 
defence committee of the cabinet on Tuesday to decide whether to reopen the 
supply line, according to a senior Pakistani official. "The environment seems 
to be optimistic," the official said,.

The decision to call the meeting followed a visit tio Islamabad on Monday by a 
high-level US delegation that included the top US commander in Afghanistan, 
General John Allen, the under-secretary of defence for policy, James Miller, 
and the deputy secretary of state for management and resources, Thomas Nides, a 
senior US official said. The visit was Allen's second in under a week.

The latest trip was a prime example of how "quiet diplomacy can play a 
significant role to get things done", the official said.

The US had addressed Pakistan's demands for higher transit fees by offering 
extensive road construction projects, the US official said, without providing 
specific figures.

Before the November attack, Pakistan was charging $250 (Â£160) for each truck; 
afterwards,Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> demanded 
$5,000, and the US countered with $500. It is unclear where the deal currently 
stands.

The US has compensated for the closed route by using a much longer, more 
expensive supply line that runs into Pakistan through central Asia. The US 
defence secretary, Leon Panetta, has said the route is costing an extra $100m a 
month now, and that figure could grow as the US starts to withdraw equipment in 
advance of the 2014 troop deadline for pulling out from Afghanistan.

The issue that has bogged down negotiations the most is the US refusal to 
apologise for the November attack, which Washington has said was conducted in 
self-defence after Pakistani troops fired on US forces.

The Obama administration is apparently worried that apologising could expose 
it to criticism from Republicans, given anger over Pakistan's alleged support 
for militants fighting US troops in Afghanistan.

However, senior officials have expressed regret over the November incident, 
including President Barack Obama and the secretary of state,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.

While a deal seems more likely, it is by no means guaranteed. Pakistan 
appeared close to reopening the supply line in May, prompting Nato to invite 
Zardari to a summit in Chicago largely focused on the Afghan war. When Pakistan 
failed to follow through, Obama made his anger clear by refusing to have a 
private meeting with Zardari.
 