
Tomorrow is not a complicated song, and it certainly isn’t original. When it 
was released in 1994, many critics savaged it. To this day,Silverchair 
<http://www.chairpage.com/news/>’s most ardent fans continue to debate its 
artistic merits.

 But Tomorrow deserves recognition nonetheless. It is arguably the most 
important Australian song of the past 20 years – not because it broke new 
ground musically, but because it had an immeasurable impact on the young 
Australian musicians who came to dominate the airwaves in the second half of 
the 1990s.

 Written by singer/guitarist Daniel Johns and drummer Ben Gillies when the 
pair were in their early teens, the song hews closely to the Seattle grunge 
formula but crackles with a younger and less oppressive energy than Nirvana’s 
big singles. The lyrics – inspired, Johns says, by a television documentary – 
combine sing-song simplicity and adolescent intensity.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRZD982yrmx4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRZD982yrmx4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRZD982yrmx4&media=>
 The track was a massive hit, spending six weeks at No 1 on the Aria singles 
chart and propelling the band’s debut album,Frogstomp 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/frogstomp-mw0000173614>, to nine times platinum 
status in Australia. In October 1995, a full year after its release, Tomorrow 
won three Aria awards, and Frogstomp scooped an additional two.

 Around the country, young Australians of all stripes were becoming devotees 
of the band. Silverchair managed to appeal both to younger teens, for whom 
Tomorrow was a first taste of powerful rock music, and to older, more 
discerning listeners, who recognised and approved of the group’s influences.

 Meanwhile, the song caught fire in north America. A new music video that took 
its cues from popular grunge clips of the early 90s was shot specifically for 
the US market and soon found favour with MTV’s programmers. Rock radio and 
college stations followed suit. Tomorrow soon hit number one on both the 
Billboard modern rock tracks and the album rock tracks charts. It was the 
most-played song on American modern rock radio in 1995.

 The track polarised American music critics. Many were unhappy that 
Silverchair – whom they dismissed as young, foreign, and derivative – had 
achieved mainstream success in the States. A wave of negative publicity 
followed the trio’s first live shows on US soil.

 But for each scathing review, there was a critic willing to give the band a 
chance.Writing in the New York Times, Dimitri Ehrlich called Frogstomp 
<http://www.chairpage.com/press_releases/item/23/> “bombastic in the brash way 
that adolescent males often are. But the album also contains several unexpected 
charms, which explains why it has gone platinum.”

 Back at home, aspiring musicians were awed by Silverchair’s international 
success. “It was extremely exciting to witness,” says Ella Hooper, who, along 
with her brother Jesse, formed the soon-to-be-massiveKilling Heidi 
<http://www.theage.com.au/entertainment/music/from-killing-heidi-to-fulfilling-dreams-20120719-22csg.html>
 in 1996. “I remember Jesse saying, ‘Look! They’re three young dudes from 
Newcastle. We’re two young kids from the country. If they can do it, we can.’ 
Witnessing their career blossom, we started to believe that something similar 
might be possible for us.” Members of many other homegrown bands have echoed 
Hooper’s sentiment.

 The Australian media was inspired, too. In the wake of Tomorrow’s success, 
local radio stations and magazines started paying more attention to the music 
emanating from garages and rehearsal spaces around the country, rather than 
taking their cues from overseas. The Australian music industry grew in size and 
confidence as the 90s progressed, spawning major events likeHomebake 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/music/festival-bubble-bursts-as-homebake-cancelled-20131023-2w083.html>
 and nurturing a slew of chart-topping bands, fromthe Living End 
<http://www.thelivingend.com.au/> to Jebediah <http://www.jebediah.net/>.

 The song influenced Australian music in numerous ways – some subtle, others 
not so. But Tomorrow still resonates today for one simple reason. Says Hooper, 
“It feels amazing to sing along to. You hold those vowels 'til you pass out!”
 