
Simon Cowell has told the BBC to "get their sense of humour back" over the 
rivalry between The Voice andBritain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent>.

Cowell, who will return to ITV1's Britain's Got Talent as a judge when the new 
series starts on Saturday – the same night as the launch of BBC1'sThe Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-voice> – questioned whether the 
BBC should be doing a Saturday night singing contest.

He defended the scheduling of the ITV show saying he had "every right to arm 
ourselves so we are in a good place to beat them".

Cowell, speaking at the launch of Britain's Got Talent on Thursday, said he 
would be watching The Voice but only "about five minutes of it. Not the whole 
thing".

"Of course [the BBC] is in the business of doing [talent shows]. But when you 
get to a point where … you mess around with the schedule and it affects the 
viewers, when you go head to head that to me is silly rivalry," he added.

"Of course I love competition but if you ask do we need another singing talent 
show I would query whether you do or not. In my opinion they don't like the 
fact The X Factor is successful.

"They have every right to compete with us and we have every right to arm 
ourselves so we are in a good place to beat them."

The BBC has accused ITV of moving Britain's Got Talent in the schedules to go 
head to head with The Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/mar/09/the-voice-britains-got-talent-clash?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
. ITV has said by scheduling The Voice in March – Britain's Got Talent 
traditionally launches in April – the two were always going to clash.

Asked about his comment that he had decided to "punish" the BBC by poaching 
Strictly Come Dancing judgeAlesha Dixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alesha-dixon> to join the judging panel of 
Britain's Got Talent, he said it was "all a bit of fun".

"I had approached Alesha to join X Factor a long time ago. Once we decided we 
were going to make [Britain's Got Talent] four people on the panel, I thought I 
would love Alesha to be on the show," Cowell added.

"Part of me thought to myself there is so much rivalry with Strictly and X 
Factor, they are always messing around with the schedule, The Voice was 100% 
intended to be a competing show to X Factor so I thought great, we'll nick 
Alesha."

Dixon said it was a "different vibe" on the ITV1 show to Strictly Come 
Dancing. "On this show I have come into myself, I feel like more of myself on 
this show," she said.

Of her decision to switch channels, Dixon added: "It's not about the money, 
it's about doing different things. I honestly don't make decisions based on 
money, that's the truth."

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> have been talking up the 
credibility of The Voice, including its "coaches", who include Sir Tom Jones 
and Jessie J, and the standard of the singers taking part.

Cowell said: "I think they better get their sense of humour back. It was 
intimated that I had offered Tom Jones a role on one of my shows.

"I met the guy once in Vegas. I think the offer he was thinking about was 
Opportunity Knocks, it wasn't one of my shows.

"They are winding this up to try and be like it's a big kind of battle. It's 
not. The shows go out at the same time, may the best one win.

"In terms of credibility it's down to being good and being successful. I tell 
you what I am going to do, I am going to back my talent against their's this 
year, that's for sure."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 