
“Music should always be joyful, even when it is tragic. He is a happy man who 
leaves such a legacy behind him.” So wrote Bohuslav Martinů of his Czech 
compatriotAntonín Dvořák <https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonin-dvorak>.

Over the next few weeks, Manchester’s Hallé Orchestra is staging a festival of 
seven concerts <http://www.halle.co.uk/dvorak.aspx> devoted entirely to that 
legacy. But why, of all composers, does Dvořák need such exclusive attention? 
Do the hugely famousSlavonic Dances 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H2amTjF_mkM>, the Cello Concerto 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=llB7NaWLUc4> or the New World Symphony – works 
featured in the festival – really need any more exposure? What is it about 
Dvořák’s music that merits such total immersion?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIRNyAytW0w8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIRNyAytW0w8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIRNyAytW0w8&media=>
“Dvořák was a populist in the best possible way”, says the Hallé’s music 
director, SirMark Elder <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mark-elder>. “He was 
one of the great tunesmiths and his music has such colour. Being Czech, dance 
was central to his conception of being a musician, something audiences all 
around the world relate to. Some of my fellow conductors feel Dvořák’s music 
has nothing to offer intellectually – one even told me ‘it isn’t dirty enough’ 
– but I love it, and it’s enormously enjoyable to perform – and of course, to 
listen to.”

What pop music owes to the classical masters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/24/what-pop-music-owes-classical-masters>
But the Hallé’s festival isn’t exclusively focused on the tried and tested 
bits of the Dvořák canon. There’s a chance to hear the charmingMoravian Duets 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moravian_Duets> which may have established 
Dvořák’s international reputation, but today are only rarely performed in this 
country. The same is true of thePiano Concerto 
<http://www.halle.co.uk/concerts-tickets.aspx?day=5&month=5&year=2016>, a piece 
some regard as a curate’s egg. “It just needs a good advocate,” says Elder. “I 
know pianists who adore it, includingStephen Hough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/cbso-andris-nelsons-review-dvorak-stephen-hough>
 andGarrick Ohlsson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/07/garrick-ohlsson-review-wigmore-alexander-scriabin-centenary>
. The piece just needs a bit of tender love and care. I have high hopes we can 
make some new friends for it.”

The title of the festival, Nature, Life and Love, is taken from the subtitles 
of a trilogy of overtures:In Nature’s Realm 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mEaGQhT0_QQ>, Carnival 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a1jNQgTVYrY> and Otello 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aI0IMeAILMo>. Dvořák composed them shortly 
before leaving Bohemia in 1892 to become director of New York’s National 
Conservatory of Music (he became a considerable celebrity in the city). 
Musically united by a recurring pastoral theme (which is heard gorgeously in 
Carnival as a memory of another, distant world), they are nevertheless seldom 
performed as the triptych Dvořák intended.

Some might lament a lost opportunity to hear Dvořák’s earlier symphonies, 
particularly the underrated Third, Fifth and Sixth; the festival instead 
features the composer’s last three symphonies, which are all hugely famous. In 
character these works are distinctive, representing different aspects of their 
composer’s personality: the Brahms-influenced Seventh is a turbulent affair 
(though, as Martinů noted, nevertheless ultimately joyful); the Eighth pastoral 
and high-spirited (it’s even been described as thepigeon-fancying Dvořák 
<http://www.antonin-dvorak.cz/images/AD_s_holuby.jpg>’s “birdsong symphony”); 
while the Ninth, the iconic New World, was a product of Dvořák’s American 
years. A special event,Beyond the Score, led by Gerard McBurney on 7 May 
<https://tickets.bridgewater-hall.co.uk/single/SYOS.aspx?p=29909>, promises to 
place the work in enlightening contexts.

Symphony guide: Dvořák's 9th 'From the New World'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/sep/02/symphony-guide-dvorak-9th-new-world-symphony-tom-service>
After returning to Bohemia from America, Dvořák became preoccupied with Karel 
Erben’s nationalistic collection of folk-ballads, Kytice. These stories rival 
the Brothers Grimm in their delight in the macabre and inspired four superbly 
graphic symphonic poems – described by Janáček as “the most Czech of Dvořák’s 
works”. The longest and perhaps the greatest of them isThe Golden Spinning Wheel
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HzQejxJqW6w>, a piece based on a story Elder 
describes as “particularly bloody, with its countless severed limbs”. This 
magnificently orchestrated work, however, does have a happy ending.

The festival culminates with another rarely performed work, the oratorio Saint 
Ludmila <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint_Ludmila_(oratorio)>, an expression 
of Dvořák’s profound religious faith and patriotism performed in a newly 
commissioned English translation by David Pountney. This gargantuan piece was
premiered at the 1886 Leeds festival 
<http://www.leedsfestivalchorus.co.uk/history/1880s/>and features some of 
Dvořák’s most rousing, full-throated choral writing, as well as exquisite arias 
and ensemble pieces. Though Dvořák had the English taste for Handel in mind as 
he wrote it, he consistently reveals his own character as a distinctively Czech 
melodist.

The son of a butcher and innkeeper, Dvořák’s success and fame were hard 
earned. Brahms, Janáček, Sibelius and even the young Schoenberg admired him, 
though under Czechoslovakia’s communist regime his music was officially 
regarded – not least by the influential culture and education minister Zdenék 
Nejedlý – as inferior to that ofSmetana 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bed%C5%99ich_Smetana>. “Dvořák presents a 
massive obstacle,” Nejedlý wrote in 1913, “which any young Czech musician must 
remove from his path if he is to make progress”.

As the festival will hopefully remind us, Dvořák’s music never tried to be 
progressive. It might not engage deeply with the intellect, but it does with 
the heart and the imagination in the most direct way possible (does music 
really have to engage the intellect anyway?). A consummate orchestrator, a 
supreme melodist, a passionate Czech nationalist with universal appeal, Dvořák 
continues to speak with immediacy, kindness and humanity. As Martinů put it: 
“If anyone expressed a healthy and happy relationship to life, it was he.”

 * Dvořák: Nature, Life and Love <http://www.halle.co.uk/dvorak.aspx> is at 
Bridgewater Hall, Manchester, from 5-21 May. Box Office: 0161 907 9000
 