
If Sir Roy Gardner has any ambitions of taking on the chairmanship of the 
Football League his candidacy has suffered a blow with recent events atPlymouth 
Argyle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle>.

The advert for the post, seeking a senior figure with "experience of leading 
complex organisations and a demonstrable interest in football", was published 
in the press on Sunday. Many observers have linked Gardner with the job since 
the former Centrica chief executive and Manchester United chairman has 
previously shown big ambitions in football politics.

He reached the final three-man shortlist for the equivalent post at the 
Football Association in 2007, but the former Manchester United chairman missed 
out when Lord Triesman was appointed. Gardner returned to football last July as 
Plymouth's chairman following Yasuaki Kagami's takeover.

Yet the struggling Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> club have since had 
financial problems, reportedly paying staff late in October after "water seeped 
into power sockets" and receiving a winding-up petition from HM Revenue & 
Customs within the past fortnight.

The club's acting finance director, Tom Kristensen, yesterday insisted to 
Digger that the tax debt has been settled, adding that this is what led to a 
Football League transfer embargo being lifted last week. But the sanction was 
the manifestation of a key plank of the league's regulatory structure that any 
new chairman would be expected to enforce.

Although as non-executive chairman of Plymouth Gardner has no operational 
responsibility for the club, a development as serious as the receipt of a 
winding-up petition from the taxman would seem rather to blot his copybook.

Riddle of Ridsdale

Another club to have suffered the ignominy of an HMRC winding-up petition is 
of course Cardiff City, whose chairman, Peter Ridsdale, admitted as much 
recently. That confession contrasts with his stance in a statement on the 
club's website last week after the News of the World wrote that said petition 
had been lodged with the courts. "We are taking legal advice with regard to the 
damaging contents of this article," said Ridsdale. "This information has then 
been used out of context, is not the latest position, nor does it contain all 
the current facts and is therefore inaccurate." Who to believe? Ridsdale or 
Ridsdale?
Club life no joke for Jacob

Portsmouth's executive director, Mark Jacob, who runs the property portfolio 
belonging to the club's owner, Ali al-Faraj, from his London law firm, has 
always been a big football fan. Jacob is a long-term follower of Tottenham 
Hotspur and has been politically active in his time supporting the White Hart 
Lane club. During Alan Sugar's ownership, Jacob represented an organisation 
called the Tottenham Action Group, whose links with the media gave it something 
of a profile. After one dire performance from Sugar's Spurs, Jacob hit out. "We 
feel we are justified in expressing these opinions and if a public apology is 
not given we call upon every Tottenham supporter to continue to support the 
team â€“ but not the board," he said. No doubt Jacob thought running a football 
club would be a doddle and that he could do a better job. After months of the 
Faraj farce, he is discovering otherwise.
England head for Angola

England 2018 are to hold a board meeting at Wembley at which the security 
situation in Angola is bound to be discussed. The Africa Cup of Nations host 
country is also holding the Confederation of African Federations' annual 
congress this month. But despite the terrorist attack against the Togo team 
last week, England 2018's plans to send what one executive yesterday described 
as "a sizeable and senior" delegation to the CAF event will not be altered. 