
Sir Ben Ainslie <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie> claimed the 2017 
America’s Cup could be the most competitive in history as the four-times 
Olympic sailing champion confirmed he intends to helm a team that is targeting 
a first British title.

Last year Ainslie was part of a winning America’s Cup crew, playing a key role 
in the remarkable comeback of Oracle Team USA who overturned an 8-1 deficit 
over Emirates Team New Zealand to prevail 9-8 in San Francisco.

Ainslie has since established an all-British team to challenge Oracle in three 
years time, although he faces competition from five other crews for the right 
eventually to race the defending champions. Asked if the standard was higher 
than ever, Ainslie said: “I’d say so, yes. It’s been a long time since we’ve 
seen six teams this strong. For us in Britain, to bring the America’s Cup home 
would be a massive thing for this team and this country.

“Certainly my skill set is being a helmsman but with these teams you just set 
it up with the best possible people. You develop the team as you go along but 
certainly it’s my intention to be steering the boat. If we were going racing 
tomorrow, I would be steering the boat but that might not be the answer in a 
couple of years’ time.”

The skippers of the six contending teams were presented in London on Tuesday, 
with the challengers, Artemis Racing, Emirates New Zealand, Luna Rossa 
Challenge and Team France, all vying with Ben Ainslie Racing to earn the right 
to face Oracle.

The 35th America’s Cup will be decided by two crews and is expected to be 
staged in either San Diego or Bermuda, with the five challengers racing against 
each other next year at various locations during a lengthy qualification 
process.

Ainslie formally announced the establishment of his new £80m America’s Cup 
project in June and he expects to recruit a team of around 100 people by 2017. 
A new sailing hub in Portsmouth is also set to be completed by May next year.
 