
The Texas-born financier and cricket impresario Sir Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford>, jailed on charges of 
bilking investors out of $7bn (Â£4.3bn), has been hospitalised with an irregular 
heartbeat and high pulse, the judge in his case said today.

Stanford was set to appear in a Houston, Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> federal courtroom for a hearing on 
whether he can get a new attorney. His current lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, has asked 
for permission to quit the case because he doesn't have assurances he will be 
paid.

In the same courtroom, Stanford's former finance chief, James Davis, pleaded 
guilty today to three counts: conspiracy to commit mail, wire and securities 
fraud; mail fraud and conspiracy to obstruct a securities and exchange 
commission investigation.

Davis' attorney David Finn has previously said that Davis, 60, cooperated with 
prosecutors and the guilty plea is part of a deal with the US justice 
department in exchange for a possible reduced sentence. He will be sentenced on 
20 November and faces up to 20 years in prison.

Stanford, Davis and other executives of the now defunct Houston-based Stanford 
Financial Group are accused of orchestrating a massive Ponzi scheme by advising 
clients to invest more than $7bn in certificates of deposit from the Stanford 
International Bank in the Caribbean island of Antigua and then misusing the 
money.

Before the hearing, DeGuerin said Stanford was taken from the privately run 
prison where he is being held outside Houston about 5.30am today to the Conroe 
Regional Medical Centre.

US district judge David Hittner said Stanford had an irregular heartbeat and 
an "extremely" high pulse.

Hittner postponed a hearing scheduled today in which he would hear arguments 
about Stanford's legal representation.

Stanford was considered one of the richest men in the US with an estimated net 
worth of more than $2bn. But he claims he is now penniless.

Last month Stanford's spokesman said the jailed financier had hired Washington 
DC-based attorney Robert Luskin, who also represents former White House 
political adviser Karl Rove. But Luskin also wants assurances he'll get paid, 
and Hittner won't release DeGuerin until an attorney takes the case 
unconditionally.
 