
In 1926, the novelist Rose Macaulay found herself bothered by the attentions 
of enthusiastic readers, and one in particular who visited, bringing lilies of 
the valley. When Macaulay went out to lunch to try to get rid of her she simply 
tagged along. “Writing books is a terrible magnet for such as her,” confided 
Macaulay in a letter to her sister Jeanie. “They are so very boring, as a 
rule.” Being polite in such circumstances only made it worse, and protestations 
of busyness had no effect. “Anyhow,” concluded the letter, “I have enough 
friends already, and I do resent people thinking that they can become friends 
merely by pushing their way in. As a matter of fact, I select my friends with 
great care, and only have those who please me a great deal. There must be a way 
out of these problems, I wish I could hit on it. I must ask other novelists 
what they do.”

Jeanie was a district nurse, and – alongside sisterly love and interesting 
conversation – provided a rather more pleasant sort of companionship for the 
hard-pressed writer. How lovely it was, wrote Macaulay in a thank you letter in 
1940, to spend a night at her “perfectly appointed house”, where the visitor 
was “a pampered drone lying on a soft warm couch and waking to news and 
breakfast, and everything found but beer, as one used to say to servants”.

Macaulay wasn’t by custom much of a pampered drone, and neither was she in 
flight from society; doggedly prolific, she wrote not only novels but 
biographies and travel books, and maintained active conversations about 
politics, religion and feminism throughout her life. But her attitudes towards 
“friends” – even when that term is enlarged to encompass troublesome fans – is 
interesting; they must be carefully selected, winnowed according to pleasure. 
Who might be able to give advice? “Other novelists.”

Novelists, in the popular imagination as well as by self-description, often 
ping between the solitude of the writing desk and the rivalrous frenzy of the 
literary circuit. Naturally, most find themselves still able to have human 
relationships beyond those with their editor and agent, and to describe the 
complex phenomenon of personal interaction in their work. But recently, there 
has been a growth in the literary depiction of a particular type of friendship, 
one that has in the past found itself vulnerable to dilution and deflection by 
the ostensibly more powerful imperatives of heterosexuality and motherhood. 
Fictional female friends are suddenly all around us, fromElena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/elena-ferrante-anonymity-lets-me-concentrate-exclusively-on-writing>
’s Lila and Elena to Emma Cline’s group of murderous California adolescents in
The Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/08/the-girls-by-emma-cline-review-charles-manson>
and Ottessa Moshfegh’s prison employees in the Man Booker longlistedEileen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/eileen-by-ottessa-moshfegh-review-bell-jar>
; they span the strange, creatively fruitful gap between fiction and memoir, 
such as in Sheila Heti’s How Should a Person Be? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/11/sheila-heti-how-should-person-be>
; they sit in a mysterious zone of desire and conflict, as in Deborah Levy’sHot 
Milk, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/27/hot-milk-deborah-levy-review> 
also Booker longlisted; they act as conduits to unleash repressed creativity 
and personal ambition, as in Claire Messud’sThe Woman Upstairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/14/woman-upstairs-claire-messud-review>
.

We increasingly seek more complex and subtle imaginative explorations of 
identity than societal expectations of gender – and a “realist” elaboration of 
personality – have often allowed; if we have long accepted that identity is 
fluid and shifting, it has perhaps taken more time to appreciate that it 
deserves a similarly sophisticated expression in art. Consequently, that sense 
of the forced compartmentalisation of a woman’s life – given such powerful 
structural form in Doris Lessing’s 1962 novelThe Golden Notebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/06/100-best-novels-golden-notebook-doris-lessing>
, in which Anna Wulf chronicles her life in four separate notebooks and tries 
to merge them in an eponymous fifth – is under extreme pressure.

In Ferrante’s Neapolitan quartet, it begins to crack. So much goes on over the 
course of the four novels – the depiction of the postwar Naples in which the 
two girls grow up, their dramatically diverging educational, occupational and 
romantic lives, radical politics and gangsterism, their experiences of 
motherhood – that readers can be forgiven for getting caught up in the material 
and straightforwardly accessible emotional reality of what they describe. But 
from its prologue, the first novel in the quartet,My Brilliant Friend, signals 
itself as a work preoccupied with the assertion and effacement of identity. As 
it opens, Lila (also known as Raffaella and Lina), now in her 60s, has 
disappeared without a trace, leaving Elena (also Lenuccia or Lenu) to muse not 
on her shock, but on her lack of surprise. Elena realises that what Lila means 
by disappearing is not beginning a new life, nor suicide:

She meant something different: she wanted to vanish, she wanted every one of 
her cells to disappear, nothing of her ever to be found. And since I know her 
well, or at least I think I know her, I take it for granted that she has found 
a way to disappear, to leave not so much as a hair anywhere in this world.

Lila’s absence is what enables Elena to write their lives, but not from a 
neutral, or even commemorative, standpoint. “We’ll see who wins this time,” she 
says, as she turns her computer on; her recreation of the pair’s history is, 
from the outset, spurred by competitiveness, and a touch of anger. But it is 
not merely that what follows is sometimes unflattering or damning to Lila, or 
that at some level, it enacts Lila’s desire to be erased by taking over the 
telling of her story; it is also that it presents friendship as a complex 
psychological dance. Their decades-long relationship is punctuated by periods 
of antagonism, envy and repudiation; at times, they appear not as separate 
entities but as projections of estranged yet dependent aspects of the same 
personality. The books’ recurrent theme of boundaries – Lila is visited by 
traumatic episodes of dissociation, sensations of the borders between objects 
and people dissolving – is linked to the idea of female identity, and 
particularly to women as potential generators; of meaning, language, children, 
history.


It takes a writer of significant qualities to avoid such a story becoming 
schematic, its characters reduced to representations of positions and outcomes. 
Ferrante’s ability to animate Lila and Elena’s lives derives partly from the 
way she merges the specificity of time and setting with the uncanny 
immateriality of fairytale (the story of the little girls’ dolls that opens the 
quartet, the dramatis personae – “the shoemaker’s family”, “the mad widow’s 
family” – that sit at the front of each book). A similar achievement 
characterises Zadie Smith’sNW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/nw-zadie-smith-review>, which 
also tells the story of two friends, their push-pull attachment to the 
neighbourhood they grew up in, and their contrasting paths through life. 
(Smith’s forthcoming novel, Swing Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/29/new-novels-zadie-smith-swing-time-and-ali-smith-autumn-announced>
, to be published in November, returns to female friendship and divergent lives 
in its story of two girls who grow up wanting to be dancers.)

In NW, concrete observations are made strange by the novel’s switches between 
modes, by Smith’s painstaking focus on the construction of identity; again 
there are name changes, abrupt volte-face, dramatic renunciations of the status 
quo. Again, there is the crucial difference in approach between the two 
characters, as here, when Leah visits Keisha-become-Natalie at university:

“Really good to see you,” said Leah. “You’re the only person I can be all of 
myself with.” Which comment made Natalie begin to cry, not really at the 
sentiment but rather out of a fearful knowledge that if reversed the statement 
would be rendered practically meaningless, Ms Blake having no self to be, not 
with Leah, or anyone.

Smith has talked about how Virginia Woolf inspired the writing of NW, and 
modernism’s influence on the creation of such fluid characters as Ferrante’s 
and those inNW is clear (Woolf’s Orlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/05/winter-reads-orlando-virginia-woolf>
, her celebration of her love for and friendship with Vita Sackville-West, is 
dependent on the idea of identity shifts). But key in these depictions of 
women’s relationships is how much the warp and weft of their individual lives, 
thoughts and feelings, are a subject in themselves. This hasn’t always been – 
and still, frequently, isn’t – the case; fictional women are frequently 
positioned in relation to men, their interactions seen through the prism of 
their need for male approval, or their subjugation to men’s desires. Often, of 
course, this is the point. In Margaret Forster’sGeorgy Girl, for example, the 
plot revolves around the difference between two young women, and in particular 
their relative sense of self-esteem in the sexual and romantic arena, 
personified by the dashing Jos:

“Why don’t you say what you’re thinking?”
“Which was?”
“Which was how could Meredith, such a pretty gay little girl, share a flat 
with a great clodhopper like me.”
“Heh, this isn’t like you, George,” said Jos.
“No it isn’t, is it? Jolly back-slapping hockey stick George.”
“Oh come on, George,” said Jos.
“My name is Georgina.”
“Georgina then. What’s eating you? Don’t you feel well?”
George threw the carrot she was peeling at him. It hit his spectacles and they 
fell onto the floor and broke and she sat on the floor beside them and cried. 
Blindly, Jos squatted down beside her and they both stared at the smashed 
lenses. Eventually, George stopped crying and started apologising.

Jos responds by telling her to shut up, although he revises his feelings about 
Georgy as Meredith proves herself a pretty useless wife and mother, and indeed 
eventually cedes her daughter to Georgy. As Jos and Georgy pick a name for the 
baby, Meredith goes “at a gallop” around the square outside:


She didn’t know why she hadn’t smacked both their smug faces. She should have 
put her foot down and stopped them getting the baby, instead of being so idle 
and short-sighted to see that it mattered … She didn’t care about the baby, she 
really didn’t, it was those two she hated. They behaved as though they were in 
some private world, all sugar and spice and all things nice. She despised them 
and their cosiness.

Her next thought is that she won’t be able to get her job back – she is a 
violinist in an orchestra – and the message about women’s choices between 
motherhood and work, rapaciousness and “niceness” is complete.


Often, too, the subject of men is more subtly managed; their existence, or 
rather women’s feelings for them, is a matter of discretion and delicacy, as if 
they might disrupt proceedings. It’s unsurprising that one of the masters of 
portraying these situation isAnita Brookner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/19/the-five-best-anita-brookner-novels>
, in whose 1982 novelLook at Me, narrated by librarian Frances (who doesn’t 
like to be called Fanny; the issue of women and their names is clearly an 
abiding one), two friends simply skirt around the whole topic. “We have never 
discussed this,” writes Frances, of her friend Olivia’s dislike of another 
woman, Alix, and fondness for Alix’s husband Nick, “because on some matters 
reticence is preferable, particularly when feelings are liable to change. We 
are both rather old-fashioned, I suppose, and although our friendship is deep 
and sincere, we do not really subscribe to the women’s guerrilla movement. I 
think we like to maintain a certain loyalty to the men who have, or have had, 
our love and affection; we regard ourselves in some way as being concerned with 
their honour. Ridiculous, really, when you come to think of it. I have learned 
that there is no reciprocity in these matters.”

Here we see women as the protectors of men, and male honour; and as the 
victims of their betrayal. InLook at Me, Frances is “taken up” by Nick and 
Alix, and given access to a far more glamorous and racy life; there are, 
naturally, consequences, and an insight into what it is to be proprietorially 
befriended by another woman. Female friendship does not always imply one’s best 
interests being served, and can lead into extremely dark waters, as in 
Moshfegh’sEileen. Here, a familiar story of faltering self-confidence and the 
allure of poise and polish comes into play, as the novel’s eponymous narrator 
meets Rebecca Saint John:

Perhaps only young women of my same conniving and tragic nature will 
understand that there could be something in such an exchange as mine with 
Rebecca that day which could unite two people in conspiracy. After years of 
secrecy and shame, in this one moment with her, all my frustrations were 
condoned and my body, my very being, was justified. Such solidarity and awe I 
felt, you’d think I’d never had a friend before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fwomen-friendship-wold-ferrante-zadie-smith-fiction-alex-clark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff17e78b1ab56fe57fafb17bf3e9ee7fd7c0a22f3%2F0_0_2700_4724%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sister%20act%3A%20female%20friendship%20in%20fiction%20from%20Woolf%20to%20Ferrante%20and%20Zadie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fwomen-friendship-wold-ferrante-zadie-smith-fiction-alex-clark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sister%20act%3A%20female%20friendship%20in%20fiction%20from%20Woolf%20to%20Ferrante%20and%20Zadie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fwomen-friendship-wold-ferrante-zadie-smith-fiction-alex-clark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff17e78b1ab56fe57fafb17bf3e9ee7fd7c0a22f3%2F0_0_2700_4724%2F2700.jpg>
 Illustration by Lucy Macleod 
Narratives that detail such transformations are compelling. This is perhaps 
why Cline’sThe Girls has captured the imagination of so many readers. Beyond 
the grisly allure of its subject matter – it is based on the young women who 
were part of Charles Manson’s “Family”, and who committed brutal murders in his 
name – it probes the nature of charisma not merely in a cult leader, but among 
a group of adolescent girls. Its narrator, Evie, is in freefall, and fed up 
with it; her parents are divorcing, she’s being shipped off to a boarding 
school, and her current best friend is simply not cutting the mustard any more. 
Evie’s obeisance to Suzanne, the leader of the “girls”, is made gripping by the 
way that she sloughs off her childhood friend, Connie, and especially Connie’s 
inept mimicry of adult female behaviour: “I remember noticing for the first 
time how loud she was, her voice hard with silly aggressiveness. Connie with 
her whines and feints, the grating laugh that sounded, and was, practised. A 
space opened up between us as soon as I started noticing these things, to 
catalogue her shortcomings the way a boy would. I regret how ungenerous I was. 
As if by putting distance between us, I could cure myself of the same disease.”


Suzanne, briefly, “cures” Evie of a certain type of femininity, although not 
of arranging her life around the expectations of a man; in this case, one whose 
apparent toxicity – he is, at bottom, weak and vain – finds its expression 
through the manipulation of women. Connie, incidentally, gets her own back.

But The Girls is not as much about friends as bad influences; it is about a 
surrender to the enablement of transgressive behaviour, while simultaneously 
being able to pretend that it is at a distance. “I can’t account for my own 
savagery,” thinks Elaine, the narrator ofMargaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>’s powerful exploration of 
group dynamics and bullying,Cat’s Eye (1989). She spends much of her life 
trying to understand how Cordelia, her tormentor, accrues so much power. When 
she reflects on her own daughters, she remembers wishing that they had been 
sons. “I must have been afraid of hating them,” she thinks, and “I didn’t want 
to pass anything on to them, anything of mine they would be better without.” 
Her capitulation to Cordelia’s will is one of those things; her fear of 
resembling her another. “There I am in her mirror eyes,” she notices, as 
Cordelia puts sunglasses on, “in duplicate and monochrome, and a great deal 
smaller than life size.”

The erotic runs through many of these novels, more or less overtly; in Hot Milk
 the narrator Sofie (also known as Sophia and Zoffie) begins a romantic and 
sexual relationship with Ingrid, whom she has at first mistaken for a man and, 
indeed, tried to eject from a women-only bathroom, and who embroiders a blouse 
for her. At first, Sofie believes that it reads “Beloved”; later, she realises 
it is “Beheaded”. The erotic has become mythological, and the everyday – a 
blouse, a jellyfish sting, a barking dog – irrevocably portentous. It is a 
cunning way to situate and examine desire; one that also runs through the work 
ofAli Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith>, who – like Levy – is 
alive to the thrilling possibilities of the dangerous and ambiguous stranger, 
often a woman, who pitches up out of nowhere.

Friendship, in literature as in life, is a dizzyingly various prospect; and it 
tells us things about ourselves that we may not want to know. Female 
friendship, with its additional charge of possible subversion – a world free 
from male control – is densely suggestive, whether it appears to be (the girls 
and women in Muriel Spark’sThe Abbess of Crewe or The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie
) or whether it masquerades as something more straightforward. It encompasses 
love, fear, dislike, insecurity, dependency, affection, sexuality, jealousy, 
altruism, cruelty, sameness and difference; it raises knotty questions of the 
individual’s ability to disrupt gender norms as well as her often unconscious 
adherence to them. No wonder writers of fiction are inspired by its boundless 
potentiality.
 