
Marketing has become a tricky territory. The dynamics of many industries, from 
hospitality to consumer packaged goods to automotive to beauty have gone 
through an overhaul thanks to the on-demand economy, platforms and competition 
from unpredictable places. ThinkNetflix being nominated for Emmys 
<http://mashable.com/2016/07/14/emmy-nominations-netflix-amazon-hulu-streaming-services/#EJOT_xcAkSqw>
. Think Airbnb becoming a hospitality company. Think Yoox Net-a-Porter being the
world’s biggest fashion store 
<http://www.fastcodesign.com/3044493/fast-feed/net-a-porter-merger-could-create-worlds-biggest-luxury-fashion-store>
.


The rise of direct-to-consumer businesses dramatically flattened 
organisational structures of traditional industries. It also introduced a 
market dynamic where competitiveness is defined by seamlessness, convenience, 
speed and efficiency of service. Products became as good as the service and 
experience that surrounds them.

All of this made the marketing puzzle infinitely more complex. It also made 
marketing – and the chief marketing officers (CMO) – more important. Instead of 
focusing just on communication, they have to have their hand in supply, 
production, distribution, customer service, sales and research and development.

No one size fits all: developing a global brand marketing strategy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/aug/04/developing-global-brand-marketing-strategy>
Not everyone is cut out for this new role; here are the habits of those who 
will come out at the top.

Keep your customer in mind at all times

The media landscape used to be simple: buy ads, do PR, call the press, 
organise an event, open new stores. But then consumers started finding 
inspiration and shopping opportunities in places and at times that brands found 
baffling. Behavioural segmentation, which divides consumers based on what they 
think, feel and do and what they expect from products and brands, has become 
critical. Tools like personas ensure that a CMO knows exactly who their 
audience is, where to find them, what they are influenced by and how to compete 
for their attention.

Bond with technology

A couple of years back, Andrew Chen <http://andrewchen.co/> of Uber wrote 
Growth hacker is the new VP of marketing 
<http://andrewchen.co/how-to-be-a-growth-hacker-an-airbnbcraigslist-case-study/>
. Chen pointed out that today’s top brands grew rapidly thanks their 
engineering, not marketing.

While a CMO doesn’t necessarily need to know how to write code, the lesson is 
clear: understand the front-end user experience and back-end technology. Be 
able to spot a culture-shaping collaboration opportunity, recognise user flows 
and scenarios and understand what makes a great omnichannel experience.

Make the customer decision journey your mantra

Everything around consumers today shapes their expectations: Uber’s 
convenience,Hello Alfred <https://www.helloalfred.com/>’s progressive 
personalisation orBirchBox’s curated choice <https://www.birchbox.co.uk/>. To 
guide their company in delivering on these expectations, a CMO needs to 
understand how their customers move through their experience with the brand and 
to connect the key decision-making points into a customer journey. Their job is 
then to design their organisation’s functions to confidently deliver on it.

Bond with data

The best CMOs know what kind of brand interactions are the most popular, how 
regions and locations differ on their product and service preferences (does a 
search for a weekend getaway mean the same thing in New York and in London?), 
when to send a newsletter, an email or a mobile alert and which marketing 
actions have the biggest return on investment.

All of this data informs marketing decisions, focuses the company and helps 
manage the market behaviour. Thanks to data, CMOs can now have impact on 
research and development, the production process and the value chain – not only 
on communications and messaging.

Practise being strategic and tactical

A successful CMO has to be able do everything from a coming up with a modern 
brand vision to its tactical execution, rollout plan and success metrics. Gone 
are the command centre days: CMOs have to get their hands dirty and stay 
involved throughout the entire global brand and marketing strategy. That is the 
only way for them to keep abreast of the constant stream of customer learnings 
and interactions, and to spot new growth opportunities and design the right 
process to deliver on them.

How to avoid overpaying for your advertising in media auctions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jun/22/avoid-over-paying-advertising-media-auctions-programmatic>
Get comfortable with the profit and loss responsibility

The biggest mistake of marketing is to focus only on marketing. This focus 
prompted majestic advertising spending, lavish events and store launches and 
having communication metrics as the only measure of success. The truth is, 
digital allows companies to measure the sales and brand building impact of 
everything from product marketing to direct marketing to brand marketing. It 
also lets them optimise these efforts to increase customer acquisition, 
retention and affinity. In this context, the CMO is responsible for connecting 
all marketing efforts directly to the bottom line.

Companies like Warby Parker <https://www.warbyparker.com/>, Airbnb or Birchbox 
know that a killer product, strong brand attitude and intimate community of 
fans are the best marketing. They employ those who combine business know-how 
with creativity and marketing savvy. To successfully compete with this new 
breed of talent, others may want to hire an outstanding CMO.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 