
What was the first song you ever bought?

The Smurfs All Star Show – The Smurfs 

That was the title of the album and the song. I was five and we were living in 
Germany, and I believe The Smurfs originated in that area. I still have the 
record on my shelf in my living room. I haven't played it in a while because I 
don't have a record player. I should get it digitally transferred.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH3j8rPrjN3c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH3j8rPrjN3c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH3j8rPrjN3c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/embed/H3j8rPrjN3c>

What song always gets you dancing?

Survivor – Destiny's Child 

I did the New York marathon for charity and I remember playing this, because I 
was at that point, during the 21st mile, actually just surviving! And I think I 
played it 18 times in a row on that run and when I was finished I just wanted 
to erect an altar to Beyoncé for helping me through it. She coveredYou Oughta 
Know <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NPcyTyilmYY> recently, so I feel that in 
some way telepathically we're giving each other some love. What dance move 
would I have been doing to the song? The running while dying manoeuvre.

What song takes you back to your childhood?

Tainted Love – Soft Cell 

I remember being obsessed with the melody and his [Marc Almond's] voice, and 
the lyrics. My parents were concerned because I kept singing that I needed to 
"get away". They sat me down and were like: "Is everything OK, sweetheart?" I 
said: "I just really love this song – there's nothing to worry about!" I loved 
the way he looked. I'd just started writing and I was like: "Wow, here's 
someone expressing themselves." These days men tend to be quite macho, but in 
the 80s male pop stars were beautifully androgynous, and androgyny was always 
very appealing to me.

What is your perfect love song? 

Hamburg Song – Keane

I've played that one a million times over. It's a theme for me, but if it 
features a man being exultative [sic] and emotional and hitting high notes, I'm 
a sucker for it. It's a man being vulnerable. Love it. Can't get enough.

What song would you want at your funeral?

Ave Maria – Aaron Neville 

My grandmother had this played at her funeral because she told me she wanted 
it, so I think I'll copy her on that one. I've heard 25 versions of Ave Maria 
but Aaron Neville's is my favourite. If people are going to be grieving, my 
feeling is that you should get the grief all the way out and naturally move on. 
I've decided I'm going to be 108 [when I die]. What will I do on my 107th 
birthday? I'll probably have some tequila shots and bounce my 
great-great-grandkids on my knee.

Time for the encore. One last song that makes you, you. 

Thank You – Alanis Morissette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette> 

I wrote it when I came back from India after the tour for Jagged Little Pill. 
It was the first time that I actually had space to think and process, and I 
wasn't claustrophobic and overcome and overwhelmed with too much stimuli. And I 
find that when I have time alone I immediately feel grateful. So Thank You was 
written from a place of stillness and that song captures the best possible 
version of me. If I want to recapture that moment, I play the song and it works 
every time.

• Listen to Alanis Morissette's Six Songs of Me.  
<http://www.sixsongsof.me/Playlist/SixSongs/Alanis.Morissette,28667,28591>
Her new album Havoc and Bright Lights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/album/c982b294-eb95-415c-80ca-5d071ab7c74a?INTCMP=ILCMUSTXT4891#post-area>
 is out now.
 