
The first thing I notice about Sjón <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sjon> 
is that he’s bleeding. As we shake hands outside a north London cafe, a 
bright-red drop beads on his upper lip, trembles for a moment, then spills. The 
sight is so surprising that it throws me completely: I exclaim; he apologises; 
we ditch the hellos and cast around for a tissue. He cut himself when he was 
shaving, he explains, hand held self-consciously to his mouth; just a nick, but 
sometimes they’re the worst. “Is it very bad?” he asks, with a mortified 
grimace. “Oh dear. Oh no. I’m so sorry.”

We are here to discuss Moonstone: The Boy Who Never Was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/26/moonstone-by-sjon-review>, 
Sjón’s 12th novel. Published in his native Iceland in 2013, it won him a clutch 
of prizes; the English translation, by his longtime collaboratorVictoria Cribb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/05/from-the-mouth-of-the-whale-review>
, has just come out. Set in Reykjavik in 1918 over the course of three 
epoch-making months that saw the conclusion of the first world war and the 
ushering-in of Icelandic independence, it tells the story of Mani Steinn: a 
16-year-old orphan, dyslexic, jobless and gay, who ekes out an existence on the 
edges of the city until the moment when the Spanish flu makes landfall, and its 
inhabitants begin to die. At under 150 pages, it’s a work of miniaturist 
perfection: a brief, brilliant jewel of a book in which each paragraph is 
precision-cut, each sentence burnished. But for all its intricacy,Moonstone 
poses questions about narrative – about the stories we choose to tell 
ourselves, and about ourselves – that extend far beyond its pages.

Mani, a pioneer movie buff, prefers to “spool [films] into himself” rather 
than to consider his own bleak, blank autobiography. The city’s elders, on the 
other hand – even those who’ve slept with him – attempt to airbrush Mani out of 
history after he’s caught in a clinch with a foreigner on the grounds that “the 
last thing people want to see at the dawn of the Icelandic sovereign state are 
headlines ... about a sodomy scandal”. In fact, just by writing the novel, Sjón 
says, he was engaging in an act of narrative disruption. “For 15 years I read 
everything I could about the Spanish flu in Iceland,” he says, “and it made me 
realise how very little had been written about it.” We’re seated, now: both 
with coffee; he with a handful of paper napkins. “In 1918 Reykjavik had a 
population of only 15,000; 10,000 fell ill and up to 300 died; up to 500 died 
in the country as a whole. It was the days of the plague. But before the flu 
arrived, the city had been rejoicing: the war was ending, and the nation was 
taking its last steps towards independence. It was one of those moments when 
everything seemed to happen at once.” So why the silence? “In part because it 
was very traumatic for a small town; everybody had family who died. But I 
believe it was also a political decision: to keep the moment of independence 
clean and clear. Those days were meant to be about triumph, not pain and 
suffering.”

Moonstone by Sjón review – a glittering fable of sex and cinema
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/26/moonstone-by-sjon-review> 
Born Sigurjón Birgir Sigurðsson in 1962, he adopted his pen name, meaning 
“vision”, when he published his first book. He was an only child, raised more 
or less single-handedly by his mother. His parents, he says, “were never in a 
relationship”; he saw very little of his father until the age of 10, or 
thereabouts, when he began to call on him on the way home from school. It’s 
tempting to heap Freudian significance on this absence, but that’s a reading 
Sjón briskly rejects. The setup, he explains, was nowhere near as noteworthy – 
or prejudicial – as it might have been elsewhere. Icelanders are used to single 
mothers; theirs is a society in which “traditionally the men were off, 
fishing”. His childhood was a happy one; he loved having his mother to himself.

A key fixture of those early years was the weekly library trip. He gorged on 
pulp fiction and boy-detective novels and felt himself entirely satisfied until 
the day when, mooching along his grandmother’s bookshelves, he picked up a 
collection of Icelandic folk stories. “I was bewitched,” he says. “There were 
ghosts and ghouls and hidden people, elves, trolls, giants – and ordinary folk 
encountering them day in, day out. I was fascinated by the idea that these 
things had actually happened, to people with the same names as our neighbours. 
It felt so close. This was my first lesson in literature: if you’re working 
with something fantastic, tell it straight.” And the second lesson? “Poetry. In 
Iceland, you’re given a big, thick volume of traditional poems at school, but 
it wasn’t until I discovered the Atom poets at 15 that I realised there was 
such a thing as contemporary poetry.” A group of modernists writing in 
Reykjavik in the 1950s, they “changed Icelandic poetry overnight. I was blown 
away that surrealism and free verse were allowed in our language. I immediately 
started trying myself.” He published his first collection later that year.

But hold on, I say. The world is filled with 15-year-old wannabe poets: how 
on earth did he get a publisher to take him seriously? “Well,” he smiles, “of 
course, I didn’t. But I’d been the editor of my school magazine. We printed it 
at a small press in Reykjavik, which happened to be the centre of the 
self-publishing movement. So when I had enough poems for a collection, I 
decided: I’m going to publish.”

And he did: paying for 100 copies with the wages from his weekend gardening 
job, and selling them in cafes, on the street, on his bus ride into town. “I 
lived in the suburbs, and the bus took 20 minutes to get to the city centre,” 
he says. “People were stuck with me. I just walked around asking, ‘Would you 
like to buy a book of poetry?’ I got rid of the first 100 quite quickly – so I 
had 50 more printed, and took them into bookstores, where the staff explained I 
had to send copies to newspapers if I wanted a review. By then I’d started the 
next collection; when I published that, I sent it out, and a couple of places 
did review it. That was the start. Nobody told me to stop, so I just kept 
going.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN8FJyhnC2Eo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN8FJyhnC2Eo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN8FJyhnC2Eo&media=>
 Björk sings ‘I’ve Seen It All’ (lyrics by Sjón) 
His work has now been translated into more than 40 languages. He was 
Oscar-nominated for his lyrics forLars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier>’s film Dancer in the Dark 
(2000) and won the Nordic Council literature prize (the Scandinavian equivalent 
of the Booker) for his fierce and twisted folktaleThe Blue Fox in 2005.

It’s a success story of the sort that wouldn’t look amiss in the pages of a 
business bible: progress through audacity, tenacity and a teenager’s blithe 
self-assurance. But it strikes me that, just as Iceland – its myths, landscape, 
history and language – underpins and infuses Sjón’s work, so you can’t separate 
his own story from his surroundings. The small community within which he was 
operating, so oppressive for his hero, Mani, was for Sjón a tremendous bonus. 
It fostered a spirit of collectivism that allowed a young boy to offload his 
poetry collection on to his fellow bus-passengers, prompted bookshop owners to 
give him advice, and lent significance to his sales. What’s more, as his turns 
as writer, publisher and publicist demonstrates, a small community requires 
everyone to upskill: you do it yourself, because the chances are that, if you 
don’t, there won’t be anyone around to do it for you.

It was for this reason, perhaps, that punk, with its DIY aesthetic, resonated 
so strongly with Sjón when it reached Iceland. Under its influence, he and a 
few friends founded “a small surrealist group called Medusa”. Some of them then 
formed a band, “and all of a sudden everything came together: the music, the 
poetry ... I read my poems at concerts, between sets. Because there were so few 
of us, we got used to collaborating: if someone needed a poster, you made the 
poster, you know? And if I wanted music in my poetry reading, someone would 
accompany me. From very early on we started working together.”

This sense of Iceland as a communal utopia in which everyone knows everyone 
else is cemented to a near-comic degree by Sjón’s friendship and collaboration 
with the country’s other great mononymous celebrity,Björk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork>. When she formed the Sugarcubes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/northern-souls-the-anarcho-punks-who-made-iceland-a-pop-powerhouse>
 in 1986, the lineup featured several musicians from Sjón’s old punk crowd. By 
this point his energies were elsewhere, but “I wrote this one song for them, 
‘Luftgitar’, which ended up being their biggest hit in Iceland, and for years I 
used to travel with them and perform it as an encore. I’m one of the few people 
in the world who’s had Björk as a backing singer.” When Björk went on to work 
with Von Trier onDancer in the Dark and the director was looking for a 
lyricist, it was Sjón’s name she put forward. “I hadn’t actually seen Lars’s 
films at the time,” he grins, “so I said, I’ll think about it. Then I watched
Breaking the Waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/breaking-waves-trier-arthouse> 
... Working with him was a very enjoyable experience – and interesting, because 
it was the first time I’d written lyrics that belonged to a character. I liked 
it so much I’ve written four opera librettos since.”

Again, that sense of multitasking; of turning your hand to whatever needs 
to be done. Sjón has had a truly renaissance career, and enjoyed every aspect 
of it, but now, at 53, he’s no longer in any doubt as to where his passion 
lies. “The novels are my real project. My mind is always there. I still write 
poetry once in a while, and the collaborations and commissions always bring 
something with them, but the novels are my bedrock. And Iceland is their 
bedrock. I think all good literature comes from small places, small parts of 
society, because that’s where the roles become visible, the social mechanism 
clear. There’s a limited readership in Iceland, which is why it’s been 
important to be translated and read abroad, because even though I’m writing 
about events in Icelandic history, I think I’m writing a bigger story.” He dabs 
at his lip again and looks down at the tissue: white. The bleeding has stopped. 
“Ultimately this is what I’ve got to work with,” he says, “what I’ve been 
given.”

• Moonstone: The Boy Who Never Was is published by Sceptre at £14.99. To order 
a copy for £11.99 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405800/s/moonstone-the-boy-who-never-was/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fsjon-bjork-moonstone-boy-who-never-was-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b705cd4891d7335ec5fc83900a8a8e63d4bb14f%2F0_61_3264_2111%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sj%C3%B3n%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20one%20of%20the%20few%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20had%20Bj%C3%B6rk%20as%20a%20backing%20singer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fsjon-bjork-moonstone-boy-who-never-was-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sj%C3%B3n%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20one%20of%20the%20few%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20had%20Bj%C3%B6rk%20as%20a%20backing%20singer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fsjon-bjork-moonstone-boy-who-never-was-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b705cd4891d7335ec5fc83900a8a8e63d4bb14f%2F0_61_3264_2111%2F3264.jpg>
 Stellan Skarsgård and Emily Watson in Breaking the Waves. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock  