
Sleeping over at Battersea Arts Centre <https://www.bac.org.uk/> was a dream. 
From the moment you step into BAC, you’re part of the family and, as an 
audience member, you feel directly connected to the incredible work that 
happens in its mansion-like building.

We arrived at Clapham Junction early, due mainly to pure excitement, and 
settled into BAC’s Scratch bar for a drink and a brownie. The bar looks as if 
it’s been kitted out with furniture from a side-alley shop in Camden. The 
mismatched chairs and tables took me back to my days in A-level art class. 
There’s a backstage feel, too: lights are rigged from the ceiling and it feels 
like an Aladdin’s cave for theatre lovers.

We stayed in one of the theatre’s newly designed artists’ bedrooms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/04/battersea-arts-centre-artist-bedroom-commisions>
. Our moss-green room, labelled the “posh room”, was designed by performance 
artist Victoria Melody, whose BAC shows have includedMajor Tom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/23/victoria-melody-dog-shows-beauty-pageants-major-tom>
, based on her experiences entering beauty contests and putting her basset 
hound into dog shows. The room’s decor ranged from a model boat encased in 
glass, an elaborate painting of a flower basket, an old oak wardrobe and a 
small double bed with an overhanging headboard. The room was cosy, just like 
the family atmosphere of BAC.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De32wpu2xguU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De32wpu2xguU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De32wpu2xguU&media=>
Ventoux, performed by 2Magpies <http://www.2magpiestheatre.co.uk/ventoux.php> 
theatre company in the members’ bar, was the first performance we saw. The 
piece explores the relationship between Lance Armstrong and Marco Pantani 
during the 12th stage of the Tour de France in 2000: the infamous Mont Ventoux. 
With the actors pedalling away on fixed bikes, it was a physically exhausting 
piece of theatre, oozing masculinity and technical genius as it revisited the 
race with the knowledge of how each man’s career – and life – played out.

Ventoux was staged as part of Leicester Curve’s takeover at BAC, which also 
includedRachael Young <https://rachaelyoung.net/>’s solo show I, Myself and Me, 
about being single in your 30s. I had high hopes for it after realising Young 
had been been inspired by working with the performance artist Stacy Makishi, a 
personal favourite of mine. The set was clever, the text was playful and 
poetic, the piece was complex and performed passionately.

How the nation's theatre reinvented itself | Lyn Gardner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/09/nations-theatre-reinvented-bac>
On day two, we were intrigued to see if Shannon Yee’s immersive audio 
performanceReassembled, Slightly Askew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/16/reassembled-slightly-askew-review-battersea-arts-centre>
 lived up to its reputation. The piece charts her recovery from a brain 
infection, and the audience listen while lying down in hospital-style beds. 
Documenting the day-to-day pain of living with her condition, it was leaps and 
bounds ahead of any immersive theatre I have experienced before.

A Nation’s Theatre festival <http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/> features 
performances all over London. A trip across town took us to the New Diorama 
theatre forIdle Motion’s Voyager <http://idlemotion.co.uk/news/voyager>. 
Inspired by space exploration, the show merged multimedia, intelligent set use 
(exhibiting a hint ofFrantic Assembly <http://www.franticassembly.co.uk/>) and 
dance-theatre. The performers were fluid at multi-roling and, among them, one 
actor shone through: Grace Chapman, as the protagonist, Carrie, showed enormous 
skill to engage the audience.


Saturday brought us our final theatre experience, back at BAC: Paradise Lost 
(lies unopened beside me) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/27/paradise-lost-ben-duke-review-dance>
 by Lost Dog. The show is described by its performer, Ben Duke, as a one-man 
contemporary dance reconstruction of John Milton’s epic. The piece was full of 
energy and aesthetically astounding but also offered a light, playful take on 
the story – a great finish to an incredible trip.
 