Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z3skx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z3skx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z3skx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The American teenager Sloane Stephens, against most expectations apart from 
her own, beat the world's best player Serena Williams in three sets here on 
Wednesday to not only reach the semi-finals of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> but ignite a bomb under 
women's tennis.

Stephens, who has never won a title of any kind, stands another shock away 
from reaching the final, and the defending champion and world No1 Victoria 
Azarenka will now be alerted to the scale of the challenge in their semi-final 
on Thursday.

Stephens won 3-6, 7-5, 6-4 on the Rod Laver Arena in two hours and 17 minutes 
of the most electric competition we have seen in the first 10 days of the 
tournament. Not evenNovak Djokovic's five hours and two minutes of pain to beat 
Stanislas Wawrinka 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/20/novak-djokovic-stanislas-wawrinka-australian-open>
 on Sunday could match it for drama. Williams, hobbled by a back spasm at the 
end of the second set that undoubtedly hindered her movement – and induced a 
bout of racket-bashing – could not quite hold off the challenge of her young 
compatriot, who played some magnificent tennis in the third. Some of her 
flat-racket ground-strokes were irresistible and she was not afraid to chip, 
dink or gamble in tight situations.

This was an historic tennis match. It announced the arrival of a young talent 
that had been bubbling under for a while. Stephens, had a tough two-setter 
earlier getting pastBritain's own prodigy Laura Robson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/19/laura-robson-defeat-australian-open>
, but nobody was prepared for the tennis she produced to defeat the best player 
here, the best player the game has seen since Martina Navratilova or Steffi 
Graf, perhaps the best player of all time.

"It's definitely tougher playing someone like Laura Robson," Stephens said, 
"because here you don't have anything to lose." She is the first American 
teenager into the semi-final of a slam since Serena at the US Open in 2001. 
That's a pointed cycle of change. Her challenge is to remain focused. It would 
not seem to be a problem. "I was just enjoying myself," Stephens said. "It's 
going to be tough against the world No1 but I've just got to do my thing."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z3usx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z3usx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z3usx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Williams took a close first set, when Stephens missed a forehand and could not 
handle a swinging serve down the middle. All looked as if going to plot.

However, a close struggle in the second culminated in a clearly troubled 
Williams netting a regulation forehand from the baseline and the crowd went 
crazy. The end was fuelled with emotion. Williams, 15-40 down on serve, looked 
to be moving Stephens across the baseline but her fading backhand gave up on 
her and the ball dribbled weakly into the middle of the net.

Stephens snapped Williams's 20-win streak (her longest since the 2002 and 2003 
season) and there were plenty of witnesses who are not writing her off to 
produce another upset against Azarenka, who early came through a demanding 
start to beat the unseeded, but still dangerous, Svetlana Kuznetsova 7-5, 6-1 
in an hour and 47 minutes.

Williams, seeded three but the hottest of favourites at the start of the 
fortnight, was not exactly climbing on the Stephens bandwagon afterwards, 
however, which betrayed her undying competitive spirit. They have a little 
recent history, though, after a run-in at the Brisbane tournament when the 
court-side microphone heard Stephens complain to her coach,"This 'come on' 
thing, it's disrespectful." 
<http://www.changeovertennis.com/video-sloane-stephens-calls-serena-williams-come-ons-disrespectful/>

Williams acknowledged her conqueror's achievement but would not commit to 
being her mentor (understandably, given she is hardly ready for the exit 
herself.) And her judgment of Stephens's performance and prospects here? 
Measured, rather than ecstatic. "She's a good player. She runs fast and she 
gets a lot of balls back. That's always a plus."

She thought, rightly, that Stephens tightened up in sight of levelling the 
match, although she held on well enough, when Williams returned from her injury 
break at the end of the second set.

"I definitely felt like she got a little nervous, which is natural," Williams 
said. "You know, it's her first quarter-final. She had a chance to tie it at 
one-set all. I've had a tough two weeks between the ankle, which is like this 
big every day, and my back, which started hurting. A lot of stuff."

Chris Evert, working for ESPN, observed: "You could see the strain on Serena's 
face. This is the first time that one young opponent, and an American, had 
threatened her. I thought it would happen, but not in this match. The Williams 
sisters came up when they were 16, 17 years old. Now it's Stephens. She was 
bold, fearless. It's a hurtful loss for Serena, but a big day for tennis."

Brad Gilbert, Andy Murray's former coach, said, "Stephens came forward on big 
shots and that's what won her the match. American ladies tennis is going to be 
back, after a long time. We haven't had it in the men's, we've got in the 
women's, big-time. Sloane didn't read the script. She kept her composure but 
there's still work to be done."

Stephens said later: "Her serve was affected definitely but she was still 
hitting pretty good off the ground. I served for the second set, I was nervous 
yeah, but I just kind of played through it. In the third set, I was just trying 
to focus on me, really."

What of Serena's racket bashing? "I've seen her do it before but this is 
tennis, it happens. She's still going to play, smashed racket or not. You're 
playing Serena, one of the best competitors in the world. Now you're going to 
have to play harder."

She was monumentally cool about the magnitude of what she had just done. "I 
looked at my coach and he was eating a chicken sandwich. I said to Serena [at 
the net], 'Good match, well played.' I say the same thing every time. She just 
said good match."

The words that matter there are "every time". This will not be the last time 
we see Stephens celebrating a big win at a big tournament. Make no mistake, a 
star is born.
 