
The Holbeck Underground Ballroom in Leeds – otherwise known as the Hub 
<http://www.slunglow.org/holbeck-underground-ballroom-hub/hub-2/> – may not be 
the only performance space in the country where you are always greeted by the 
artistic director or programmer, but it is definitely the only theatre where 
you will also be handed a blanket and a One Direction hot water bottle to keep 
you warm.

Why British theatre should embrace the great outdoors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/23/why-british-theatre-should-embrace-the-great-outdoors>
Situated in railway arches close to the city centre, in an area untouched by 
regeneration, the Hub is the home ofSlung Low 
<http://www.slunglow.org/about-us/slung-low/>, a company that must be judged 
not just on the quality of work that it makes – which isvery high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/oct/21/regional-theatre-something-to-be-proud-of>
 and includes shows such as Blood and Chocolate, the spectacularThe White Whale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/08/the-white-whale-review-moby-dick>
, or the recentCamelot: The Shining City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/15/camelot-the-shining-city-review-slung-low-crucible-sheffield-revolution-theatre>
 made with Sheffield People’s Theatre – but also on the way that it offers a 
different model for how a funded theatre company might operate and what its 
purpose might be.

One of the things that distinguishes the Hub is the way it seeks innovative 
solutions to challenges: the everyday practical ones, and the wider 
philosophical ones about the purpose of theatre. When it became clear that 
audiences needed something to keep them warm while watching a show, the hot 
water bottles purchased as a cheap job lot proved an unusual but effective 
solution.

We were talking about acts of kindness and generosity earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/28/theatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company>
 in relation to Derby theatre and its caring relationship with artists at the 
start of their career. I reckon that the Slung Low model is also worth 
investigating, particularly at a time when so many companies, buildings and 
institutions still seem to see their own continued survival as a prime 
motivator for what they do, rather than looking to the way that they can share 
what they’ve got, thinking about how they can be more useful to the communities 
that they serve, and questioning the way that theatre traditionally operates.
 The ringmaster... Alan Lane, artistic director of Slung Low. 
As Slung Low’s artistic director Alan Lane says: “If, like us, you are a 
publicly funded company, you have to ask what that money is for and what is the 
best use for it. We are never going to make aWar Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/19/how-we-made-war-horse> and make 
millions of pounds, we’re not that kind of company. We have to think of how we 
are useful in other ways, most particularly to the people ofHolbeck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/leeds/2010/sep/28/a-whirlwind-tour-of-wonderful-holbeck>
 and justify to them why we get £99,000 from the Arts Council.”

This is rather refreshing in a theatre world where not everyone sees subsidy 
as the privilege it undoubtedly is, or understands that it must be shared and 
directed to where it can make the greatest impact. This isn’t just fine talk 
either. Turn up at the Hub and you may be fed more than art: there are 27 baths 
dotted around the site that serve as allotments for fruit and veg used to make 
shared meals. It also hosts a writers group and a weekly choir and there are 
two annual free festivals where you can see art but also make it.

The Hub hosts bi-weekly, pay what you can afford performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/dec/10/pay-what-you-decide-theatre-arc-stockton>
, and even the bar prices are low: a beer or a glass of wine only costs £1, 
because as Lane points out there is no point in telling local people that they 
can come to shows and pay what they can afford (which may be nothing) and then 
try to turn a tidy profit on the bar. That’s not the way to win the trust of 
people, particularly local people who may not much spare money or lots of 
experience of going to the theatre.

Why every artist should be a community artist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/25/why-every-artist-should-be-a-community-artist>
Slung Low make up to nine shows a year all across the country, but as far as 
Lane is concerned, the Hub is “micro-local”. That means it is concentrated on 
the needs of Holbeck, rather than being Leeds-focused. But of course it is the 
truly local that often translates into the more universal.

Slung Low doesn’t have a traditional structure: anybody who works for the 
company in any capacity earns the same £95 per day and it has an advisory board 
made up of local people, not thetraditional board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2010/feb/25/northcott-theatre-exeter-board>
 stuffed full of local dignitaries, lawyers or people with some dosh. “This 
company is built on the blood, sweat and tears of artists, so why hand it over 
and put the power of decision making in the hands of some bloke from 
Santander?” says Lane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fslung-low-hub-leeds-artists-audiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438176376479%2Fd75516c9-7ed4-48c6-ad37-91b11d938dfd-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slung%20Low's%20utopia%20for%20artists%20and%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fslung-low-hub-leeds-artists-audiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slung%20Low%27s%20utopia%20for%20artists%20and%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fslung-low-hub-leeds-artists-audiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438176376479%2Fd75516c9-7ed4-48c6-ad37-91b11d938dfd-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Camelot: The Shining City, a Slung Low co-production with Sheffield People’s 
Theatre. Photograph: Mark Douet 
Because of where they are situated and the kind of work they make, it’s 
unlikely that they would attract the sort of philanthropy that the current 
government so believes in. But they can attract labour on the allotment.

In fact the idea of value based on more than money chimes with the kind of 
thinking around alternative economics and networked activity increasingly 
pointed to as the future, by people like Paul Mason. Over the years the theatre 
company has accumulated a lot of stuff and if they’ve got something then they 
share it, mostly for free. If you’ve got a van, then why not insure it so 
others can borrow it when they need it? If you’ve got an office, why not share 
it with others? Slung Low does all this. There is accommodation for visiting 
artists, those making shows and even for those performing in other theatres in 
Yorkshire who can’t afford to pay for somewhere to sleep.

Slung Low reckon they should only go on for as long as they feel that they are 
needed in Holbeck and have the energy to deliver. When they don’t, then they 
should pack up, give back the £99,000, go and do something else and let others 
with a vision and energy have their chance to do something.

“West Yorkshire Playhouse <https://www.wyp.org.uk/> is a building and because 
of that it has to invest in making sure it carries on,” Lane says. “We don’t. 
It puts us in a really privileged position and it allows us to constantly ask 
why we are here at all. We have a flexibility and a freedom and that brings a 
responsibility. What we’re doing is not the only model, but it is one and it 
works for us... What is a theatre company for, why should it be funded and what 
value does it add?”

It’s a question that every subsidised company and building should be asking 
themselves every single day. Because as local authority and government cutsbite 
deep 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/regional-theatre-fears-catastrophic-aftershock-funding-cuts/>
, survival may depend on finding the answers.
 