
Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> is selling its loss-making 
photo business to Photo-Me International for about £5.4m in cash as the 
supermarket chain reduces the number of services it offers directly in its 
stores.

Photo-Me will buy 191 Asda in-store photo centres and 172 self-service kiosks 
and operate the supermarket’s online photo-processing service. It will pay 
£3.35m for the business and will also buy about £2m of stock.

The world’s biggest photobooth operator will manage the sites as concessions 
in stores for 10 years and pay commission to Asda. Employees at the photo 
division will work for Photo-Me after the deal is finalised in October.

Asda is getting rid of surplus services such as in-store pizza-making as it 
seeks to reverseplunging sales at its main grocery business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/walmart-asda-rejects-price-war-after-eighth-quarter-of-decline>
. The Walmart-owned chain has faced intense competition from Aldi, Lidl and a 
revived Tesco amid an ongoing price war between food retailers.

Photo-processing had already been earmarked for the chop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/asda-to-cut-up-to-750-jobs> 
by Asda, with Photo-Me saying in April it was interested in buying the 
business, which lost £3.4m last year on sales of £19.3m. Photo-Me said it 
expected to increase sales by installing better equipment, revamping layouts 
and introducing new products.

Serge Crasnianski, Photo-Me’s chief executive, said: “This is an interesting 
opportunity to significantly expand our UK business in a strong set of 
locations and increase our market share in the digital photo printing market, 
which we believe has growth potential in the digital age.”


Photo-Me’s main business is operating photobooths and digital printing kiosks. 
It trades in 17 countries and has 6,600 photobooths in the UK. Underlying 
pre-tax profit rose 15% to a record £40.1m last year, helped by demand for 
photos for an identity card in Japan.
 