
"I can't remember a time when I didn't know Smokey Robinson's voice, because I 
grew up hearing his music in the house and in the culture. Other Motown voices 
were very gospel-influenced, whereas his has a pathos, this crying vibrato, 
which gives it a really intimate sound. There's space in between each part of 
the note and incredible delicacy in the way he turns phrases. Sam Cooke had 
that, too. I heard him recentlysinging the Norah Jones song 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VklI___xkrQ> Don't Know Why, and in his hands 
it seemed a much deeper, more poignant and sad song. When he sang 'don't know 
why I didn't come' it had a real sadness to it that isn't in the original. It 
was great to see he still has his phrasing and his timing.

"You sometimes get a singer who is an amazing interpreter, or you get a writer 
working behind the scenes, but to have the two together and still keep that 
kind of innocence is very special. As a songwriter he can put across something 
that's very simple but heartfelt.You Really Got a Hold on Me  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y2EsZpobWJs>is an incredible song. The melody 
and the lyrics are really insistent but the softness in his voice balances it 
out. 'All I want you to do is just hold meâ€¦' It stands for all time. Then 
there's 'I don't like you, but I love you.' What a line! The melodic structure 
of that line is like one person answering the other. It's incredible writing.

"He's a true American heartthrob. He's vulnerable, but in being vulnerable 
he's very sexual as well. It's the kind of sexuality that comes across as being 
really tender and winning, and that's something that his songs and his voice 
have. It's also part of his physicality. He's slender, with light skin and 
those green eyes. Just amazing to see.

"It's miraculous to me that he's also a producer and record executive. He 
comes across as this romantic balladeer, and you can't imagine him knowing 
about the machinations of the record company or how to place a song with an 
artist, but he's obviously very savvy. It's incredible how he holds both those 
things together.

"The one thing I'd want to take from his music, if I were able to drink it 
consciously into my own, is the tenderness and vulnerability. That's a real 
challenge. When you sing a love song you don't want it to be too sweet, you 
want it to have a certain amount of pain and resilience. I don't think you can 
learn it, but it's wonderful to observe it in his music."

Key recording: Going to a Go-Go (Motown, 1965)
 