
Ten years on from the teenage punk-pop herberts who frothed nothing but Star 
Wars analogies and lived on psychedelic drugs, andAsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash> are finally grown-ups. They know this 
for the following reasons: two of them are now engaged (Tim Wheeler, 27, and 
Rick McMurray, 29), two own cars (Tim and Rick), one has taken up yoga, which 
is "fucking agony" (Charlotte Hatherly, 24) and one has "started drinking 
whisky" (Mark Hamilton, 27).

"Oh," adds Mark, Ash's kamikaze bass player, "and I've got a shotgun." 

"That's a really bad idea," balks Rick, Ash drummer and rock'n' roll 
professor, "for an unstable bass player."

"Well, we're all home-owners now," protests Mark. "If someone broke into your 
house I think you should have the right to decapitate them. I've got a two-bit 
axe by my bed [indicates three-foot-tall axe]. Full-on Lord Of The Rings."

Rick: "If this album does really well, you can pay for a dwarf to wield it... "

It's 10am in the swish public cafe of the Royal Institute Of British 
Architects and Ash are in chipper form. "Everything," grins songsmith Tim, 
indie's own Peter Pan, "is fucking great." Fourth album Meltdown is a chunky, 
melodic stormer, flagged by irresistible single Orpheus. "Sun-shiiine in the 
mawnin'!" trills a chorus of dancing tulips and the world's collective kettle 
switches itself on.

These days, the sometime galactic gonzo-kids write music for George Lucas, 
soundtracking a forthcoming LucasArts videogame. Charlotte, Britain's most 
celebrated axe-fox (who joined Ash in 1997), releases her debut solo album this 
August, produced and co-written by PJ Harvey musicians Eric Drew Feldman and 
Rob Ellis.

Mere days ago, the ever-touring Ash played the Californian Coachella Festival 
where they gawped, awestruck, at the resurrection of childhood heroes, the 
Pixies. Even better, Ash are now personally Pixies-anointed: chosen to support 
the Boston doyens in Paris and Berlin next month.

Today, they're support-band veterans to the giants of global stage, from David 
Bowie ("he's a bit like an embarrassing uncle") to Coldplay. Ash were the only 
people invited to Chris Martin's stag do.

"Mel's Diner on Sunset Strip," recalls Rick, "at three in the afternoon, out 
for a milkshake."

Tim: "He was the only one who knew it was his stag do. He's bonkers. He hadn't 
even told his parents he was getting married the next day."

Rick: "Two days later we realised that was his stag do. Imagine his biography! 
He's rewritten the whole thing, and it'd still be madder than Keith Moon's. 
It'll probably come in colouring-book format."

People, generally, approve of Ash, buoyed through a decade by a tide of public 
goodwill. Why, other than the music, might this be?

"I think," decides Rick, "we're just decent human beings." 

Teenage school-pals from Downpatrick, near Belfast, Ash were the UFO darting 
over Britpop's magic carpet, their mid-1990s singles a greatest hits of 
consistently sublime, power pop melodic brilliance: Kung Fu, Girl From Mars, 
Angel Interceptor, Goldfinger, Oh Yeah. Their 1996 debut album, 1977 (the year 
of Tim, Mark and Star Wars' birth) skylarked to No 1, selling one million 
copies.

Everything, immediately, fell apart; LSD-induced nervous breakdowns (Mark), 
near-bankruptcy in 1998 (no one bought metal-hawk album Nu-Clear Sounds), 
writer's block unshifted by six months on ecstasy in Suffolk (Tim). Ash 
responded to their almighty "kick in the balls" with the self-financed single 
Shining Light, Ivor Novello song-writing winner in 2001. "Never get 
complacent," avers Tim, "never take yourself too seriously."

Ten years in the rock'n'roll cocoon and there's a word for the likes of Ash... 
"A ward," chortles Tim, "a medical ward! Um... survivors?" Institutionalised.

"I've thought that quite a lot actually," nods Rick. "It's fear of reality. We 
were talking about that on Mark's birthday, and The Shawshank Redemption came 
up. The guy who gets out of prison, withers away and kills himself 'cos he 
can't deal with anything else. Can't take the freedom. If the band splits up, 
that'll be us. Hanging by a noose with a baby bird strangled in our hands."

There's a phrase, too, which sums up this physical, mental and emotionally 
stunting belief system: "fucked by rock." "Because you're not forced to grow 
up," surmises Rick, "or take responsibility for anything. I'm a drummer. 
Traditionally dead by 32. John Bonham, Keith Moon. Enjoy it while it lasts." 
Mark contemplates the daily supplements he has to take for his creaking, 
27-year-old joints, pulverised by years of pogoing. "Your knees start to go... "

Tim has an appointment today with a Harley Street doctor for the jip in his 
lower back. "Third time it's happened, nasty," he winces. "I was in agony at 
Coachella, shooting pains down my left leg, I'm in physio now. It's just 
sitting on planes every day, carrying stuff, everything. Fucked by rock! 
Actually, I was shagging Lee Chapman... "

Ash look around at the 21st century and see pop culture driven by "a machine". 
Celebrity culture gives us "drones for fame". Charlotte, reluctantly, is one 
half of a cult-celebrity couple, girlfriend of Edgar Wright, founder of telly's 
surrealist caper Spaced - alongside Simon Pegg - and director of the pair's 
debut film, Shaun Of The Dead. Charlotte's actress mum, a sometime Carry On 
girl, was cajoled "out of retirement" and offered a starring role. "She gets 
shot in the head," lilts Charlotte, "and called a 'cockacidal maniac'. She had 
a great time."

If Charlotte is Ash's Marianne Faithfull without the heroin, Mark is their 
Keith Richards, without the in-built kryptonite girders. Surviving his teenage 
breakdown via beta-blockers and anti-depressants, he's endured subsequent years 
of booze-induced physical wreckage: a cracked rib, two broken feet, a collapsed 
lung. Two years ago in Switzerland he was saved, sort of, by falling off the 
roof of a trailer while pretending to be Darth Vadar.

"I probably should've died," he muses. "I landed on my head. But I was lucky. 
The doctor said if I hadn't been so drunk I would've tensed up and broken my 
neck. A big wake-up call, that you're not immortal. I'm nowhere near as 
reckless. I'm probably... much more content."

So, too, is Tim, finally engaged to his girlfriend of the last five years. 
"She fits all my ideals," he swoons, sweetly. Nonetheless, for the last 10 
years, Tim has been Britain's No 1 indie-gay poster-boy. Before they were 
signed, then a three-piece managed by a gay man, they were marketed, grins Tim, 
"almost as rent boys". Promotional T-shirts bore the porn-inspired slogans 
"Three Boy Hardcore Action", "Domination Teenage Bisexual", "Guaranteed Real 
Teenagers". Rick took to wearing pink PVC bondage tape on-stage, purchased from 
Ann Summers.

"We played GAY [famed London gay club-night] after boozing for three hours," 
says Rick, "and we were terrible. We covered Does Your Mother Know with Bjorn 
Again, who were on too, standing at the side, pissed off."

Tim: "Luckily, we destroyed it. Thank God it was covered up by a big balloon 
drop... We were young jailbait. And that's sort of stayed. Now Charlotte's a 
dykon."

All the Ash boys have cats. Very fashionable, and possibly gay, cats. 

"We've got cat jackets over there," chirps Rick. Mark rummages in Rick's 
backpack, pulling forth what appears to be a black, cotton windsock with two 
arms poking out the front. It's a Lucasfilm promotional cat-coat. "The head 
pops out there," says Mark, wrestling it along his hand.

"But I draw the line," notes Rick, "at getting a lead. Walking down the road 
with a cat on a leash wearing a fucking hat and a Lucasfilm jumper. Jesus 
Christ."

Only once before, in popular culture, has such cat-fashion lunacy been 
sighted: pegged on a washing line in Romford, in 1986, a sparkly-blue, 
four-limbed jump-suit featuring the word "PUPPY" in silver sequins. Puppy the 
cat belonged to 1980s pop group Five Star (before the one called Steadman, 
sadly, ran him over in the family driveway).

Where Five Star perished, Ash frolic on - incarcerated, happily, in the 
greatest institution on Earth. Today has been rare, an Ash day off, a 
day-release trip to this cruel, outside world. Then again... "Edgar's just come 
back from LA," glimmers Charlotte, rockly, "so now I'm going home for a shag."

Â· Ash's album Meltdown is out on Monday. Their nationwide tour starts May 25
 