
The winner

When is a film preview not a preview but in fact a full release that's 
pretending to be something else? The question came up when Bad Neighbours 
"previewed" every single day from Saturday 3 May, before "opening" on Friday 9 
May. And it arises again with the case ofTransformers: Age of Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/transformers-age-of-extinction>, which is set 
to open this Thursday, 10 July. That official release date now seems a moot 
point, since it began previewing on Saturday 5 July, and continues to do so.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FS30VkLn5a2o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FS30VkLn5a2o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FS30VkLn5a2o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S30VkLn5a2o>

Since Age of Extinction has not yet officially opened in the UK, the film is 
absent from the box-office chart (see below). Instead, the six days of previews 
will be added to the next official reporting period (11-13 July) and included 
in the film's opening-weekend number next week. According to trade reports, Age 
of Extinction in fact picked up £4.7m on Saturday and Sunday, enough to power 
the film comfortably to the top of the current UK weekend chart.

The previous Transformers film, 2011's Dark of the Moon, generated a similar 
£4.2m in previews, although these were earned on the Wednesday/Thursday 
immediately prior to release. The previews helped Dark of the Moon open with 
£10.73m (a five-day figure). Since Age of Extinction will ultimately appear 
with box office correlating to nine days of play in cinemas, we can expect its 
debut number to land far north of Dark of the Moon's.

Distributor Paramount agrees that England's early exit from the World Cup is a 
factor in its aggressive strategy, encouraging more days of previews than might 
otherwise have been the case. The tactic has also ensured six days of play for 
Age of Extinction before most UK newspapers review in their print editions this 
Friday 11 July – this may have been a consideration, or just an accidental 
consequence, felicitous or otherwise.

The runner-up

Nestling at No 4 in the official UK/Ireland box-office chart is How to Train 
Your Dragon 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/how-to-train-your-dragon-2>, 
with weekend takings of £475,000, as it continues its run in Scotland, Ireland 
and Northern Ireland. However, according to reports, the film really took £2.6m 
at the weekend, including Friday-Sunday previews in England and Wales. 
Cumulative box-office for Dragon 2, per the official chart, is £1.46m. In fact, 
total box-office earned so far, including all the previews in England and 
Wales, is believed to be £5.8m. The extra £4.3m will be added in next time, 
which will send Dragon 2 shooting up the box-office chart.

This peculiar reporting policy ensures that Mrs Brown's Boys D'Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mrs-browns-boys-movie> holds on to 
the top spot for a second weekend, leading a weak field in which no other film 
cracked £1m in takings.

The debutant

Can Melissa McCarthy open a movie? The breakout ensemble player in 
Bridesmaids, McCarthy bounced directly into movie vehicles created to develop 
her as a leading actress: Identity Thief, with Jason Bateman, and The Heat, 
with Sandra Bullock. Now, withTammy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tammy>, 
McCarthy moves to centre-screen, in a film she co-wrote (with husband Ben 
Falcone, who directs) and produces (with Will Ferrell and Adam McKay).

Backers New Line/Warner Bros have done their best to position Tammy as a 
mainstream, laugh-packed Melissa McCarthy comedy, effectively exploiting the 
film's notable comedy set piece in a trailer. Viewed in this context, the 
film's £466,000 UK opening from 338 cinemas is a significant disappointment. 
Identity Thief began with £1.31m including £111,000 in previews. The Heat 
kicked off with £2.5m, including £910,000 in previews.

An alternative view is that Tammy is not, in fact, a mainstream, laugh-packed 
Melissa McCarthy comedy. Had the film been made by, say Fox Searchlight, and 
positioned as a quirky US comedy road movie, box-office expectations may have 
been more appropriately modest. Tammy shares three actors (Toni Collette, 
Allison Janney and Nat Faxon) with Fox Searchlight's The Way Way Back. That 
film opened last August with £532,000 from 307 cinemas, including £132,000 in 
previews.

The arthouse market

If your local independent cinema is playing mainstream fare, don't be too 
surprised. There are no arthouse films in the top 10, unless you count Jon 
Favreau's crossover indie comedyChef <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chef>, 
in seventh place. Landing at No 11 is Swedish dark comedy The 100-Year-Old Man 
Who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared, with an OK £103,000 from 86 sites. 
Normally, you'd expect a film in specialised play to debut with a screen 
average of £2,000-plus, but recently that's rarely been the case. The 
100-Year-Old Man is adapted from the novel by Sweden's Jonas Jonasson. Indie 
crime drama Cold in July, in 13th place, falls 64% from the previous weekend. 
Belle, a place below it, drops 51%.

A bewildering profusion of fresh contenders (see Other openers, below) fought 
for oxygen but struggled to present themselves as must-see theatrical 
propositions. Lisle Turner's Herefordshire-set Here and Now picked up some 
encouraging reviews but phrases including "creditable feature debut" and 
"heartfelt and good-looking film" (both the Guardian) were evidently not 
received by cinemagoers as an urgent call to action, and a gross of £1,255 from 
three cinemas resulted. Spanish time-travel comedy The Year and the Vineyard 
seemed to lack obvious selling points, and managed just £311 from a single 
venue.

Two more-mainstream offerings nestle at the very foot of the Other openers 
chart: Goddess and Vampire Academy. The former, featuring Ronan Keating's 
big-screen debut, grossed £129 from four cinemas. The latter, receiving a token 
release after a disappointing US result in February, managed £111 from a single 
venue. Vampire Academy did not appear on the Film Distributors Associates' 
official list of July 4 cinema releases, and was not reviewed by newspaper 
critics. Since the theatrical outing does not appear to have been conceived to 
generate extra publicity ahead of next Monday's DVD release, it's possibly a 
contractual obligation.

The future

Thanks to the exclusion of extensive Age of Extinction and Dragon 2 previews, 
the official UK box-office has hit a predictable low point: the lowest tally 
for the top 15 films since the middle of October 2013 (a weekend where no film 
managed £1m), and the second-worst-grossing frame of the past year. Next week, 
box office should bounce back in spectacular fashion, with the arrival of 
Transformers, the nationwide expansion of Dragon, plus the addition of all 
those juicy preview numbers. Two indie alternatives also look enticing: Begin 
Again, from Once director John Carney; and Richard Linklater's innovative 
Boyhood, filmed over 12 years. Buzzy Boyhood, in particular, is almost certain 
to revive the sickly arthouse sector.

Top 10 films July 4-6

1. Mrs Brown's Boys D'Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mrs-browns-boys-movie>, £2,188,761 
from 529 sites. Total: £9,299,344

2. The Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fault-in-our-stars>, £961,640 from 506 
sites. Total: £8,605,638

3. 22 Jump Street <https://www.theguardian.com/film/22-jump-street>, £663,228 
from 403 sites. Total: £16,554,354

4. How to Train Your Dragon 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/how-to-train-your-dragon-2>, £475,270 from 
136 sites. Total: £1,459,256

5. Tammy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tammy>, £471,429 from 338 sites 
(New)

6. Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, £448,697 from 437 
sites. Total: £17,364,817

7. Chef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/29/chef-review-jon-favreau-tasty-food-movie>
, £192,601 from 339 sites. Total: £1,099,247

8. Walking on Sunshine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walking-on-sunshine>, 
£160,402 from 330 sites. Total: £890,844

9. X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, £118,008 from 204 
sites. Total: £26,856,504

10. Edge of Tomorrow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-edge-of-tomorrow>, 
£115,500 from 158 sites. Total: £7,601,860

Other openers

The 100-Year-Old Man Who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared, £102,570 
(including £6,818 previews) from 86 sites

Don Giovanni: Glyndebourne, £32,205 from 57 sites (live event)

Bobby Jasoos, £30,754 from 30 sites

The Anomaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/03/the-anomaly-review-noel-clarke>, 
£17,712 from 63 sites

Cycling with Molière 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/06/cycling-with-moliere-review-fabrice-luchini-french-comedy>
, £12,683 from 22 sites

A Hard Day's Night <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-hard-day-s-night>, 
£9,935 from 10 sites (rerelease)

Mr Morgan's Last Love <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-morgans-last-love>, 
£9,585 from four sites

Lekar Hum Deewana Dil, £6,697 from 20 sites

Arima Nambi, £1,325 from four sites

Here and Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/03/here-and-now-review-teen-romance-lisle-turner-lauren-johns>
, £1,255 from three sites

Love Eternal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/03/love-eternal-review-brendan-muldowney-robert-de-hoog>
, £866 from one site

The Year and the Vineyard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/03/the-year-and-vineyard-review-spain-time-travel>
, £311 from one site

Goddess <https://www.theguardian.com/film/goddess>, £129 from four sites

Vampire Academy, £111 from one site

Thanks to Rentrak

• More from Charles Gant's UK box office analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/at-the-british-box-office>
 