
I can't understand the critical mauling that the superb Keeley Hawes has 
received playing DI Alex Drake onAshes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes>. Is it just good old 
fashioned sexism?

I watched last night and thought that Ms Hawes was very good indeed, but the 
press have taken agin.

 Girl on Film: Keeley Hawes in Ashes To Ashes

Even the Sun's star TV critic Ally Ross 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/columnists/ally_ross/article556133.ece>
 - normally so solid you can set your PVR by him - has listed Alex Drake under 
his random TV irritations for "ruining nearly every scene". The Daily Mirror's
Jim Shelley 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/showbiz/tv/shelleyvision/2008/02/12/ashes-to-ashes-a-rehash-89520-20316601/>
 has also had a go. So didSam Wollaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/feb/08/television.tvandradioarts> in 
the Guardian.

Why? She provoked a wildly adverse reaction in the first episode last week, 
but based on last night, Keeley did a very good job. We are not really meant to 
like her character all that much. A piece of posh totty too knowing for her own 
good whose brittle protective shell is bound to crack. And yup, it's all down 
to a totally dysfunctional relationship with her mother, who has just made her 
grand appearance.

If the series must by criticised, what about its plot? Last night's Docklands 
bombing story plot was perfunctory - just an excuse to get the cast out and 
about so we can wallow in a bit of 1980s nostalgia. But while the programme 
looks like the 1980s - it is not good enough to make it feel like the 1980s.

My beef with Ashes to Ashes is that it doesn't suck us in. We never forget 
that we are watching a post-modern high concept TV show. Compare this to The 
Singing Detective, for example.

Which makes for an enjoyable romp, but the thought that Hawes is ruining it is 
way over the top.

It is not that good to begin with.
 