
Like Odysseus and his stout companions, Ange Postecoglou and the Socceroos have
safely navigated their first hazard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/socceroos-off-to-winning-start-with-victory-over-iraq-in-world-cup-qualifier>
 on the long and arduous journey to Russia 2018 and a fourth consecutive World 
Cup appearance.

More Sirens than Cyclops perhaps, Iraq gently invited Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> to dash themselves on the 
rocks of their own expectations, rather than setting upon the hosts with raw 
bone-crunching power.

That the Socceroos for the best part of an hour were stymied and frustrated by 
their opponents however still warns of the challenges ahead; if they’re to meet 
Postecoglou’s demands – not just for good results, but for an exciting, 
attacking brand of football – then much improvement still needs to take place.

In Perth, Australia were at times ponderous in possession, careless in 
execution and lacking venom during key moments in attack. In the first half 
especiallyIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iraq> appeared 
well-drilled, composed and patient – happy to parry and counterpunch when 
possible.

Australia beat Iraq in World Cup 2018 qualifying – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/01/australia-v-iraq-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live>
But for two headers – one from Mathew Leckie was the best possible from an 
innocuous situation, the other from Mile Jedinak innocuous from the best 
possible opening – Australia hardly disturbed the Iraqi goal, despite the 
lion’s share of possession and territory.

With Ali Abbas and captain Saad Abdulameer working hard in midfield to harry 
the Australians, and a high defensive line contracting the space for 
ballplayers like Aaron Mooy or Tom Rogic to operate within, Australia huffed 
and puffed but were largely ineffectual in posing Iraq serious problems 
defensively.

For their part, Iraq were ultimately self-defeating. In looking primarily to 
stifle Australia’s attacking outlets – drafting Suad Natiq to shadow Rogic, 
burdening the attacking talents of Ali Adnan or Ali Hisny with more defensive 
responsibilities, and leaving Justin Meram isolated up front – they largely 
neutered their own attack, content to feed on the crumbs of errors or 
quarter-chances.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Faustralia-win-against-iraq-world-cup-qualifier-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20win%202-0%20against%20Iraq%20in%20World%20Cup%20qualifier%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Faustralia-win-against-iraq-world-cup-qualifier-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20win%202-0%20against%20Iraq%20in%20World%20Cup%20qualifier%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Faustralia-win-against-iraq-world-cup-qualifier-video-highlights&media=>
Australia win 2-0 against Iraq in World Cup qualifier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/01/australia-win-against-iraq-world-cup-qualifier-video-highlights>
As the second half progressed the Socceroos eventually broke their visitors’ 
resistance, not only fair reward on the balance of play, but also instructive 
in the ever-ongoing search for post-Cahill attacking solutions. Tomi Juric’s 
miss in the 56th minute was as awful an error as any striker has ever conjured 
– the type that haunts a player’s ceiling, at 3am, night after harrowing night.

More importantly though was the former Western Sydney Wanderers player’s 
response. Within 90 seconds he’d manufactured a wicked cross for Massimo Luongo 
to tap home; and within seven minutes he’d found the net himself.

For seemingly as long as Postecoglou has been in the job the ever-nagging 
narrative has been the glaring need to find a source of goals that isn’t Tim 
Cahill-sized. Prior to kick off Australia’s all-time lead goalscorer boasted 47 
goals in 91 appearances. Between them Robbie Kruse, Leckie and Juric had made 
exactly 91 appearances for a return of nine goals.

And in case you thought Cahill’s phenomenal goal tally was a leftover from the 
Oceania days of strikers hitting seven, nine or thirteen in a single game, 
remember that during the Postecoglou era it’s been the former Everton striker 
who has scored 19 of Australia’s goals – more than the next three players 
(Jedinak, Rogic and Luongo) combined, and invariably on the biggest stages 
against the most difficult opposition.

Fans and pundits who became restless during the first hour of this match, 
railing against the ‘narrowness’ of Australia’s play, should actually draw 
comfort from the fact that the opening goal was precisely the kind that 
accommodates the talents of Rogic, Mooy and Luongo (with Jedinak screening).

Socceroos' road to Russia may be long but they would not have it any other way 
| John Duerden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/socceroos-road-to-russia-may-be-long-but-they-would-not-have-it-any-other-way>
The late lung-busting run, reminiscent of those that saw the then Swindon 
midfielder awarded player of the tournament during Australia’s Asian Cup 
triumph, was exactly the type of movement a 4-4-2 midfield diamond sytsem 
relies on. This from a player who, if the team was playing in a 4-3-3 with two 
out-and-out wide forwards, would not have had a place in the starting XI.

It was also a run that typified the confidence and the sheer determination to 
energise a faltering contest that the Socceroos will need time and time again 
before this campaign is out. Having blooded nearly 20 new faces but selected 
countless more for camps, constantly experimented and pushed his chargers in 
every fixture, the era of experimentation is over, as Postecoglou puts forward 
his strongest possible squad to qualify for Russia 2018.

And yet despite the experimentation and the evolution, performances such as 
against Iraq (combined with at times disappointing showings against Greece and 
England) demonstrate how much further this young squad has to come. Fifteen of 
the 23 players selected have fewer than 20 caps. This is a new generation, but 
one ingrained not with the results-first mentality of the Pim Verbeek or Holger 
Osieck era, but with Ange’s exhortation to play a demanding high-tempo, 
possession-based, attacking style of football.

Having seen the results elsewhere in the group – a shock 2-1 win by United 
Arab Emirates over Japan in Saitama, and a narrow late 1-0 win by Saudi Arabia 
over unfancied Thailand – the Socceroos know that their game will have to 
improve significantly for some of the more onerous challenges ahead.

Chief among those a trip to UAE on Tuesday night (Wednesday, 1.30 am AEST) and 
the residual heat of 40-plus degree days. It will take greater composure, 
patience and clinical execution in finding space and playing through tight 
defences if Australia is to build upon this solid start.

Iraq were a tricky obstacle overcome, but the monster Scylla and the deadly 
whirlpool Charybdis still await Postecoglou’s plucky crew.
 