
Socceroos star Tom Rogic’s stocks continue to soar after he scored another 
blistering goal to give Scottish giants Celtic a 4-3 league victory over 
Motherwell.

Rogic is thriving under former Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers this season, 
netting 10 goals, including in the League Cup triumph over Aberdeen six days 
ago.

Real Madrid and Sergio Ramos grab point at the last from Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
And Rodgers has become an unabashed fan of the 23-year-old Australian and his 
nose for timely goals with his latest coming from the No10 role.

“He (Rogic) is an amazing player, with a real high level of technique and he’s 
improving his stamina all the time,” Rodgers told the Celtic website.

“He’s playing in different positions for us but what he can (do is) get goals 
and he’s scoring important goals. His contribution was outstanding.”

Collecting the ball at the edge of the box in the 90th minute and with the 
scores locked at 3-3, Rogic sent a curling right-footed bullet beyond 
goalkeeper Craig Samson into the far corner, sparking wild celebrations among 
the travelling support at Motherwell’s Fir Park.
Celtic Goals ⭐ 🍀 (@CelticGoals) 
GOAL! @Tom_Rogic <https://twitter.com/Tom_Rogic> pic.twitter.com/XjN5pdZWap 
<https://t.co/XjN5pdZWap>
 <https://twitter.com/CelticGoals/status/805051252124110848> December 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CelticGoals/status/805051252124110848> 
The goal comes a week after Rogic scored a similar screamer, with his left 
foot, as Celtic won their 100th major trophy, the Scottish League Cup.

The result was a real come-from-behind effort, with Celtic never ahead until 
Rogic struck.

“It is arguably the most pleasing (win) after being in that adverse 
situation,” Rodgers said.

“We hadn’t had that before so to see the joy in the supporters, they 
appreciate the fight and spirit in the team.

“I thought we were defensively very poor in the first half but I thought we 
were brilliant in the second half in terms of our composure, at 2-0 down.

“Huge credit to the players and the winning mentality and spirit within the 
team.”

The home side got off to a flyer when Louis Moult produced some magic of his 
own, running on to a lofted through-ball to volley over Craig Gordon in the 
Celtic goal just three minutes in.

Moult doubled that lead on 35 minutes when he Ryan MacLean crossed to the far 
post and the 24-year-old Englishman ghosted in to score from close range and 
give the hosts a 2-0 lead at the break.

Rodgers’ team hit back just three minutes after halftime when Callum McGregor 
scored to cut the lead to 2-1 and Patrick Roberts tied things up at 2-2 with a 
header in the 70th minute.

As soon as they had levelled Celtic let the lead slip again, Motherwell 
substitute Liam Ainsworth got in at the far post to volley home and make it 3-2.

The goal rush wasn’t over though and from the ensuing kickoff Celtic levelled 
the game at 3-3 when Stuart Armstrong was played in behind the line before 
Rogic eventually found the winner for the league leaders.
 