
Adult social care rarely seems to be out of the news, whether the headlines 
are about the ageing population, dementia or delayed transfers of care. But, in 
my experience, social care is so much more than this.

As a transitions manager for disability charity United Response 
<http://www.unitedresponse.org.uk/>, my job is to work with young people with 
learning disabilities and autism through major changes in their lives, such as 
moving from education into work or out of their family home.

My brother has Down’s syndrome and it is because of him that I was inspired to 
work in this field. We’ve been close our whole lives and, since growing up, he 
has lived in a supported living service in the countryside, which is perfect 
for him. Helping him find the right home made me value the importance of good 
care during times of transition and see the difference it can make to a young 
person’s life.

For me, social care isn’t just about looking after an ageing population – it’s 
about enabling people of all ages, with a range of needs, to live their lives 
to the fullest.

Social care co-ops draw on first-hand experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/03/social-care-co-ops-draw-on-first-hand-experience>
Building friendships

As part of my job, I assess people in transition to determine what kind of 
support they need. It’s important they feel comfortable at this stage, so I 
always try to find some common ground to get the conversation going.

One woman I have supported for a long time is a huge Manchester United fan. As 
a Liverpool fan I can argue about football with her, which means she thinks of 
me as a friend, not just a person who supports her.

Building relationships that are both professional and friendly is important 
when working in social care. Nobody wants to feel they are unable to look after 
themselves, so it’s vital that they are never made to feel different in that 
way.

Using modern technology

One of the things I enjoy most about my job is using a combination of modern 
technology and new opportunities to find ways of working through challenging 
behaviour.

Will the autumn statement offer any hope for social care?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/oct/31/autumn-statement-social-care-paul-burstow>
I work with one young man, Tom*, who has a learning disability and is also 
non-verbal. When he first moved into a supported living house, he found 
communication difficult and missed his family.

Tom’s support workers and I showed him how to use an iPad so he could Skype 
his family. We’re lucky to have technology like this at our fingertips, and 
using it to make challenging situations easier is one of the most interesting 
aspects of working in social care.

Developing independence 

One of the projects I am most proud of is a supported living service 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wz_KE-km7MQ> I helped set up in south-west 
London. It’s a beautiful house where three young people live together, and one 
of the things that makes it unique is that the staff all have things in common 
with the residents and are similar ages to them. They have a huge garden, where 
they host barbecues and parties in the summer – a bit like a student house, 
although a lot cleaner!


Often people forget that young people with learning disabilities and autism 
want the same things as anyone else their age – to be able to exercise 
independence and do what they enjoy. Ensuring that these freedoms are achieved 
is what good quality social care is all about.

United Response has relaunched its Postcards from the Edges 
<https://www.unitedresponse.org.uk/postcards-relaunch> campaign to highlight 
the importance of adult social care, particularly for young adults with 
disabilities.

* Names have been changed to protect identities 

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 