
What does a terrorist look like? No such archetype exists of course, but you 
certainly wouldn’t figure somebody like Mohammed Abdi*. Yet the slight, 
middle-aged man with a neatly trimmed beard was until 18 months ago a member of 
the Somali jihadist group al-Shabaab – albeit in its finance department.

He joined willingly. The former shopkeeper heard a sermon in the mosque in his 
home town, 50km north-west of the central city of Bosaso, urging people to 
stand up to defend Islam, and was convinced.

He handed the keys of his shop to his aunt, and despite the objections of his 
family, joined the insurgency fighting what he regarded as an illegitimate 
government backed by western interests. “I was very excited and very happy as I 
was serving the religion,” said Abdi.

His job was to collect the money raised from al-Shabaab checkpoints and the 
taxes levied once a year on households. When al-Shabaab controlled much of the 
countryside before an offensive last year by the African Union’s intervention 
force, known as Amisom, they raised “a lot of money”, he said.

It was enough to keep men like Mohammed Farah* armed, fed and fighting. The 
stocky, gravelly voiced former al-Shabaab soldier had been with the militants 
from the early days, but now, like Abdi, he has defected.

Amnesty and rehabilitation

Both men have taken advantage of a government amnesty and are in a voluntary 
programme for disengaged combatants. These are men and women who are assessed 
as low-risk by the Somali intelligence service, which means they have not been 
involved in major military action or committed any serious crimes.

Religion is not one of the main reasons that compels anyone to join al-Shabaab

The disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration (DDR) initiative provides 
them with vocational training, then hires them on public works projects – 
typically building schools and clinics – and finally they are set up with a 
trade and released. Throughout their time on the programme, they live in the 
community.

There are currently three centres: in Mogadishu, south-central Beledweyne and 
Baidoa, with a facility in the southern city of Kismayo due to open soon. There 
is also a safe house in Baidoa for female al-Shabaab members and their 
dependents, which graduated its first group of 19 women this year.

Somewhere to hide

Farah is on the programme, despite his combat experience, because he is a 
marked man and it’s probably the safest place for him. He was arrested by 
al-Shabaab as a suspected spy after US-piloted drones kept finding his unit, 
and was lucky to escape what was likely to have been a death sentence.

“The only thing that al-Shabaab fears are drones and the Ethiopians,” he said, 
a reference to Ethiopian soldiers in Amisom and Ethiopian commandos camped 
insideSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> who report directly 
to Addis Ababa.

A colleague helped Farah get away after he had been beaten up and thrown into 
detention. He made the 90km journey to Baidoa barefoot, over terrain he knew 
well, but he believes he has only delayed the inevitable. He has heard 
al-Shabaab is out to kill him and, even though he sleeps in the barracks, he 
thinks it’s only a matter of time before they get him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsomalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ef1b64dff0707e14a7cbb2e061fcd4ba563e043%2F0_478_7108_4266%2F7108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Somalia%3A%20one%20man%E2%80%99s%20terrorist%20is%20another%20man%E2%80%99s%20carpenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsomalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Somalia%3A%20one%20man%E2%80%99s%20terrorist%20is%20another%20man%E2%80%99s%20carpenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsomalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ef1b64dff0707e14a7cbb2e061fcd4ba563e043%2F0_478_7108_4266%2F7108.jpg>
 Somali security servicemen stand guard over suspected al-Shabaab militants. 
Photograph: Tobin Jones/AFP/Getty Images 
Ideology or religion?

Both men said they joined al-Shabaab out of conviction. But the evidence for 
most low-level defectors is that recruitment is driven by economic need, peer 
pressure, or coercion by family or religious leaders.

According to research based on focus group discussions by the UN assistance 
mission in the country, Unsom, the main attractions are: the promise of a large 
salary ($400-1,000); the power of the ideology; the cool uniform; the promise 
of an exciting life; and the attraction of fighting for Islam.

“Religion is not one of the main reasons that compels anyone to join 
al-Shabaab,” said Patrick Loots, Unsom’s chief DDR officer and the architect of 
the disengaged combatants programme. “On the questionnaire, people listed that 
they needed money, or that their family needed money,” he told Irin. “But once 
in, that’s when al-Shabaab works very hard on the religious component.”

The bulk of al-Shabaab’s recruits are drawn from the central region, and there 
is little community disapproval over recruitment. “The attitude is ‘these are 
our sons and daughters’,” said Vikram Parekh, Unsom’s head of office in Baidoa. 
“There’s only stigma if you’ve committed something horrendous, and that’s not 
the people we’re talking about in the disengaged combatants centre.”

Somalia stumbling along 'bumpy and difficult' path to peace and prosperity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/25/somalia-stumbling-bumpy-difficult-path-peace-prosperity-nicholas-kay-al-shabaab>
Disillusionment

Abdi and Farah share similar reasons for quitting to take up the government’s 
amnesty offer. Abdi said he was angered when he realised al-Shabaab’s public 
profession of piety was not the reality. “I saw a lot of vices, like burning 
people’s property at checkpoints – that is not in the Qur’an.”

But it was witnessing the murder of eight elders accused of collaborating with 
the government that caused Abdi’s doubts to really set in. “They should have 
been taken to court, but instead they were taken to a different location and 
killed,” he told Irin. “I saw the bodies.”

As a soldier, Farah has seen far worse. But it was a similar episode of 
injustice, and the impunity with which al-Shabaab operates, that finally got to 
him. There was one episode in particular. It was near Beledweyne, when 
al-Shabaab again ordered the execution of an elder. With the knife at his 
throat, the man started reciting the Shahada [the Islamic declaration of 
faith]. “I began weeping,” said Farah. “There was nothing I could do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsomalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93987c2344f9f055a013500ef2006978f7191f6a%2F0_235_3974_2384%2F3974.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Somalia%3A%20one%20man%E2%80%99s%20terrorist%20is%20another%20man%E2%80%99s%20carpenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsomalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Somalia%3A%20one%20man%E2%80%99s%20terrorist%20is%20another%20man%E2%80%99s%20carpenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsomalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93987c2344f9f055a013500ef2006978f7191f6a%2F0_235_3974_2384%2F3974.jpg>
 Somalis at a registration centre, having been displaced from their home in 
southern Somalia by famine. Al-Shabaab have taken advantage of the famine to 
recruit men searching for food. Photograph: Tony Karumba/AFP/Getty Images 
Weakness

Farah believes al-Shabaab is at its weakest point. It is paranoid about spies, 
and, although the movement is historically loyal to al-Qaida,there is discord 
over the influence of so-called Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/american-us-resident-islamic-extremists-defect-somalia-al-shabab>
. Being accused of Isis sympathies is a dangerous charge to have hanging over 
one’s head, explained Farah.

Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> is also short of 
cash. In the past, money allowed it to buy support from the community and 
provided the intelligence tips that made it so effective. Now, fear of 
retribution is the main currency. “It’s not human and it’s not Islamic,” 
insisted Farah.

Unsom’s research suggests the reason low-level al-Shabaab combatants defect is 
that their expectations are not met after they join up. The salary, if paid at 
all, is between $20 and $500; the discipline is ferocious; and the frontline is 
far from a glamorous place to be.

Abdul Abdulahi* works in one of the government’s rehabilitation centres. He 
understands the initial appeal of al-Shabaab: it was a powerful vision of 
cleaning Somalia of the clan-based warlords that had destroyed the country, and 
returning to a golden age of justice and righteousness. “They occupied a void. 
There was no good government. People were tired of the clans. But they are 
hypocrites.”

He sees the DDR programme as a potentially powerful weapon in the fight 
against the militants, if it is properly promoted. “We have to set up more 
centres like this one, and to tell the low-risk combatants to defect and be 
retrained and reintegrated.”

In his town, among the 79 who have so far graduated from the programme, are 
people who are now providing jobs to their families and the community. It means 
that “instead of being destructive, they are now productive”, said Abdulahi.

*Names changed for security reasons
 