
Despite sporadic, sometimes intense militant attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/mogadishu-beach-attack-at-least-20-dead-as-somali-forces-end-siege>
, Somalia has been making steady political progress ahead of aplanned 
presidential vote 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-somalia-politics-idUKKCN0Q321Z20150729> this 
year, but these tenuous gains will not be consolidated unless the focus 
switches to debt relief and kickstarting the economy, says the former head of 
the UN mission.

Nicholas Kay, a British diplomat, was the UN secretary general’s special 
representative to Somalia 
<https://unsom.unmissions.org/Default.aspx?tabid=6258&language=en-US> from 
mid-2013 until December. During his tenure, the Horn of Africa country sought 
to fine-tuneits federal system 
<https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20150902SomaliaFederalFutureMosley.pdf>
 (pdf), which is meant to take some of the sting out of the clan rivalries that 
have poisoned politics for more than two decades and complicated the war 
against al-Shabaab militants.

Somalia: how to build hope amid the horror of al-Shabaab's insurgency | Mark 
Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/04/somalia-al-shabaab-insurgency-mogadishu-mohamed-nur>
“The political and security progress the country has made will be at risk 
unless there are enhanced economic opportunities and livelihoods for the 
massively young population,” Kay said after returning to London at the end of 
last year.

“The needs are enormous. The infrastructure is destroyed. There is no real 
functioning road system, the ports are in poor shape, there is no national 
electricity supply grid,” he added.

Somalia cannot qualify for debt relief under the heavily indebted poor 
countries initiative <https://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/hipc.htm> 
because it has longstanding arrears. Kay said the priority is to sign up to an 
International Monetary Fund-monitored programme, and start working towards 
achieving the governance and transparency goals needed to qualify for debt 
relief.


Last July, the IMF carried out its first economic consultation 
<http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2015/pr15360.htm> with Somalia since 
1989. It said the economy, driven by agriculture – includinglivestock exports 
<http://mgafrica.com/article/2015-04-30-somalia-livestock>, construction and 
telecommunications – grew by 3.7% in 2014. The IMF forecast growth of 2.7% for 
last year.

As well as grappling with the economic cost of more than two decades of 
conflict and a2011 famine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/may/02/somalia-famine-worst-25-years>
, Somalia, like many war economies, is hamstrung byendemic corruption 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-somalia-politics-idUKKCN0QK09O20150815> that 
will have to be tackled to unlock finance.

“I hope that political will will be there, because the crisis that Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> was in three years ago could well 
return unless there is a viable economic horizon for its young people,” said 
Kay.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsomalia-stumbling-bumpy-difficult-path-peace-prosperity-nicholas-kay-al-shabaab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa68a09c22456603e1974f657959cd746acde1b23%2F0_0_3716_2474%2F3716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Somalia%20stumbling%20along%20'bumpy%20and%20difficult'%20path%20to%20peace%20and%20prosperity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsomalia-stumbling-bumpy-difficult-path-peace-prosperity-nicholas-kay-al-shabaab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Somalia%20stumbling%20along%20%27bumpy%20and%20difficult%27%20path%20to%20peace%20and%20prosperity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsomalia-stumbling-bumpy-difficult-path-peace-prosperity-nicholas-kay-al-shabaab%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa68a09c22456603e1974f657959cd746acde1b23%2F0_0_3716_2474%2F3716.jpg>
 Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, right, is seen with Nicholas Kay in June 2013. 
Photograph: Stuart Price/AU-UN/AFP/Getty Images 
Last year, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud conceded there was no way a popular 
vote <http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-somalia-politics-idUKKCN0Q321Z20150729> 
to choose a new president could take place yet in a country where militants 
still control significant territory, and where4.9 million people still need 
assistance 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/151218%20Somalia%20Humanitarian%20Bulletin%20December.pdf>
 (pdf), with 1.1 million internally displaced.


In 2012, Mohamud was elected president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/10/somalia-chooses-new-president-elections>
 by MPs who were in turn nominated by tribal elders. Kay said that, despite 
similarities, the process would be “significantly more inclusive and 
representative” this time, although the details are still being discussed by 
politicians.


“There will be representatives of civil society, women, youth. The total 
number of people voting for selecting the members of parliament will be in the 
thousands, between 5,000 and 10,000, yet to be decided. It will be … much less 
easy to influence through payments or whatever,” he said.

Kay said ongoing efforts to create a federal structure for the country were a 
“huge task of political engineering”, but a wise choice by the Somali people.

“I can see very little other prospect of reconstituting a strong, united 
Somalia other than through some kind of devolution,” Kay said. “None of this is 
… a smooth, asphalted superhighway to peace and prosperity. It’s bumpy and 
difficult,” he said.

One of the biggest bumps in the road is the war against al-Shabaab, who mostly 
withdrew from Mogadishu in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/08/al-shabaab-mogadishu-somalia>
 but still carry out attacks in the city and againstAfrican Union peacekeepers 
<http://amisom-au.org/> across the country. This month, al-Shabaab attacked a 
base near the Kenyan border, claiming to havekilled more than 100 Kenyan 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-somalia-attacks-kenya-idUSKCN0UV08R> 
soldiers belonging to the AU’sAmisom <http://amisom-au.org/> force. Kenya did 
not give details on casualties.

Kay, who was speaking before that attack, said internal rifts and battlefield 
losses to Amisom had significantly weakened al-Shabaab.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fphotoclub-mogadishu-somalia-children-war-unicef&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422446450705%2Fcrop_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photoclub%20Mogadishu%3A%20children%20in%20Somalia%20offer%20a%20snapshot%20of%20lives%20overshadowed%20by%20war%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fphotoclub-mogadishu-somalia-children-war-unicef>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photoclub%20Mogadishu%3A%20children%20in%20Somalia%20offer%20a%20snapshot%20of%20lives%20overshadowed%20by%20war%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fphotoclub-mogadishu-somalia-children-war-unicef&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422446450705%2Fcrop_640x360.jpeg>
Photoclub Mogadishu: children in Somalia offer a snapshot of lives overshadowed 
by war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/feb/05/photoclub-mogadishu-somalia-children-war-unicef>
“Al-Shabaab is not defeated but it does not pose an existential or strategic 
threat in Somalia,” Kay said. Instead of foreign fighters flocking to join its 
ranks, some are leaving, while there has also been a destructive split between 
thosewho want to swear allegiance to Islamic State and those who want to stick 
with al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/american-us-resident-islamic-extremists-defect-somalia-al-shabab>
.

“It would be a threat and a setback if Isis gained a significant foothold in 
Somalia and if that resulted in significant new funding or sources of recruits 
and material. It’s far too early to say whether that is going to happen,” Kay 
said.

Kay admitted that the Amisom campaign against al-Shabaab had been done “on the 
cheap”. Some analysts have pointed out that while Amisom has pushed the 
militants out of much territory, it lacks operational capacity –including 
helicopters 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/al-shabab-attacks-expose-amisom-weaknesses/2845768.html>
 – to hold that ground.


Selling Somalia: we need indomitable investors, not aid, says foreign minister 
| Clár Ní Chonghaile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/10/somalia-foreign-minister-indomitable-investors-not-aid-abdusalam-omer-chatham-house>
“In 2016, there will need to be quite a hard look at what international 
partners collectively are doing, to identify whether it is sufficient in 
quantity and whether qualitatively it is properly coordinated and delivered to 
best effect,” Kay said. Providing support to the nascent national army – long 
blighted bylack of discipline and poor salaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/apr/19/somalia-army-uphill-battle-credibility>
 – is critical.

For Kay, the most urgent task is to keep Somalia in the world’s thoughts.

“The biggest mistake the international community could make would be to say, 
‘Oh, Somalia, job done. Politics and security are reasonably OK and now we can 
turn our attention elsewhere’. Well, politics and security still need more work 
and to sustain that, it does need a viable economic recovery plan.”
 