
Two suicide bombers have detonated explosives-laden cars outside the offices 
of the UN’s mine-clearing agency and a Somali army checkpoint in Mogadishu, 
killing 13 people including seven guards, Somali police officials have said.

The two blasts on Tuesday took place near the African Union base in the area 
of Mogadishu airport, the Somali police chief, Gen Mohamed Sheikh Hassan, said 
at a press conference.

Somalia’s jihadi rebels, al-Shabaab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/15/foreign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay>
, have claimed responsibility for the bombings, according to the group’s 
Andalus radio station.

Unlike previous attacks by the group, which is linked to al-Qaida, gunmen did 
not accompany the suicide bombers, said police officer Mohamed Hussein.

The first bomber tried to speed through the barrier at the UN office but 
guards shot at the car, the officer said. The guards at the UN offices were 
from a private security firm, said a police official, who requested anonymity 
because he was not authorised to speak to the press.

A second suicide blast targeted a checkpoint manned by Somali security forces 
near the AU base, said Hussein. Casualties there remain unclear.

Foreign troops in Somalia struggle to keep al-Shabaab at bay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/15/foreign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay>
Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> is waging an 
insurgency against Somalia’s weak UN-backed government with the goal of 
establishing an Islamic emirate in Somalia, ruled by a strict form of Islam.

Earlier this month, eight soldiers were killed when an al-Shabaab suicide car 
bomber targeted a Somali military training camp and attackers then entered the 
base on foot.

More than 22,000 troops and police serve in the AU force, which also includes 
troops from Burundi, Djibouti, Kenya, Sierra Leone and Ethiopia.

Al-Shabaab opposes the presence of foreign troops in Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> and has launched attacks in 
countries that have contributed to the AU force. Although al-Shabaab was ousted 
from the Somali capital, Mogadishu, in 2011, it continues to wage a deadly 
guerrilla campaign that includes suicide bombings.
 