
Combined car bomb and suicide attacks in the Somali city of Baidoa that killed 
at least 30 people at the weekend appear to be part of an accelerating 
offensive by al-Shabaab. The group aims to disrupt national elections planned 
for this year, undermine public confidence in international peacekeepers and 
bring down Somalia’s weak western-backed federal government.

 The Baidoa attacks targeted a busy restaurant where patrons were watching the 
English Premier League football match between Manchester United and Arsenal on 
Sunday. The bombings, claimed by the al-Qaida-affiliate, followed a lethal 
attack in the capital, Mogadishu, on Friday.An al-Shabaab spokesman said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35685648> government officials had been 
targeted, but most of the dead in both incidents were civilians.

Dozens dead after al-Shabaab Islamists bomb town in Somalia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/dozens-dead-after-al-shabaab-islamists-bomb-town-in-somalia>
Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> has suffered two decades 
of lawlessness, insurrection and invasion since the collapse of the Siad Barre 
dictatorship in 1991, earning it the label of “failed state”. Instability has 
spread to neighbouring Kenya, home to large numbers of Somali refugees, 
following Nairobi’s decision in 2011 to intervene militarily.

Enraged by Kenya’s support for the African Union’s 22,000-strong peacekeeping 
mission in Somalia (Amisom), al-Shabaab caused mass casualties in attacks on a 
university in Garissa last year and at the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi in 
2013. Last month as many as 200 Kenyan soldiers died in an al-Shabaab attack on 
a military camp inside Somalia, according to Somalia’s president, Hassan Sheikh 
Mohamud.

Kenyan authorities disputed the figure 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35658500> but did not give a specific 
death toll. Al-Shabaab later distributed photos of dozens of dead Kenyan 
soldiers, many apparently shot in the head.

“We have been winning for years and months but [in] that El Ade battle [at the 
Kenyan camp], we were defeated,” Mohamud said.

Al-Shabaab attack on Mogadishu hotel kills 14 civilians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/at-least-9-civilians-killed-as-al-shabaab-gunmen-storm-mogadishu-hotel>
The relative success of Amisom, which is backed by the UN and western 
countries, in regaining control of Somalia’s main cities since 2011 has 
encouraged hopes of a lasting national recovery. But the security situation is 
deteriorating again as the jihadis, who control large swaths of rural south and 
central Somalia, battle to demonstrate they are still a force to be reckoned 
with. Last autumn Britain said it wassending special forces 
<http://intelligencebriefs.com/britain-to-send-special-forces-in-somalia-to-combat-al-shabaab-terror-group/>
 to assist Amisom.

 The Islamists also oppose what they see as a foreign-imposed electoral 
process, which wasfinally agreed 
<http://www.raxanreeb.com/2016/01/breaking-news-somali-leaders-agree-election-in-2016/>
 last month. The planned election this year will create a new two-chamber 
parliament in which women will hold nearly a third of seats.

Despite enthusiastic backing 
<http://news.yahoo.com/un-praises-inclusive-somali-election-plan-213208856.html>
 from Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, who called the election plan “a 
roadmap towards universal suffrage by 2020”, it has faced strong criticism from 
opposition politicians because MPs will not be directly elected. A 
power-sharing formula agreed by rival clans will be used instead. In 2012, a 
group of 135 elders picked the president. Opponents say this is all a plot to 
keep the current government in power.

Mohamud said in an interview with Foreign Policy magazine 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/08/06/somalias-incredible-shrinking-election-hassan-sheikh-mohamud/>
 last year that poor or non-existent security prevented the immediate 
introduction of a nationwide one-person, one-vote ballot in 2016. But security 
was not the main reason.

“There is a much bigger and wider concern I have for the election. We don’t 
want [it] to create new conflict, new division, within the society, which is 
the experience of many post-conflict environments. We don’t want elections to 
create winners and losers … This time around, Somalia is still fragile,” 
Mohamud said.

Critics say such a circumscribed electoral process is not the answer. “Anyone 
who says elections are impossible is listening to people who want the status 
quo maintained,” said the former prime minister Abdiweli Sheikh Ahmed. “The 
international community is not serious about this.”

Islamist terror and political divisions are not the only threats to Somalia’s 
rehabilitation. To the dismay of African leaders, the EU hascut funding for 
Amisom <http://www.nation.co.ke/news/-/1056/3053596/-/qk83vtz/-/index.html> by 
20%, despite Brussels’ recent emphasis on reducing refugee flows and migration 
into Europe by stabilising conflict areas in Africa and the Middle East.

 Uhuru Kenyatta, Kenya’s president, said Amisom needed more international 
support, not less. “Whereas the continent is footing the bill of stabilising 
Somalia by blood and flesh, it is disheartening that the international 
community is even contemplating to reduce support,” he said.

The EU and UN are the main donors 
<https://www.euractiv.com/section/development-policy/news/african-union-s-somalia-mission-hit-by-eu-funding-cut/>
 to Amisom. Troop-contributing governments have received €1.08bn (£780m) in 
stipends and allowances from the EU African Peace Facility (APF) since 2007. 
Amisom currently accounts for more than 85% of total APF resources.

 The EU commission says the cuts are necessary because money is needed for 
other African peace missions and to respond to new crises that may arise in 
future.
 