
Ross Bleckner’s paintings are ethereal and gorgeous <http://www.rbleckner.com>
. They are like post-modern Monets. Whether he is painting flowers or a 
cerebral cortex he captures the fragility of life in bright flashes of 
effervescent colour hovering over nothingness. Bleckner paints tender elegies 
for a world that is always passing from the light into the dark.

Alec Baldwin sues art dealer over $190,000 'original' that wasn't
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/alec-baldwin-sues-art-dealer-over-190000-painting>
It is easy to see why the actor Alec Baldwin fell in love with a painting by 
this accomplished New Yorker. It’s a lot less easy to understand what happened 
next.Baldwin is suing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/alec-baldwin-sues-art-dealer-over-190000-painting>
 the famous Manhattan gallerist Mary Boone because he claims she sold him a 
version of Bleckner’s 1996 painting Sea and Mirror on the false premise that it 
was the original.

What exactly is he saying? It is not, apparently, that he was sold a fake or a 
print, simply that the Bleckner painting he bought is not the Bleckner painting 
he thought he was buying. It is a different version of the same subject by 
Bleckner. Got that? But it’s still a painting by Bleckner – you know, an 
original. Has Baldwin seen any other paintings by Bleckner or indeed any other 
contemporary art?

Gerhard Richter paints abstractions 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/richter-abstract-painting-809-3-ar00027> 
among themany other types <https://www.gerhard-richter.com/en/> of picture he 
produces. Each abstract painting by Richter is different, and yet is it really 
that different? Richter makes his abstractions using chance and repetitive 
processes. They are like huge utterly entrancing reflections in puddles. Can 
anyone remember what their favourite Richter abstract is? Perhaps Alec Baldwin 
can.

Perhaps he would also fret if his Andy Warhol screenprint was not an 
“original” or if he really had theoriginal 
<http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/Collection/art-object-page.1005.html> of 
Auguste Rodin’s Thinker in his garden. Modern art glories in repetition, 
seriality and self-reproduction and has done since Rodin made sculptures to be 
cast in multiple editions and Monet paintedidentical cathedral facades 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rouen_Cathedral_(Monet_series)#/media/File%3ARouenCathedral_Monet_1894.jpg>
.

Bleckner is very much a painter of our time and he works in a repetitive way. 
He has favourite themes and tropes, like recurring dreams. Grids and 
constellations, nervous systems and vegetation come back into his paintings in 
ways that vary gently within a certain familiar pattern. Surely, to love 
Bleckner you have to love all his paintings. It makes no sense to separate off 
one of his works and adore it alone. It’s like saying “I hate most of Warhol’s 
work but I really lovehis orange car crash paintings 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/works/79223> – only the orange ones, mind.”


Warhol only makes sense as a whole. Bleckner, too, is an artist whose work is 
all of a piece and part of a great chain of delicate variations. The same 
luscious sensibility pervades his entire oeuvre. When you buy his art you buy a 
mood. Quite apart from who is right in this lawsuit, Baldwin has completely 
misunderstood the lyrical art of Bleckner. But there’s one good thing about the 
case: it will make an excellent artist more widely known.
 