
A funny thing happened on the way to Farum. It was May and I was in Denmark, 
aboard a train heading north from Copenhagen. I picked up a copy of Danish 
Rail's in-train magazine. To my surprise, staring from its cover was a young 
woman called Johanne Schmidt-Nielsen.

For a Brit, this was odd. Schmidt-Nielsen is a politician – UK train 
travellers are most used to pop stars such as Gary Barlow gracing the front of 
their rail propaganda. And she's not just any old politician: she's of the 
left. The hard left, in fact. The de facto leader of afar-left party called 
Enhedslisten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/01/johanne-schmidt-nielsen-denmark-left>
. In which light, her presence as a cover star is not just odd, but outright 
bizarre. It is the Danish equivalent of plasteringSalma Yaqoob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/sep/22/salma-yaqoob-respect-george-galloway>
 or evenMike Chessum <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-chessum> all 
over the west coast mainline. And if you haven't heard of either of them, that 
is more or less my point.

I had come to Denmark to research my book, How to Be Danish. The genesis of 
the project was the Danish TV cop dramas that have taken over BBC4 on Saturday 
nights:Borgen <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b019ch5q>, The Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-bridge-episode-by-episode> 
andThe Killing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b017h7m1>. A million Britons 
watch every episode of these subtitled hits – but they don't know much about 
the country where the shows are set. My book tries to fill in some of the gaps. 
My research saw me scurry from the cycle lanes of Copenhagen to the windmills 
of west Jutland, interviewing chefs, politicians, writers and farmers, imams 
and architects, designers and academics – all in an attempt to discover some of 
what it is to be Danish.

In many ways, to be Danish is to be wonderfully progressive. Denmark's a place 
wherelawyers' salaries are less than twice those of binmen 
<http://www.patrickkingsley.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/salary-comparisons-denmark.jpg>
; a place where university is free, where the state subsidises between 70-80% 
of private school fees; where 77% of mothers return to work (compared with 66% 
in Britain), mostly because the government pays for three-quarters of the cost 
of childcare.

How enlightened, I thought as I sat in my train seat. But then I put the 
magazine in my bag, and flicked instead through the local paper. "Neger stjal 
bil fra 80-arig," read one headline. "Negro stole car from 80-year-old."

This is the paradox of Denmark. It is in many ways very enlightened. It is 
home to one of the smallest gaps between rich and poor in the world. It was the 
first country – in 1989 – to legalise same-sex partnerships. But Denmark is 
also a country where an editor might casually print a word such as "Negro" 
without realising the offence it might cause. Likewise, it's the country that 
spawned the 2006Muhammad cartoons crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muhammad-cartoons>, when a Danish newspaper 
depicted the prophet as a terrorist, sparking fury among Denmark's already 
marginalised Muslim community. For much of the past decade, Denmark's 
centre-right coalition government was propped up by the Danish People's Party 
(DPP), which is not only the nearest Danish equivalent to the BNP, but the 
country's third largest party.

Denmark, then, is a tale of two opposing mindsets – one indignant and 
xenophobic, the other tolerant and communal. Much of my time there was spent 
wrestling with this question: how can they exist side-by-side in the same small 
country? Or even the same railway carriage? One theory is slightly startling: 
these mindsets aren't polar opposites, or at least they're not unrelated. In 
fact, it is sometimes argued, Denmark's insularity stems partly from its 
communality.

To understand why, we need to return to 1864, the year when Denmark finally 
surrendered its two southernmost provinces – Schleswig and Holstein – to 
Prussia, in a humiliation that saw the country lose 40% of its population. As 
the historianKnud Jespersen describes in his History of Denmark 
<http://us.macmillan.com/ahistoryofdenmark/KnudJVJespersen>, it was a moment of 
great national trauma. With this loss the Danes had finally to accept that 
their once-vast medieval empire – a Baltic sprawl that had housed several 
states and a babble of languages – was in fact just one single, tiny 
monoculture. This prompted a national identity crisis, and forced Danes to 
reassess the values that united them.

Heavily influenced by the ideas of a priest called Nikolai Grundtvig 
<http://justus.anglican.org/resources/bio/236.html>, the Danes reimagined their 
society as one defined by togetherness. They built what were known as "folk 
high schools" – liberal arts colleges for the rural poor that aimed to turn 
peasants into active participants in political life. The farmers who attended 
them were weaned on the concept of solidarity. As a result, many of them 
clubbed together to form agrarian cooperatives that shared materials and 
profits. And it was these cooperatives that were the foundation stone for the 
huge, tolerant social democracy that now exists in contemporary Denmark.

But it was Grundtvig's ideas that perhaps also created Denmark's unpleasant 
side. Enlightened as they may have been, they became a means of compensating 
for – or even making a virtue of – Denmark's newfound homogeneity. As 
anthropologist Richard Jenkins writes in his fascinating ethnography,Being 
Danish <http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/distributed/B/bo13356801.html>
: "The solution that was found to the problems of Denmark in the mid-19th 
century has created a new problem in the present."

The problem is that, having largely hidden itself away for 150 years, Denmark 
has woken up in the last few decades to find the world banging on the door. One 
response, best represented by the DPP, is to slam the door shut and keep the 
world out. Another is to embrace what the world has to offer, and try to better 
it. People such asSøren Sveistrup, the creator of The Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/mar/31/the-killing-danish-sarah-lund>
, orRené Redzepi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/14/rene-redzepi-chefs-better-food>
, the chef at Noma, which has been called the world's best restaurant, have put 
Denmark on the map by being superlative.

Both reactions, ironically, aren't very Danish. The DPP wants to preserve the 
Danish identity, but in the process has undermined its central tenet of 
tolerance. Similarly, Sveistrup and Redzepi have made Denmark famous, but their 
heightened ambition is unusual for a country that traditionally frowns on those 
who think they're better than the collective.

But it is the latter pair who are in the ascendant. And they're the reason I 
wrote a book about Denmark. The reason I could be found one day this spring on 
a train chugging north to Farum. In a small way, they might be changing what it 
is to be Danish.

Patrick Kingsley's How to Be Danish is published by Short Books 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780721330>
.
 