
What’s the name of this show? Son of Zorn <http://www.fox.com/son-of-zorn>.

When does it premiere? Fox is giving the show a “sneak preview” on Sunday 11 
September at 8pm ET, right after the NFL game so everyone will be watching. It 
settles into its regular time slot on Sundays at 8.30pm ET starting the 25rd.

It’s a Fox show on Sunday night, so does that mean it’s animated? Not entirely.

Who is this Zorn and why should we care about his son? Zorn is a cartoon 
character from the land of Zephyria.

I thought you said it wasn’t animated. Well, it’s not – Zorn is the only 
cartoon character on the show. Everything else is live action.

OK, just what the hell is this thing? Zorn (voiced by Jason Sudeikis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/15/jason-sudeikis-arrived-the-millers>
), an excessively masculine He-Man-esque cartoon character, is the defender of 
Zephyria and conqueror of the tribes of Agon. On his island nation, they don’t 
have concepts like consideration, empathy, pacifism, or “no shirt, no shoes, no 
service”. He decides to leave his island home to go to Orange County for his 
human son’s 17th birthday. When he gets there, he discovers his ex-wife Edie 
(Cheryl Hines) has a new fiancé (Tim Meadows) and that his son Alangulon 
(Johnny Pemberton) – who goes by Alan – isn’t quite the flesh-ripping, 
head-stomping mini-warrior that Zorn was hoping for. Wanting to be more of an 
influence in his son’s life, Zorn decides to get a job and stay in California, 
even though no one wants him there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkPnlQTi8heM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkPnlQTi8heM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkPnlQTi8heM&media=>
This thing sounds really weird. It is. Fox has had some success experimenting 
with off-the-wall comedy concepts lately, likeThe Last Man on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/01/the-last-man-on-earth-high-concept-post-apocalyptic-comedy>
 and the sadlydepartedThe Grinder  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/29/john-stamos-rob-lowe-grandfathered-the-grinder-review>
(RIP). But this one is gonzo even for them.

Does it work? Yes, because Son of Zorn actually isn’t that weird. Well, it is, 
but aside from the fact that Zorn is a cartoon character, this is a traditional 
fish-out-of-water sitcom. Anyone who watchedGreen Acres 
<http://www.tvland.com/shows/greenacres>, Perfect Strangers  
<http://www.perfectstrangers.tv/>or The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/17/the-fresh-prince-of-bel-air-when-the-mainstream-met-afrocentric-style>
will recognize what works about pulling someone from one very specific culture 
and asking him to fit into another. It just happens that Zorn’s culture is 
ripped out of a bad 1980s cartoon. When Zorn’s new boss asks him if he has a 
shirt, he responds: “Does a Griffion herdsman have nine anuses?” Now, we have 
no idea what this herdsman is or why he is so prodigious in the colorectal 
arena, but we know it’s a solid joke and it’s made even funnier by the 
absurdity of it.

So it’s funny? Yeah, it’s funny. There is a couple of laugh out loud moments 
and surprisingly, the humor is quite relatable. When Edie asks Zorn why he 
hasn’t been a part of his son’s life, he says: “I was busy fighting for my 
homeland and making sure Volchezor didn’t get his hands on the Staff of Quib.” 
That’s funny, but what’s even better is when Edie says: “Oh, the Staff of Quib 
is only a stick.” Which of us hasn’t had a similarly stupid fight with an ex, 
or been embarrassed by our ridiculous parents when they picked us up at school? 
Everything here is just taken to its absurd extreme and features a tone-deaf 
dude without a shirt swinging around a cartoon sword.

How’s the animation? Pretty good and it fits in seamlessly. After a while, you 
won’t even remember that you’re watching an animated swordsman who only eats 
raw meat.

I find that very hard to believe. I do too, but it was worth a shot. 

Should I watch this show? Yes, because even if it gets canceled after its 
first 13 episodes, in 10 years people will be saying: “Oh my God! Remember Son 
of Zorn?” like it’s the newCop Rock <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cop_Rock> 
(or at least the newDinosaurs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dinosaurs_(TV_series)>). You’re going to want to 
remember something this ridiculous and might even startle yourself at how much 
you enjoy it.
 