
Garba Touré and his guitar were a familiar sight on the streets of Diré, a 
dusty town on the banks on the Niger, upstream from Timbuktu. But whenarmed 
jihadists took control of northern Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/06/mali-tuareg-rebels-independence> 
in the spring of 2012, he knew it was time to leave.

"The first rebel group to arrive were the MNLA [Mouvement National pour la 
Libération de l'Azawad], but they weren't against music, so there was no bad 
feeling between them and the population," he tells me over the phone from 
Bamako, Mali's capital. "But then Ansar Dine [a local armed Islamist group, 
whose name translates as "followers of the faith"] came and chased them out. 
They ordered people to stop smoking cigarettes, drinking alcohol and playing 
music. Even though I don't smoke or drink, I love the guitar, so I thought: 
'This isn't the moment to hang around. I have to go south.'"

Like thousands of refugees, Garba grabbed a bag, his guitar and boarded a bus 
to Bamako. His father, Oumar Touré, a musician who had played congas for Mali's 
guitar legend,Ali Farka Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/08/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, stayed behind with the family. The hardline Islamist gunmen drove music 
underground. The penalties for playing or even just listening to it on your 
mobile phone were a public whipping, a stint in an overcrowded jail or worse.

"When I arrived in Bamako the mood wasn't great," Garba remembers, "Different 
army factions were fighting each other. There were guns everywhere. All we 
heard was the scream of weapons. We weren't used to that."

Garba and some other musician friends from the north decided they couldn't 
succumb to the feeling that their lives had been shipwrecked by the crisis. 
They had to form a band, if for no other reason than to boost the morale of 
other refugees in the same situation. "We wanted to recreate that lost ambience 
of the north and make all the refugees relive those northern songs."

That's how Songhoy Blues was born. "Songhoy" because Garba Touré, lead 
vocalist Aliou Touré and second guitarist Oumar Touré, although unrelated to 
each other – Touré is as common as Smith or Jones in northern Mali – all belong 
to the Songhoy people, one of the main ethnicities in the north. And "Blues" 
not only because northern Mali is the cradle of the blues and its music is 
often referred to as "the desert blues", but also because Garba and his mates 
are obsessed by that distant American cousin of their own blues. "My father 
used to make me listen toJimi Hendrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jimi-hendrix>. He's one of my idols. But I 
also listenBB King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/picture/2013/sep/16/bb-king-photography> and 
John Lee Hooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jun/23/guardianobituaries> a lot."

Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/playlists/14423956%3Fsecret_token%3Ds-3CsD0&color=ff6600&auto_play=false&show_artwork=true>

After signing up drummer Nathanael Dembélé from the local conservatoire, 
SonghoyBlues <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blues> hit the Bamako club and 
maquis (a kind of local spit'n'grit bar restaurant) circuit with their raucous 
guitar anthems dedicated to peace and reconciliation. People flocked to see 
them, not only fellow Songhoy, but also Tuareg and other northern ethnicities. 
Even southerners came.

Anybody familiar with the enmity between the Songhoy and Tuareg peoples left 
behind byMali's recent civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/17/mali-fights-militants-far-from-over>
 will appreciate how inspiring it must have been to see Tuareg and Songhoy 
youth wigging out together in a Bamako bar.

In September, an uncle told Garba that a group of European and American 
musicians and producers were coming to town under the banner ofAfrica Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express>. Garba called Marc-Antoine 
Moreau, one of the Africa Express organisers, and – after passing an informal 
audition – Songhoy Blues were introduced toNick Zinner of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/13/yeah-yeah-yeahs-mosquito-interview>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBOValSt7YOY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBOValSt7YOY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBOValSt7YOY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BOValSt7YOY>

"Marco told us that Nick was a big American guitarist and asked us to 
collaborate with him. So the next day we went into the studio and did some 
takes with Nick. Everything went well, no problem. He's a very simple person; a 
great guitarist but really modest." The word "simple" is just about the 
greatest compliment a Malian can pay to another person. In the Malian French 
patois it means honest, down-to-earth and solid as a rock.

"We just walked into the studio not knowing what to expect," Zinner recalls. 
"There was just one amp between all of us, so it was like: 'What are we gonna 
do here?' But then they showed up, sat down, said 'Hi', and 30 seconds later 
they were playing music, amazing music."

One result of these sessions is a track called Soubour, which means 
"patience". "We're asking the refugees to have patience," Garba explains. 
"Without patience, nothing is possible." A video of Sobour featuring Zinner and 
friends has now gone viral. It is the rawest, spikiest and most electrifying 
dollop of desert R&B you're likely to hear this year or next, but it remains 
proudly Malian and African.

Working with musicians who had just seen music outlawed in their homeland was 
a humbling experience for Zinner. "It's impossible for a westerner like myself 
to imagine it," he says. "Like, truly unfathomable. And knowing the reasons why 
a lot of the musicians that we were working and hanging out with had come to 
Bamako added another dimension to the whole experience. Like … a real 
intensity."

Like the majority of Malian Muslims, Garba has no truck with the attitude to 
music taken by hardline Salafist Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/23/mali-militants-declare-war-music>
. "The world without music? It would be like a prison, right?" he says. "Music 
causes no harm and what's more you can educate an entire population using 
music. Maybe in previous generations, music could have been condemned by 
religion, but not now."

Africa Express has invited Songhoy Blues to London to appear at the launch of 
Maison des Jeunes 
<http://www.africaexpress.co.uk/2013/11/africa-express-presents-maison-des-jeunes/>
, the album of recordings made in October during the Bamako trip. Songhoy Blues 
and other emerging Malian talents, such as the seraphim-voiced Kankou Kouyaté, 
who is also appearing at the launch, feature alongsideDamon Albarn, Brian Eno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/13/damon-albarn-mali-africa-express>
,Ghostpoet <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ghostpoet>, Zinner and an 
eclectic mix of other artists and producers. To Garba and his fellow 
band-members, the experience has been like a dream.
 Musicians and producers at Maison des Jeunes, Bamako, Mali, a youth club that 
became a temporary recording studio for Africa Express. Photograph: Manuel 
Toledo 
"There we were living in the north," he says. "We were told that if we played 
music we could get our hands chopped off. Then we arrived in Bamako, in a state 
of emergency. We had to go to the ministry of the interior to ask for 
permission to play. But then, by the grace of God, the atmosphere returned.
Africa Express <https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> came and we 
were invited to play in London. Really and truly, it's an explosive joy for us, 
an explosive joy! We can't even begin to explain that joy."

• Africa Express Presents: Maison des Jeunes 
<http://www.africaexpress.co.uk/2013/11/africa-express-presents-maison-des-jeunes/>
 is released on 9 December on Transgressive.Songhoy Blues appear at the album 
launch event at Oval Space, London, on 9 December 
<http://www.ovalspace.co.uk/events/view/africa-express-album-launch-celebration-maison-des-jeunes/>

• Damon Albarn and Africa Express in Mali 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/music/video/2013/oct/14/damon-albarn-africa-express-bamako-mali-video>
• A week in Mali with Africa Express 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/music/musicblog/2013/oct/18/africa-express-mali-diary-olugbenga-adelekan>
 