
Sonny Pike remembers the game – and there were so, so many games – that 
brought him to the edge. “I was on trial at Palace, playing against Spurs, out 
of position on the left wing. The match was going on around me and I just 
thought to myself: ‘You know what? I just want the whole world to eat me up and 
take me away from here.’”

What happened next makes difficult listening. Pike spent the mid-1990s being 
touted as the next Diego Maradona, shuttled between agents, sponsorship deals,
television appearances <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vnVH3fjQAAU>, trials at 
Premier League clubs and a high-profile fortnight with Ajax. The wavy hair and 
cherubic features made a household name of a young player who should not really 
have been referred to in those terms. Pike was just a child and by the age of 
17 it had all become too much. “My head was finished, I was gone,” he says. “I 
was suicidal at times, in a bad place for a long time. I couldn’t take it and 
was thinking about calling it a day.”

Paid too much, too young, but George Green makes new start at Ossett | Ed 
Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/george-green-ossett-everton-oldham-tranmere>
Pike’s story has been held up as the model cautionary tale for garlanded 
prodigies, yet it has been shrouded in mystery and half-truths. Now 32, he was 
prompted to resurface after becoming a father of two and considering the damage 
that had been done to his own childhood.A radio interview with TalkSport 
<http://talksport.com/radio/listen-again/1456221600#> this week was “like 
therapy, really, it’s chilled me out so much”; the effects of his teenage years 
had been bottled up and hearing what happened would be a jolt to the senses of 
anyone naive enough to believe people are automatically minded to look after 
young footballers’ interests.

Not least those close to them. Playing for his youth side in Essex, Pike tells 
the Guardian that he scored “about 150 goals a season, 300 if you count the 
other competitions I played in”, although he saw himself as more of a No10, a 
Dennis Bergkamp. Scouts began to take notice and by the age of “12 or 13” he 
was representing East Anglia at a “Mini World Cup” tournament in Denmark, 
playing alongside Ashley Young and David Bentley. “How many scouts did you have 
today?” he and Bentley would ask each other after games. The inquiries flooded 
in and fell at the feet of his father Mickey, a builder by trade. Mickey had 
never shown any interest in the sport itself but, according to Pike, saw an 
opportunity to grasp.

Pike says he thinks his father “was hungry for the public attention and got 
carried away by the publicity side of things, and did me a great deal of harm”. 
The perks, and more importantly the schedule that came with them, quickly 
became overwhelming. “He’d get together with journalists, do pieces and earn 
money on the side out of all the attention I was getting. By around 14 or 15 I 
was living with the benefits of a professional – sponsored by Paul Smith and 
Mizuno, free clothes, legs insured for £1m, McDonald’s adverts, Coca-Cola 
promotions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-football-prodigy-head-finished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b05d5b50c3b47399f265f332f843feae33527e1%2F0_321_1341_803%2F1341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sonny%20Pike%20on%20life%20as%20a%20football%20prodigy%3A%20%E2%80%98At%2017%20my%20head%20was%20finished.%20I%20was%20suicidal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-football-prodigy-head-finished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sonny%20Pike%20on%20life%20as%20a%20football%20prodigy%3A%20%E2%80%98At%2017%20my%20head%20was%20finished.%20I%20was%20suicidal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-football-prodigy-head-finished%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b05d5b50c3b47399f265f332f843feae33527e1%2F0_321_1341_803%2F1341.jpg>
 Sonny Pike poses with Ian Wright after being named the ‘Sun Schools Champion’ 
for football in 1995. Photograph: Photoshot 
“My dad really pushed that side of it and a lot of it was just too much. I 
remember doing the McDonald’s ad, having to keep the ball up and shoot it 
towards a camera, and my thighs felt raw. The environment was ruthless.”

Pike went through numerous agents – Eric Hall and Sky Andrew among them – and 
even more trials, the best-known coming after a Dutch television crew filmed a 
tournament he was playing in. The invitation fromAjax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> came from that, as did a request to 
move full-time to the Netherlands. That did not feel like an option to Pike but 
the experience was, at least, one of his more enjoyable.

“I went out for a while and played a few games, including the winner against 
PSV,” he says. “They wanted me to go back for good but I was 13 or 14 and 
wasn’t interested in doing that, I’ve always been a family person. But I met 
the first team, Louis van Gaal was in charge at the time and was kind to me 
too, and mixed with Nwankwo Kanu, Patrick Kluivert, all of the famous team they 
had back then. The training side was like nothing I’ve ever seen over here – 
just unbelievable.”

Pike ended up at Leyton Orient. It seems a curious choice and any chance of 
stability was destroyed permanently by his appearance in a 1996 documentary, 
“Coaching and Poaching”, presented by the current FA chairman, Greg Dyke.

“That was the beginning of the end,” Pike says. “I was signed at Orient but my 
dad was working with a certain journalist at the time and agreed to do the 
documentary. I knew Chelsea were interested in me, and one day my dad told me 
to get in the car – where another coach I knew was sitting – and say I wanted 
to go there.

“I didn’t know I was doing anything wrong. This film crew followed me into the 
Chelsea training ground and filmed me playing for them. It went out on Channel 
4. Then I went back to Orient and played in a game on the first-team pitch. The 
manager said he’d already heard a rumour something had happened.”

Pike’s days at Orient were numbered and he feels it was a set-up. “It went to 
an FA inquiry and I was banned for a year, couldn’t play for any of those 
teams, all down to that documentary. It was a kick in the shins, to say the 
least.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-football-prodigy-head-finished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70c9749ec4d15b0be05cba45013e2506a7bac2cc%2F0_59_1419_851%2F1419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sonny%20Pike%20on%20life%20as%20a%20football%20prodigy%3A%20%E2%80%98At%2017%20my%20head%20was%20finished.%20I%20was%20suicidal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-football-prodigy-head-finished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sonny%20Pike%20on%20life%20as%20a%20football%20prodigy%3A%20%E2%80%98At%2017%20my%20head%20was%20finished.%20I%20was%20suicidal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-football-prodigy-head-finished%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70c9749ec4d15b0be05cba45013e2506a7bac2cc%2F0_59_1419_851%2F1419.jpg>
 Television crews became a regular fixture in Sonny Pike’s life during the 
mid-1990s. Photograph: Action Images 
It turns out that Pike may not technically have been signed to Orient at all. 
He believes Mickey signed his contract forms and that, he says, was legally the 
responsibility of his mother, Stephanie. But the damage had been done and it 
was during this break from the game – in which he continued to play away from 
the spotlight, helped by his old coach and lifelong friend Terry Welch, for a 
youth team in Loughton – that Mickey left the scene. Pike’s parents had been 
separated for years and had long held opposing views on the merits of pushing 
for a career in football. Pike has not seen Mickey in more than 15 years, and 
the immediate psychological toll was huge. He returned to football – that trial 
at Palace, and others around the south of England – but felt broken.

“There were multiple reasons for why I felt as I did,” he says, recalling the 
time it felt easier to let everything go. “As much as I now know my dad did me 
bundles of harm, when I was a young kid I’d have done anything for him. But I’d 
lost him. I’d lost the chance to play for Chelsea, which I’d really wanted, and 
then there was all the abuse I used to get on the sideline from people who knew 
my story. ‘Break his legs,’ and much worse. I had a lot of bad things coming my 
way and for somebody of my age it was just too much.” Pike’s comments about his 
father have not been substantiated.

Pike struggled along. Conversations with a close family friend helped his 
mental state but efforts to eke out a football career became increasingly 
withdrawn.

“I decided to change my image, look different,” he says. “I did it all 
purposely, I didn’t want to be seen as I was. I remember going to Grimsby for a 
trial, driving up, and didn’t want anyone to recognise me. Before I got in the 
car I got out the clippers and gave myself a skinhead – never had one before or 
since. I didn’t want anyone saying: ‘Wasn’t it you who played for Ajax?’ I just 
wanted to be another geezer, treated the same as anyone.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-discusses-being-a-child-football-star-audio&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F25%2F1456413143786%2FKP_1812813_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sonny%20Pike%20discusses%20being%20a%20child%20football%20star%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-discusses-being-a-child-football-star-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sonny%20Pike%20discusses%20being%20a%20child%20football%20star%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsonny-pike-discusses-being-a-child-football-star-audio&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F25%2F1456413143786%2FKP_1812813_crop_640x480.jpg>
Sonny Pike discusses being a child football star. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/feb/25/sonny-pike-discusses-being-a-child-football-star-audio>
The trial lasted two days before Pike, who had been scheduled to play in a 
match, had enough and drove home. “I was all over the place, I just packed up 
and went,” he says. “Subconsciously, I think I must have known it was all over. 
But when I didn’t get a deal at Stevenage after that, I knew I couldn’t pursue 
it any longer. I’d wanted to be at the top.”

Pike disappeared from the radar after that and it is easy enough for urban 
myths to develop. He had supposedly been spotted under assumed identities at a 
number of non-league clubs; he had, according to one story,uprooted to Dundee 
to study psychology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/feb/15/theknowledge.sport>. None of 
it is true. With few financial benefits from all those deals and broadcasts 
having come his way, he trained to be a carpenter and then after the birth of 
Freya, now seven, spent three years studying the Knowledge. He now drives a 
black cab six days a week, dotes on Freya and her 18-month-old brother, Beau, 
and has little interest in the game that eventually wronged him.

“I don’t know much about football these days,” he says. “When I was younger I 
was obsessed, could imitate all the players, but now I rarely watch a game 
unless perhaps England are playing. These days I’m fanatical about boxing – I 
really study it, the movements, everything, and follow all the fighters. What I 
love is that it’s one on one. In a team game you can hide, but not there; I 
look up to boxers.”

He does, though, feel he has something to contribute and that is another 
reason for his keenness to speak to media now. With hindsight it is clear 
enough that he was a guinea pig in football’s ham-fisted early attempts to 
monetise young talent; some academy scholars these days are on the verge of 
becoming brands of their own and, while things may have moved on beyond return 
in the last two decades, Pike would be delighted to pass on his experience to 
interested players and clubs.

“When I was younger I was the only one getting attention like that,” he says. 
“But now it’s non-stop for hundreds of them. These players need to take a step 
back and concentrate on their craft, because the amount of money they are 
walking around with is crazy. Agents aren’t necessarily a bad thing but there 
is no reason they should be working with kids as young as I was.
 Sonny Pike with his wife and children. Photograph: Courtesy of Sonny Pike 
“I’d be more than happy to get out there, talk to academies, kids and parents, 
make sure they hear and learn about it, help them understand you mustn’t get 
too carried away. I want people to hear about it, and make sure they don’t 
suffer in the way I did.”

The biggest sadness is that Pike’s tale is far more that of a lost youth than 
of a wasted talent. The latter is of relatively little consequence in the 
bigger picture and that is why, all these years later, Pike has been able to 
rebuild himself without need for the game.

“I’m not saying this story hasn’t had a beautiful ending,” he says. “I’m so 
happy now with my kids. Because of my experience they’ve got a good dad, 
someone who will do his best for them, and that’s how I look at it. Things have 
ended up well, but there’s a lesson to be learned.”

Sonny can be contacted via his Twitter account, @Sonnypike01Pike 
<https://twitter.com/sonnypike01pike>

The Samaritans in the UK can be contacted in the UK on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be 
foundhere <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>. 
 