
"My love for Sonny goes back a long way. I would have been 15 or 16 when I 
first played his records, first with Max Roach and Clifford Brown, then his 
stuff with Miles, and then of course on his own. I first saw him in 1964 in the 
original Birdland club on 52nd Street, playing with a trio. To sit there and 
watchSonny Rollins <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sonny-rollins>, my God! 
In those days he did this fantastic thing: he used to start playing in the 
dressing room with no band, then walk out and go around the stage, using the 
room to bounce the sound off. It was amazing. I'd never seen anyone do that.

"He was incredibly hip and looked fabulous, and he still does. We have the 
same tailor friend who makes our clothes in New York, and Sonny is still a very 
sharp man. He looks amazing. He's gone perfectly white in his beard and hair; 
it's like Samuel Beckett when he got old.

"I've been fortunate enough to get to know him a bit. Mick [Jagger] asked me 
about a tenor player for the Stones' Waiting on a Friend and I suggested Sonny. 
He did that song then wanted to have a go at another one, a real lairy 
rock'n'roll thing calledNeighbours <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FkdwV2juaKA>
. He played great on it. It was an overdub, unfortunately, so we never played 
together. Probably just as well. My goodness, I'd sit there and think, 'bloody 
hell, what am I going to do here?'I'd feel like an impostor, because that's the 
highest company you can keep.

"There are people who burn bright and fade quickly, and there are those who 
burn bright and keep going. You have to admire that. Sonny has never made a bad 
record â€“ ever; some are simply greater than others. When he stands and plays, 
there isn't a saxophone player who doesn't look on in awe. He's the last one 
standing, and he's still playing as well today as he was then. He's still at 
the peak at what he does. It's great inspiration that there isn't really a time 
limit, but very few people can do it at that level.

His wife died a few years ago and it hit him very hard. He became much more 
reclusive, but we ring each other now and then. He's not just a saxophone 
player, he's something else. He's iconic, a leader without having to explicitly 
say it. I think you'd follow Sonny into war."

Key recording: Saxophone Colossus (Prestige, 1956)
 