
Sore throat sufferers will visit their pharmacist instead of their GP for an 
on-the-spot test to see if they need antibiotics under a newNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> initiative.

The planned walk-in “sore throat test and treat” service will be rolled out 
across the country over the next year, after a six-month pilot project. It 
could help relieve pressure on family doctors and tackleantibiotic resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
, according to NHS England.

NHS seeks to reduce winter deaths as sub-zero weather looms across UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/06/bonfire-night-weather-temperatures-fall-below-freezing-uk>
The sore throat test and treat service, which was piloted with 35 patients 
treated at Boots pharmacies, involves taking a swab test with results provided 
in five minutes to see if a course of antibiotics is needed.

The initiative could save the health service £35m a year and reduce GP 
consultations by as many as 800,000 if the scheme is taken up nationwide, 
according to NHS officials. About 1.2 million people visit their GP with sore 
throat symptoms every year.

The NHS chief executive, Simon Stevens, said the scheme would be rolled out 
across the country over the course of the coming year and is one of eight 
medical innovations that will be introduced.

“Necessity is the mother of invention, and health care worldwide is now 
fizzing with smart innovation,” Stevens said. “In the NHS, we’re now taking 
practical action to develop and fast-track these new techniques into mainstream 
patient care.”

The introduction of the new walk-in scheme follows news last month that the 
Department of Health had drawn up proposals tocut funding for pharmacies by 12% 
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37651250>from December. The 
pharmaceutical services negotiating committee described the cuts as madness, 
and said they would damage the NHS and social care, the BBC reported.

Antibiotic resistance is not theoretical: the threat is real and immediate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/11/antibiotics-drug-resistance-is-not-theoretical-threat-real-immediate>
The initiative is part of the NHS innovation accelerator scheme, designed to 
help with the adoption of new treatments and technologies.

The programme’s founder, Sir Bruce Keogh, NHS England’s national medical 
director, said: “With rising demand and escalating costs, innovation is not an 
option but a necessity if we are to build a sustainable NHS.

“The innovations selected for this programme have the potential to deliver 
better value for the taxpayer whilst making patient interactions with the NHS 
safer and more personal.”

Meanwhile, the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, has urged those eligible for 
a free flu vaccination to take up the offer.

As part of the national “stay well this winter” campaign, Khan called on 
people more at risk to prepare for the cold weather.

Children aged between two and seven, adults with chronic health conditions, 
pregnant women and people over 65 are eligible for a free fluvaccine, according 
to NHS England.

Claire Ward, the chair of Pharmacy Voice, welcomed the initiative as a means 
of reducing patient reliance on antibiotics but said the announcement had come 
at a time when community pharmacies faced “significant cuts”.

“Clearly we’re concerned this would make it difficult for some communities to 
have access to the healthcare professionals delivering these kinds of services 
if the cuts result in fewer pharmacists being available.

“Here is the NHS doing what we would expect it to do, but at the same time it 
is in the context of the pay master – the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> – making significant cuts to 
community pharmacies.

“We need this type of service to be accessible to all community pharmacies. We 
are concerned that while on the one hand it is promoting great ideas and 
visions, on the other it’s taking away the funding that makes community 
pharmacies viable.”
 