
I am eating in Osaka and entrust myself entirely to the perfect taste shown by 
my Japanese hosts. Akiko and Fukima translate the menu - symbols painted on 
teak tickets that hang from brass pins on a board. Smelt, sashimi, fugu. Fugu? 
Isn't that blowfish?

Excitement yelps around the table. Fear chases it, propelled by vague and 
venomous statistics like poisonous humming birds eager to spear any sense of 
adventurousness. One in 100 servings is fatal don't you know? The order is 
made. The sashimi is, as always, beautiful, like slices of semi-precious stone 
resting on a snowdrift of shredded daikon radish. It is from the surface end of 
the root, and it is mild and refreshing. The thin tip is the hot end.

Before we put the fish in our mouths, we wrap it in shiso, a light lemony herb 
that looks a little like nettle leaves and which I have seen only in Japan. I 
barely notice that I now use my chopsticks with ease, rather than the unnatural 
rigidity of a child holding a pencil for the first time. There is a token 
western dish. It is not a standard caesar salad; shredded kos is topped with 
fried potato noodles, raw salmon and a barely poached cold egg.

The Iwatani flame is lit below the nabe, a pot of cabbage, bean sprouts and 
fatty beef, raw like bacon. Food as social entertainment is important in Japan 
and with bright eyes, we watch our grinning bassist as he stirs the bubbling 
mix, chattering about his technique. The shishamo arrive, tiny smelt fried 
whole, their swollen pregnant bodies twisted with the heat.

A bite reveals the eggs; pale yellow, densely packed and so small they look 
like powder, but taste of delicious bitterness. Fukima tells me that her 
parents made her eat lots of shishamo as a child, as the calcium in the fragile 
bones would make her legs grow long. Finally the fugu is set down in front of 
us to hushed anticipation. I pick up a breaded, deep-fried cube. I chew. I 
swallow. It tastes good, but not as exceptional as it should, considering the 
supposed risk in eating it. Findus and Birds Eye make something similar. What 
price death? A finger from the Captain's table?

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 