
Although the two nations are separated by little more than 30 miles of water, 
the gulf between the French music industry and British hearts has seemed 
unbridgeable at times. For many Anglophone critics, French pop was a joke – 
superannuated grandes dames in chintzy dresses belting out chintzier ballads 
and moustachioed men in tight white suits desperately trying to convince 
themselves they were the second Elvis. French rock wasn't treated so kindly. 
The party line seemed to be that the country could have shut up shop after 
Serge Gainsbourg releasedHistoire de Melody Nelson <http://youtu.be/cIDuE4U_fZg>
 without the rest of the world missing out on anything.

That such myths were common currency, at least until the emergence of Daft Punk
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/056e4f3e-d505-4dad-8ec1-d04f521cbb56> 
andAir 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/cb67438a-7f50-4f2b-a6f1-2bb2729fd538>, 
is remarkable given all the evidence to the contrary. French law demands a high 
proportion of songs on French radio in the national language. This might have 
hampered commercial success in English-speaking markets, but it has helped to 
maintain a domestic music scene that is one of the strongest and most diverse 
in Europe. To celebrate French music at its best, here are 10 clips from the 
archives.

Sylvie Vartan – Par Amour, Par Pitié <http://youtu.be/ICMoHEW0UY4> (1966)

Despite the frothy image of acts such as France Gall 
<http://youtu.be/_3NNGKAxOxs> and Jacqueline Taïeb <http://youtu.be/guADTFlEHJE>
, the 1960s weren't all miniskirts and bubblegum. The darker side of 
pop-chanson was rarely articulated with such gut-wrenching power as on Sylvie 
Vartan's Par Amour, Par Pitié. Pleading for a departed lover to return, out of 
pity if not love, she requests the same mercy a vet would show in putting a 
wounded horse out of its misery. It would be difficult to find a bleaker 
sentiment in the pop canon, even with the best efforts of the current 
generation of singers from thenouvelle scène française 
<http://youtu.be/_hGBf4exIBw> following in her footsteps.

Brigitte Bardot – Contact <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1SE_K7SSDKg> (1968)

Music so forward-thinking it still sounded futuristic when Stereolab 
<http://youtu.be/3_XswHm514w> started imitating it three decades later, Contact 
marked the high point of Brigitte Bardot's pop career and ranks alongside the 
very best workSerge Gainsbourg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/serge-gainsbourg> ever produced. Accompanied 
by clanking, whirring loops, Bardot spits out lyrics about meteorites and space 
suits like an angry Barbarella. It's fitting that one of the most electrifying 
songs of the 1960s was performed by a star whose raw vivacity revolutionised 
the world's image of France.

Nicoletta – A Quoi Sert de Vivre Libre <http://youtu.be/Bp5oHM5VBcU> (1975)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBp5oHM5VBcU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBp5oHM5VBcU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBp5oHM5VBcU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It was almost inevitable that chanson, seen by some as France's indigenous 
version of soul music, would be influenced by the lush Philly sound that came 
to dominate the US in the early 70s. Replacing the sweet falsetto of the 
original with an earthy growl, Nicoletta's cover of the Stylistics'Can't Give 
You Anything (But My Love) <http://youtu.be/LPTbzPHkEGA> brought the two 
together magnificently. The song foreshadowed the glorious rise of French 
disco-pop that saw the likes ofDalida <http://youtu.be/8SeiLHvWRr8>, Sheila & B 
Devotion <http://youtu.be/lrKjawtXY3s>, Patrick Hernandez 
<http://youtu.be/9UaJAnnipkY> and Santa Esmeralda <http://youtu.be/8O0y3Rg2SnI> 
conquer the European charts.

Cerrone – Supernature <http://youtu.be/QgGK4qBTwpw> (1977)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQgGK4qBTwpw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQgGK4qBTwpw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQgGK4qBTwpw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Having mastered disco, French producers set about dismantling it and 
rebuilding the genre in remarkable new configurations. Alongside Space'sMagic 
Fly <http://youtu.be/DSLWKw4NImA>, the stunning Supernature by Cerrone was 
instrumental in shaping the next 30 years of dance music, inspiring everything 
from the glittering house ofCassius <http://youtu.be/DDr-UcPg91k> and Daft Punk 
<http://youtu.be/s9MszVE7aR4> to David Guetta <http://youtu.be/Igpdpl1C1Q8>. 
Over swirling synths, the apocalyptic lyrics tell of mutant creatures wreaking 
a terrible revenge on humanity for its environmental crimes.Goldfrapp 
<http://youtu.be/nFF8bubMc40> named their finest album in its honour.

Elli et Jacno – Main dans la Main <http://youtu.be/Fq_7dbaQ4QA> (1980)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFq_7dbaQ4QA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFq_7dbaQ4QA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFq_7dbaQ4QA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Rising from the ashes of punk legends Stinky Toys <http://youtu.be/9HxcDY-ea4s>
, Elli et Jacno played stripped-down synth-pop that demonstrated you could take 
electronic music into the charts even if you weren't able to recite the 
instruction manuals of obscure analogue keyboards from memory. Rarely sounding 
as if they required more than one finger to play, songs such asMain dans la Main
 <http://youtu.be/Fq_7dbaQ4QA> were critical to the development of a DIY pop 
scene that has continued to produce some of France's most exciting acts, 
includingreigning electro queen Yelle <http://youtu.be/Y99UqvgCmE8>.

Étienne Daho – Week-End à Rome <http://youtu.be/yS2H2cBNFn8> (1984)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyS2H2cBNFn8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyS2H2cBNFn8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyS2H2cBNFn8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
From Charles Trenet's Route Nationale N°7 <http://youtu.be/uXNIrFStLa8> 
onwards, Parisian singers have frequently returned to the theme of escaping the 
city the rest of the world is infatuated with. Daho brought a heavy measure of 
Trenet's unruffled old-world charm to electronic pop in the early 1980s, a 
suave, sardonic voice in anotherwise frenetic era <http://youtu.be/FFbh6WDQ9w0>
. Week-End à Rome saw him flee France's rainy capital, in the company ofBelgian 
starlet Lio <http://youtu.be/T9gfRXAj5VA>, for two days of romance across the 
Italian border.

Indochine – 3e Sexe <http://youtu.be/T_jSFjGBq8I> (1985)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FT_jSFjGBq8I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FT_jSFjGBq8I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FT_jSFjGBq8I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
By 1985, the French new wave was in full swing, bringing drum machines and 
gender fluidity to a rock scene crying out for rejuvenation. Snarling, 
propulsive jangle-pop equal to anything the Cure were releasing on the other 
side of the Channel, Indochine's 3e Sexe captured the spirit of the times. 
Together withLes Rita Mitsouko <http://youtu.be/t6FVlfOgTo8> and Niagara 
<http://youtu.be/kmAHp645l4c>, they're one of the few French bands to have 
consistently competed with the country's biggest solo artists.

Mylène Farmer – Désenchantée <http://youtu.be/XazOkXRTyR4> (1991)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXazOkXRTyR4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXazOkXRTyR4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXazOkXRTyR4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The signature song of Europe's greatest modern pop star, Désenchantée topped 
the charts for nine consecutive weeks in 1991. Although private to the point of 
reclusiveness, Farmer's life and work have always been intensely scrutinised by 
critics applying the auteur theory to commercial music. It's an approach 
dissenters have argued has kept the French industry in stasis while the rest of 
the world has moved on to the more immediate pleasures of precision-engineered 
assembly-line pop. France may never produce a Girls Aloud but it is just as 
unlikely Cheryl Cole will ever record a million-selling single with lyrics 
channelling Romanian philosopher Emil Cioran.

Air – La Femme D'Argent <http://youtu.be/Ls9aiN4QEDw> (1998)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLs9aiN4QEDw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLs9aiN4QEDw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLs9aiN4QEDw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Familiar to anyone who caught three minutes of a BBC home improvement 
programme between 1998 and 2006; Air's La Femme D'Argent deserves to be 
remembered as more than backing music for grasping buy-to-letters replacing 
their lawns with decking. Chill-out may be the two most offputting words in the 
electro lexicon (after "featuring Skrillex"), but the song's sprawling beauty 
is absolutely undeniable. With "(French Band)" proudly displayed in parentheses 
on their record sleeves, Air shattered stereotypes about the country's pop and 
cleared a path to British critical acclaim that the likes ofPhoenix 
<http://youtu.be/4BJDNw7o6so> and Charlotte Gainsbourg 
<http://youtu.be/fEEsdzgBrCA> have followed.

Raï'n'B Fever – Un Gaou à Oran <http://youtu.be/o8u1GNOMTso> (2004)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fo8u1GNOMTso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fo8u1GNOMTso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fo8u1GNOMTso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The street sounds of Africa have always found a home in Paris and there are 
few better examples of the city's cultural cross-pollination than 2004's 
Raï'n'B Fever project. Bringing Algerian-born raï singerMohamed Lamine 
<http://youtu.be/I2BCYOx4NCE> and Ivorian zouglou superstars Magic System 
<http://youtu.be/CXcn9shBP4g> together with local rappers 113 
<http://youtu.be/LEMKsBBX4BI>, Un Gaou à Oran showed the new face of French pop 
at its dynamic best. With a take on banlieue life more heavily indebted to 
Benny Hill than La Haine, the accompanying video gave international audiences a 
rare chance to see the suburban tower blocks as communities bubbling with life, 
rather than crumbling monuments to deprivation and inequality.

• For more information on certain destinations, visit our Eurostar Music 
Discovery site <http://www.guardian.co.uk/eurostar-music-discovery>, published 
in association with Eurostar
 