
The final episode of South Park’s serialized 20th season picked up where we 
left off last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/01/south-park-episode-nine-us-election-theme>
: in the midst of an international crisis caused by bunch of trolls (of both 
the presidential and garden-variety).

In the Pentagon, the “stank face” and be-oranged President Garrison is told 
that the Russians are scrambling bombers to attack Denmark in retaliation for 
Troll Trace, the program that will allow anyone to look up anyone else’s 
internet history that will go online in minutes.

But, it seems there’s still hope! Someone is leading a coordinated cyberattack 
on the Troll Trace website: it’s Kyle Broflovsky, back inSouth Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/south-park>, and he’s enlisted all of 
his classmates (and his brother Ike) for help trolling, responding to or coming 
up with terrible things to say online in order to create more trolls than Troll 
Trace can log.

South Park continues US election theme: 'What if you could troll the entire 
world?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/01/south-park-episode-nine-us-election-theme>
At Troll Trace HQ, Rick Astley’s Never Gonna Give You Up is still playing on 
repeat as Gerald Broflovsky waits, naked and depressed, in the company’s 
glassed-in dining room. Dildo Scaggins, the other naked trolls and the Danish 
employees of Troll Trace break through the transmission to explain that the 
program should go online soon but that someone else’s mass-trolling is 
overwhelming the Troll Trace servers – and it’s coming from Gerald’s account.

Dildo and the Danish eventually get in touch with Kyle and offer their 
assistance, telling Kyle that he’s mastered Trevor’s Axiom, but Kyle doesn’t 
know what that is.

Neither does President Garrison, who is being briefed on it at the Pentagon. 
The briefer explains that, when person A trolls person B, the actual target is 
person C, who will self-righteously overreact. Person C’s overreaction is 
designed to stimulate persons D, E and F to make fun of them, and persons G-N 
to rip on persons D-F, and so on, “all bringing out the worst in humanity”.

“Huh,” says Cheeto Garrison. “That sort of sounds like how I got elected.”

At SpaceX, the crowd that wants to go to Mars to escape Troll Trace is growing 
restless; inside, Cartman’s girlfriend Heidi has successfully created a cheap 
and easy power source that can take them to Mars. Elon Musk asks how she got to 
be so smart, and Heidi says, “I just have a boyfriend who really supports me,” 
waving at Eric.

Eric, though, is sulking: he has been convinced by Butters that Heidi is part 
and parcel of the conspiracy against men firstoutlined by Bill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/south-park-spoofs-us-election-trump>
 after Hillary Clinton’s election night loss. He and Butters explain to a male 
SpaceX employee that they can’t go to Mars because of the visions of Mars that 
Cartman has been having all season finally make sense.
South Park (@SouthPark) 
And you'll be trapped down there forever. In the cum and joke mines of Mars. 
#SouthPark <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SouthPark?src=hash> #SeasonFinale 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SeasonFinale?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/CIa68ovick 
<https://t.co/CIa68ovick>
 <https://twitter.com/SouthPark/status/806742501516152833> December 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SouthPark/status/806742501516152833> 
Cartman says that the Mars colony will seem really cool until you notice that 
all the other visible colonists are women. “Men have been forced underground, 
deemed useless by women” Cartman intones. “They are mined for the only things 
women still need us for: our semen and our jokes. And you’ll be trapped down 
there forever, in the cum- and joke-mines of Mars.”

Back at Troll Trace HQ, Dildo tells Gerald that someone must turn off the 
breakers that will keep the servers from overheating, and, so, dressed in a 
Danish uniform that resembles the outfit of a garden gnome, Gerald starts 
turning off the breakers. The mega-troll flying away in a helicopter checks his 
phone to see Gerald scaling the tower, and turns back.

Sheila Broflovsky, enraged at being locked in the pantry by her sons so that 
they can troll, frees herself and, slightly crazed, grounds both her sons from 
the computer forever. Kyle says, “I’m just trying to save my family” and, 
strapping something on his back and grabbing Ike, flies out the window.

Kyle and Ike make their way to the town copy shop to continue their trolling 
on a public terminal. Garrison interrupts, telling him the federal government 
will help amplify the hate he’s spreading to shut down the internet completely.

Sheila goes by another house to find the boys (as people run around, 
panicking, in the background), but discovers her friend weeping: Troll Trace 
has gone online, and the other mother looked up her husband’s history. Sheila 
sits down and looks up Ike to discover … he has no history of trolling, just 
like the boys said. She feels first guilty and then relieved that Ike was 
telling the truth, but the other mother wants someone to share her pain. She 
tries to get Sheila to look up Gerald’s history, both of them blissfully 
unaware that Gerald is the online troll whose activities have nearly triggered 
an apocalyptic event.

Back at SpaceX, Cartman is trying to solve his conundrum: stay on earth and 
let Heidi discover that he doesn’t think women are funny, or be enslaved in the 
cum-and-joke mines of Mars when Kyle calls Butters and finds out about SpaceX’s 
enormous energy source. “I think we can help each other,” he tells Cartman 
because, without Heidi’s power source, the Pentagon doesn’t have enough power 
to destroy Troll Trace. They execute a plan to allow the Pentagon to tap into 
the source without the SpaceX employees becoming aware.

At Troll Trace HQ, Gerald has found the last breaker – at the end of a totally 
unnecessary and Star Wars-like bridge – but the mega-troll has beat him there. 
As the building shakes and heaves around them, they debate whether the 
mega-troll is truly a satirist or just a nihilist. Gerald finally says that 
he’s learned his lesson, because he sees himself in the mega-troll, “with only 
one minor difference”. He then knees the mega-troll in the balls and tosses him 
off the bridge. “Fuck you! What I do is fucking funny, bitch!” he yells after 
him, and pulls the final lever to make sure the Troll Trace servers can 
overheat.

South Park spoofs the US election result: 'What have you done? You maniacs!'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/south-park-spoofs-us-election-trump>
Dildo tells Kyle that Gerald’s finished his mission, Kyle tells Garrison, and 
Garrison tells the Pentagon to re-route the internet through SpaceX. SpaceX 
explodes, and the internet goes out just as Sheila presses enter to pull up 
Gerald’s internet history.

Elon Musk, the SpaceX employees and the kids watch as the building goes up. 
“Well, looks like you’ll kind of have to start over, huh, Elon?” says Cartman. 
“Maybe you should just go back to your little cars, huh?”

Back in South Park, a new day dawns as Kyle narrates that the internet has 
been completely erased. Gerald arrives home, and gets hugs from Sheila as the 
boys glare at him.

The town is seen watching the local news cover the first email sent on the new 
internet, an honor accorded the elderly Dave Beckett of Boca Raton, Florida. He 
explains he sent a picture to an old friend, and the reporter asks what 
precisely it was. “I showed him my dick, called him a fag,” says Beckett – 
because you can reboot the internet, but you can’t reboot humanity.
 