
Australia need a daunting 592 runs to win the third Test against South Africa 
after the tourists dominated the third day at Perth.

Hashim Amla and AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> both made big hundreds as 
the Proteas looked well set to win the three-match series 1-0. Amla fell just 
short of a double-century and De Villiers made 169 as South Africa were bowled 
out in their second innings for 569 to set the home side a victory target of 
632. Australia closed on 40 without loss.

South Africa had taken control of the series decider on day two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/dec/01/australia-south-africa-ricky-ponting>
 and closed on 230 for two, 292 runs in front. By lunch on day three that lead 
had been lifted to 382, with Amla serene on 149 not out and Jacques Kallis the 
only man out in a total of 320 for three.

Amla started the morning on 99 but showed no hint of nerves as he tapped the 
third ball for a single to register his 18th Test century. A first boundary of 
the day followed in Mitchell Johnson's second over, driven wide of mid-off by 
Amla, who offered a tough chance on 108 when he hit a woeful Johnson full-toss 
hard towards gully. Michael Hussey got a hand to it but could not cling on and 
instead Amla picked up his second four in as many balls.

Kallis, batting within himself, hit his first four of the day off John 
Hastings in the 10th over and Amla continued to pepper the ropes, passing 1,000 
runs for 2012 with another boundary. Kallis eventually departed for 37 in 65 
balls, top-edging a Mitchell Starc bouncer to Johnson at fine leg.

Amla's innings was unaffected and De Villiers offered solid support to 
accompany him to lunch, grinding out 18 runs in the process. By the break Amla 
had scored 149. He went on to score 196, including 21 fours, before Johnson 
claimed a difficult caught and bowled chance.

The unfortunate Dean Elgar bagged a pair of ducks on his debut as he was 
trapped lbw by Johnson to the fourth ball he faced. But that was the last joy 
for the home side in the session as De Villiers took over where Amla left off 
with Faf du Plessis providing good support.

After tea Johnson went on to claim his fourth wicket and also fourth catch of 
the innings as he gave the home crowd something to cheer about. Du Plessis had 
scored 27 before he guided Johnson into the hands of Michael Clarke at wide 
slip.

Robin Peterson had failed to trouble the scorers when he was caught by Johnson 
off Starc with the total on 539 for seven. Starc went on to claim his fourth 
wicket when De Villiers fell for 169, caught behind by Matthew Wade after an 
innings that included 21 fours and three sixes and coming off only 184 balls, 
with the total on 557 and the lead at over 600.

Starc made it a five-wicket haul when Dale Steyn clipped a rising ball behind 
to Wade and departed for eight. Starc finished with six for 154 as he bowled 
Morne Morkel for a duck to end the South Africa innings on 569 and a lead of 
631.

Australia's reply had reached 40 without loss, with David Warner on 29 and Ed 
Cowan nine not out from 13 overs when the third day's play came to a close.

That left the home side still needing 592 runs to win or two days to bat out 
and save the Test and deny the Proteas what would be a series-winning victory 
in a match that carries the extra bounty of the world No1 spot.
 