
4.19pm GMT 

Bye then

We’ll be back again tomorrow for much more relentless Australian dominance. Do 
join us then. Ta-ra!

4.06pm GMT 

STUMPS

And that’s yer lot. Another wonderful day for Australia, whose grip on this 
match is absolute. But for an early-morning Australian collapse, it would take 
a spectacular turn-up for South Africa to get anything other than a hiding out 
of this match.

4.03pm GMT 

6th over: Australia 27-0 (Rogers 1, Warner 25)

Warner brings up his quarter-century with a single off the 17th delivery he 
has faced. That leaves Rogers to see out the rest of the over, leaving as many 
balls as he can. The day ends with him on an 18-balls one.

4.00pm GMT 

5th over: Australia 26-0 (Rogers 1, Warner 24)

Warner goes down on one knee to crash Morkel’s first delivery through the 
covers for four, and flicks the next off his pads and past mid-on for another. 
There follows a muted lbw shout, the ball pitching outside leg and being on its 
way a foot or so over the stumps when it hits Warner’s pad. There will be time 
for one more over.

3.56pm GMT 

4th over: Australia 17-0 (Rogers 1, Warner 16)

Whooosh! Abbott angles the ball across Warner, gets a little movement off the 
seam, and only just misses the edge. Warner’s high-scoring start ends, though 
he does nick a single off the final delivery.

3.51pm GMT 

3rd over: Australia 16-0 (Rogers 1, Warner 15)

Warner is picking up where he left off, leaning back to guide a shortish 
delivery through the covers for four, then slightly mishitting the next in a 
similar direction for three more. Rogers has faced 11 deliveries for his one 
run, and Warner has scored 15 off seven balls.

3.47pm GMT 

2nd over: Australia 9-0 (Rogers 1, Warner 8)

Abbott bowls, and Rogers makes a series of gutsy leaves from balls angles 
across the stumps. A maiden.

3.44pm GMT 

1st over: Australia 9-0 (Rogers 1, Warner 8)

A fine, aggressive start from Morkel, with Rogers not really knowing what to 
make of his first two deliveries but leading-edging the second for a single. 
But then Warner touches the ball deftly away for four and gets two from each of 
the next two, and the memory of those first two deliveries is lost.

3.31pm GMT 

Follow-on latest

Australia won’t enforce the follow-on, and their second innings will get under 
way shortly. Back in a tick.

3.30pm GMT 

82.5 overs: South Africa 287 all out

Pattinson replaces Harris, and Australia bring a short leg in to further 
pressure Morkel. When Morkel does hit the ball, though, it crashes straight 
into Philander’s thigh. Then he pulls a no-bal through midwicket for two, and 
repeats the dose only more so to grab four off the next ball. Hence the switch 
to bowling round the wicket, which worked pretty well.

3.28pm GMT 

WICKET! Morkel c Watson b Pattinson 7 (South Africa 287 all out)

It’s all over! Pattinson comes round the wicket to Morkel, and immediately 
finds the edge, and Watson catches well at first slip. So, what of the 
follow-on?

3.23pm GMT 

82nd over: South Africa 280-9 (Philander 37, Morkel 1)

Australia place a fielder deep at third man and Johnson immediately gives 
Steyn height and width and the batsman takes the bait, though the ball flies 
about 10 yards wide of the fielder for four. No matter, he gets out next ball. 
Morkel takes a single off the last to stay on strike.

3.20pm GMT 

WICKET! Steyn c Watson b Johnson 28 (South Africa 279-9)

Johnson angles the ball across Steyn, who gets a thick edge and sends the ball 
straight at Shane Watson’s chest at second slip.

3.16pm GMT 

81st over: South Africa 275-8 (Philander 37, Steyn 24)

Australia take the new ball, and hand it to Harris. Philander misjudges its 
bounce and hits it in the air towards mid off, where nobody is waiting to catch 
it. A maiden.

3.13pm GMT 

80th over: South Africa 275-8 (Philander 37, Steyn 24)

Johnson also returns, with the new ball imminent, and gets one to rear up into 
Steyn, who pushes his bat at it with one hand and is all sorts of fortunate to 
see it come off the shoulder, fly high between keeper and slip and off for 
four. Then a short ball has Steyn ducking, but it doesn’t bounce much and 
smashes into the badge on his helmet. No damage caused, except to the helmet, 
which is eventually replaced.

3.03pm GMT 

79th over: South Africa 269-8 (Philander 37, Steyn 18)

Philander gets a single off Harris’s first, bringing Steyn onto strike, and he 
drives his first ball deliciously down the ground for four, and then hoiks the 
next over cover for two, and clips the one after that to gully for a single. 
After Abbott’s 25-ball three, we’ve had Steyn’s 18-ball 18.

Updated at 3.06pm GMT

3.00pm GMT 

78th over: South Africa 264-8 (Philander 36, Steyn 11)

Steyn pushes the ball through the covers for four, his timing exemplary. “It’s 
a little-known fact,” writes James Steerforth, “but Molly Bloom’s famous 
monologue at the end of Ulysses is actually a heart-felt lament for the 
truncated career of Ryan Harris due to his gammy knees.”Here’s the full text of 
said soliloquy 
<http://archive.org/stream/MollyBloomMonologEnd/MollyBloomMonologhyEnd_djvu.txt>
. I couldn’t read it all, what with having an OBO to write, but so far as I can 
tell it could be about absolutely anything.

2.55pm GMT 

77th over: South Africa 257-8 (Philander 36, Steyn 7)

Pattinson continues, and he’s reliably getting the ball to swing into the 
batsman. Philander looks uncomfortable, and edges one into his pads, but 
generally deals with it pretty well.

2.48pm GMT 

76th over: South Africa 257-8 (Philander 36, Steyn 7)

Watson sizes Steyn up with a few testers, and then bowls one shortish and 
wideish and it’s dismissed, absolutely as it should be, past point for four.

2.44pm GMT 

75th over: South Africa 253-8 (Philander 36, Steyn 3)

After just one over, Smith’s microspell is over and Pattinson returns. 
Philander’s habit of taking a single from the first ball of an over continues, 
despite a new and apparently injured batsman. Steyn then pushes the ball down 
the ground and runs three, during which there is just the slightest evidence of 
a limp. “Not only cricket,” writes John Starbuck about James Joyce (see over 70 
for details). “Ulysses has plenty about the smells of peoples clothing too: the 
partially moistened right sock; Love me, love my dirty shirt etc.” You could 
say literally anything about Ulysses and I would be forced to believe you.

2.40pm GMT 

74th over: South Africa 249-8 (Philander 35, Steyn 0)

The wicket came off the last ball of Watson’s first over after replacing 
Johnson. For a while I thought this meant the end of watching Abbott squirm, 
but no – Watson bangs one in short and Abbott only just gets his head out of 
the way, and then pitches the next full and takes the wicket. Nice bowling.

2.38pm GMT 

WICKET! Abbott b Watson 3 (South Africa 249-8)

The ball totally ignores Abbott’s haphazard defensive push and clips off stump!

2.32pm GMT 

73rd over: South Africa 249-7 (Philander 35, Abbott 3)

Smith replaces Harris, and gets his first ball to move quite a bit. Philander 
knocks it to a fielder at cover and runs, a bit foolishly – a decent throw 
would surely have done for Abbott. Luckily it was a terrible throw, high and 
wide of Haddin’s right shoulder, and Abbott survives.

2.29pm GMT 

72nd over: South Africa 247-7 (Philander 34, Abbott 2)

Philander scores a single off Johnson’s first ball, which brings South Africa 
to 247, a number that is not only precisely 247 more than nothing but also 
precisely 247 less than the 494 Australia got before declaring. A landmark, of 
sorts. Abbott survives the rest of the over, but his 16-ball two has been an 
exercise in discomfort.

2.24pm GMT 

71st over: South Africa 246-7 (Philander 33, Abbott 2)

Harris angles the ball into Abbott, who leaves it and it misses the stumps by 
an inch or two. The next ball crashes into Abbott’s pads, engendering a mild 
appeal – the ball was heading down leg side. Abbott survives the rest of the 
over, even scoring a couple of runs, but he doesn’t look very happy.

2.19pm GMT 

70th over: South Africa 244-7 (Philander 33, Abbott 0)

A maiden from Johnson. “Nice Kate Bush moment. And don’t worry. People who 
like Test Matches are destined for Ulysses,” reassures Robert Wilson. “Joyce is 
full of cricket. Always blind as a bat, he loved thesounds. And liked to slip 
in the phrase ‘slog to square leg’ whenever he could. Not something you can say 
of Proust.” Sadly I can’t say anything of Proust, either. I don’t even know any 
songs inspired by him.

2.16pm GMT 

69th over: South Africa 244-7 (Philander 33, Abbott 0)

Philander gets three with a nice-looking cover drive. “I don’t know if this 
will be of assistance in understanding the yellowing whites of the Aussies, but 
when I did judo as a lad we made a point of never washing our suits before 
competition,” writes Paul Whaley. “This was on the rationale that quite frankly 
it’s bad enough for your concentration to have a hairy ape grinding his sweaty 
chest in your face; it’s quite another if said ape is garbed in kit drenched in 
the stale sweat of six months’ heavy physical work-outs. Now, I’m not 
suggesting that the Australians are the sort of unwashed Neanderthals who would 
stoop so low as to employ this sort of skullduggery, but what do you think the 
odds are that anyone in that team of slavering machismo knows what Persil is 
for?”

I can easily imagine opponents reeling from the serious olfactory up-beating 
they received even before your bouts commenced. This is the kind of advantage 
teams should be seeking. Not so much blue-sky thinking as grey-shirt thinking.

2.11pm GMT 

68th over: South Africa 241-7 (Philander 29, Abbott 0)

Another 50-odd still required if South Africa are to avoid a potential 
follow-on, and Johnson wastes no time making Abbott exceedingly uncomfortable 
by sending a few balls into, or not far off, his body. Or head. “The Australian 
team wears cream-coloured clobber, as mandated by tradition and that dedicated 
follower of fashion, Richie Benaud,” point-of-informations James Steerforth, 
and I hang my head in ignorant shame. I preferred the sweat-staining theory.

2.07pm GMT 

WICKET! Du Plessis c Warner b Johnson 67 (South Africa 241-7)

Johnson comes on, and with his second ball coaxes an edge from Du Plessis, and 
Warner takes an excellent low catch at gully. The partnership is broken after 
adding an extremely important 95.

2.04pm GMT 

67th over: South Africa 240-6 (du Plessis 67, Philander 29)

Ryan Harris has a go with the ball, and is duly tucked through midwicket by Du 
Plessis for four, and again a few balls later for two. In between, Harris 
coaxes one to swing across the batsman, away from Haddin and away for four 
byes. English cricket newsflash:
England Cricket (@ECB_cricket) 
Andy Flower has today been appointed as Technical Director of Elite Coaching 
by the ECB
 <https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/statuses/440487052594118656> March 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/statuses/440487052594118656> 
1.59pm GMT 

66th over: South Africa 230-6 (du Plessis 61, Philander 29)

“Has no one noticed that JP Duminy sounds like a stationery shop owner in 
Ulysses?” wonders Robert Wilson. “Grossbooted draymen roll dullthudding barrels 
past the fourpaned windows of JP Duminy’s. Kind of thing. Pretentious maybe, 
but dizzyingly true.” Robert, I have no idea. I can’t even pretend to have read 
Ulysses, sadly. I have heard a song inspired by it, if that counts?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du3z1neIlOh8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du3z1neIlOh8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du3z1neIlOh8&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du3z1neIlOh8&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du3z1neIlOh8>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du3z1neIlOh8&media=>
close 
1.54pm GMT 

65th over: South Africa 227-6 (du Plessis 60, Philander 27)

Du Plessis clips the ball through midwicket for four, and that’s his 
half-century. It’s a lovely shot, and he basically does it again to get another 
four off the next ball, later adding a couple with a paddle to long leg. Now, 
here’s another picture of a sparkly white-clad South African and some 
yellowing, sweat-stained Australians.
 Australia's Ryan Harris celebrates taking the wicket of South Africa's JP 
Duminy during the third day of the third Test match at Newlands Stadium in Cape 
Town. Photograph: Stringer/Reuters 
1.51pm GMT 

64th over: South Africa 216-6 (du Plessis 49, Philander 27)

Philander waits for a bit of width, and then pounces upon it when it arrives, 
cutting the ball away through backward point for four. Now, more important 
matters: is it just me, or do South Africa use a better brand of washing powder 
than the Australians? Their kit is justwhiter. There can be no doubting it. 
I’ll post another picture in the next over. Questions must be asked about this.
 Australia's Ryan Harris, front, prevents South Africa's Graham Smith, from 
making a run during the third day of the third test in Cape Town. Photograph: AP
1.48pm GMT 

63rd over: South Africa 212-6 (du Plessis 49, Philander 23)

A poor first ball goes for two, and Philander adds a single off the second to 
give Du Plessis four opportunities to clame that 50. He doesn’t take any of 
them.

1.45pm GMT 

62nd over: South Africa 209-6 (du Plessis 49, Philander 20)

Du Plessis brings himself to the very brink of a half-century with a push 
through the covers for a couple. A fine shot, the only scoring effort of the 
over.

1.41pm GMT 

61st over: South Africa 207-6 (du Plessis 47, Philander 20)

A maiden from Lyon. Right now I am profoundly jealous of anyone enjoying this 
view:

1.37pm GMT 

60th over: South Africa 207-6 (du Plessis 47, Philander 20)

Pattinson’s first ball is an absolute ripper, jagging in off the seam and 
flying about four inches over the stumps with Philander a bemused bystander. It 
could so easily have taken a wicket, but it could also pretty easily have gone 
for four byes, but for Haddin’s diving stop.

Incidentally, further developments in the Australia v South Africa sporting 
rivalry came today with the announcement that the nations’ football teams would 
meet in a friendly in Sydney this May, dubbed a “World Cup farewell match”, 
presumably because it gives Australia a chance to say farewell to their fans 
before travelling to Brazil, and South Africa a chance to say farewell to the 
concept of competing in the World Cup for the foreseeable future. Seems a bit 
cruel to me.

1.33pm GMT 

59th over: South Africa 204-6 (du Plessis 45, Philander 19)

Nathan Lyon gets the evening session under way, and the batsmen ease 
themselves in with a single each, before Du Plessis paddles the ball over his 
left shoulder for a couple.

1.30pm GMT 

Hello!

Hello world. Don’t go anywhere: we’ve got another 40-odd overs to go today, in 
which South Africa should either score enough runs to avoid the follow-on, or 
get out having failed to make them (in which case Australia may well not 
enforce the follow-on anyway). The players should be back out in but a few 
short minutes, so hold on to your hats.

1.18pm GMT 

TEA

So that’s the break. Six South African wickets have gone down across two 
sessions, but du Plessis - the resistance man - is still there with great 
support from Vermin Vernon Philander. Faf fu Plessis has been let off a caught 
behind by the umpire, dropped twice, and had a stumping missed, and has thus 
hazardously navigated his way to the verge of a half century. One more wicket 
will still signal a swift end, in all likelihood, but while these two are 
there, South Africa can still look to bat through the day and really hamper 
Australia’s victory push. Who will triumph? Who will falter? Who will out-think 
the other? I will leave you with some words sent through by Daniel East, from 
his friend Baudelaire, then Simon Burnton will take up the commentary.

We rack our brains with subtle stratagems
and ruin massive armatures
before the splendid Creature may be seen
for whom our fatal longing makes us sob.

A fine night to all, and thanks for the company.

Updated at 1.27pm GMT

1.13pm GMT 

58th over: South Africa 200-6 (du Plessis 42 Philander 18)

Johnson bowls the last over before tea, but there is no late joy, just a 
couple of singles as this pair safely negotiate the session. The 200 comes up, 
and South Africa will be a little happier after this resistance.

1.08pm GMT 

57th over: South Africa 198-6 (du Plessis 41 Philander 17)

Another close call for du Plessis, this time facing Harris and nicking behind, 
but just wide of Haddin. The keeper took one of the best catches I’ve ever seen 
to get rid of Dean Elgar earlier today, but couldn’t leap far enough for that 
one. Faf got two runs from it, then got a half volley that he utterly creamed 
for four on the cover drive. Held the pose. For about two minutes. Creamy.

1.04pm GMT 

56th over: South Africa 192-6 (du Plessis 35 Philander 17)

Philander is a very, very good lower-order batsman. Gets a short ball from 
Johnson on his hip, but just flicks it away for a run rather than panicking 
about it. Looked quite casual. Du Plessis gets a run to the on side, and 
Johnson over-corrects by going too wide of the off stump.

Good to see that Harris Love Day has made it as far as the editor-in-chief of 
Wisden India.
Dileep Premachandran (@SpiceBoxofEarth) 
Such a pity that we'll get to see Harris in only a handful more Tests. Sort of 
player that should be the spine of every team.#SAvsAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvsAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/SpiceBoxofEarth/statuses/440471386377555968> March 3, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/SpiceBoxofEarth/statuses/440471386377555968> 
12.59pm GMT 

55th over: South Africa 190-6 (du Plessis 34 Philander 16)

Faf is shutting up shop this over against Harris. Up on his toes, dead 
straight bat, blocking everything away. It’s the 55th over, the reverse that 
was there seems to have faded, which means there are another 25 until the new 
ball is due. A maiden.

12.55pm GMT 

54th over: South Africa 190-6 (du Plessis 34 Philander 16)

Two singles from this Lyon over. He never gives too much away, but he must be 
frustrated. Reckon he’s lost at least ten Test wickets to keeping fumbles, 
mostly from Matthew Wade though.

12.52pm GMT 

53rd over: South Africa 188-6 (du Plessis 33 Philander 15)

This pair starting to look a bit more comfortable against pace. Harris comes 
back on, but Faf picks off two, runs a leg bye, then Philander drives three 
through midwicket, and Lyon puts in the best chase and sliding save that I’ve 
ever seen from a gangly awkward spin bowler. They’re exception in their ground 
fielding these days.

12.48pm GMT 

52nd over: South Africa 182-6 (du Plessis 31 Philander 12)

There’s an over the Australians may rue. They’ve missed Faf du Plessis twice 
in three balls off Lyon: first Haddin missed a routine stumping when Faf had a 
big swing and missed, then Doolan was moving the wrong way at short leg to 
intercept a flick. Big, big let-off for a batsman this stubborn. He got a 
single from the missed catch.

12.46pm GMT 

51st over: South Africa 181-6 (du Plessis 30 Philander 12)

Steve Smith comes on for the novelty hour, looking to confuse some South 
Africans. They are so confused they work five singles and don’t hole out. 
Here’s a terrific little story that’s just come in from David Brannigan. Read 
on.

“It’s nearly 11pm down here in southern Tasmania.We don’t have Uncle Rupert’s 
channel for watching the cricket action, but I have a good imagination, 
nurtured as a boy by listening to the radio, the mellifluous tones of Tone 
(Tony Charlton) during the Windies ‘calypso cricket’ tour in 60/61 particularly 
vivid, the excitement of the tied Test, indelible...”
“My tales however, of meeting some of the greats are as follows: In the summer 
of 62/63 I was tagged onto the tail of an U17 trip from Alice Springs to Port 
Augusta. I was 13. The highlight of the whole trip was a day trip to Adelaide 
Oval for a clinic with Vic Richardson and his grandsons Ian and Gregory. It was 
a good while afterwards before I realised who the grandsons were, but they 
weren’t at the time, if you get me. I certainly knew who the great man was, 
having read avidly the exploits of the greats of the game, the Ashes 
encounters.”

“I recall the great Victor as a bright-eyed very upright man. There were a few 
of the lads bowling and Vic was coaching at the bowling crease. One of the 
batsmen cracked a big straight drive and Vic just stuck out his hand and there 
was the ball. He was quite casual about it. I was most impressed! I can’t 
remember anything that was said, even when I had a knock myself, but being the 
youngest in the group, I was probably indulged. Cheers mate. I’m a slow typer. 
It’s now 11.24.”

12.41pm GMT 

50th over: South Africa 176-6 (du Plessis 27 Philander 10)

Lyon is giving the ball some nice flight here, just floating it up to the 
other end. Controlled, he only concedes a single and a two, and has the batsmen 
remaining watchful.

12.37pm GMT 

49th over: South Africa 173-6 (du Plessis 26 Philander 8)

Whoosh, another five extras from Patto, as he bangs a bouncer way over 
Haddin’s head for five wides. South Africa will gratefully accept all the 
freebies that the young mountain man can give them. Is a person from Dandenong 
called a Dandenong? Pattinson is looking like one, with all these sprayed 
deliveries. In between times he’s bowling some nice ones though. Faf picks up a 
single, that’s it.

“We have to discuss the dreaded F word,” says Rudi Edsall. “If we flush them 
out for another 30 or so runs does Clarke even consider enforcing? Obviously 
it’s worth getting them back out there for another possible Warnering with no 
Steyn but I kind of miss the follow on in modern cricket.” Actually we don’t 
have to discuss it, Rudi. It’ll never happen. Clarke doesn’t like it, and when 
your bowlers are working this hard, I can see his point. Unless you can roll a 
team for under a hundred, there’s really no point risking the follow on, in 
favour of a rest and a session or two on the lash.

12.32pm GMT 

48th over: South Africa 167-6 (du Plessis 25 Philander 8)

Gervase asks, Gervase gets. Nathan Lyon is back, the youngest old man in the 
world, looking to make his mark on this innings. Philander drives a single, 
then du Plessis plays a rather extravagant lap shot, a real flourish as he 
almost ramped this ball, while down on one knee, high toward fine leg. Would 
have been an easy catch for a one-day field, but there was plenty of space 
there. He got two, then a single off a leading edge. Another unconvincing over.

12.29pm GMT 

47th over: South Africa 163-6 (du Plessis 22 Philander 7)

Four byes down the leg side to start this Pattinson over, Haddin got a glove 
to it but not enough purchase. It ends up being a dicey over for the batsmen 
though, Philander inside-edging for a single to square leg, then du Plessis 
edging from low on the bat away through gully for four.

A lot of Ryan Harris love is coming in over the Harris-Love Portal, also known 
as my email account. Gopal Bhagavatula asks to send his respects to SRH. “99 
wickets in his 24 Tests,” says Gopal, “is a testament to perseverance.”

12.24pm GMT 

46th over: South Africa 154-6 (du Plessis 18 Philander 6)

Watson is dipping this ball. That one swerved in late, but too wide of the 
stumps to do much. Philander gets one, du Plessis gets one, then Philander 
edges three runs down to third man. This is their biggest over in a while, 
therefore.

“I know it’s counter- cyclical, or perhaps just daft, but why isn’t Nathan 
Lyon being brought on right now to tighten the screws and finish this off?” So 
asks Gervase Green. “Time is not that much an issue, and it seems to me Mitch 
in particular is looking a little tired, with plenty now sliding down. Pattison 
can’t bowl long spells anyway, at the moment, so the stage is set for some 
tweak, surely?”


12.20pm GMT 

45th over: South Africa 149-6 (du Plessis 17 Philander 2)

Pattinson is continuing, and looking good in this over, which is a maiden to 
du Plessis. I wonder about his staying power. Australia have done well so far, 
but their selection was a gamble.

“How good is Harris?” ponders Tilo Fobes, presumably with rhetorical flourish. 
“I know we both love Siddle, but having strike bowlers around seems a good 
decision in hindsight. What’s going to happen? I fear the Proteas will somehow 
bat it out. It’s as inevitable as England losing on penalties, or England 
scoring under 250 in ODIs, or England blaming KP for everything, or Russia 
invading it’s neighbours.” Having strike bowlers is great as long as they’re 
striking. All it takes is a couple of guys to bat long, and suddenly strike 
bowlers become struck.

12.15pm GMT 

44th over: South Africa 149-6 (du Plessis 17 Philander 2)

Watson probing away at Philander like John Starbuck with an enigmatic avocado. 
An edge runs to third man for two runs, Vern off the mark. The next five balls 
are defended with some care and without total control. James Steerforth puts in 
a bid for my Sentence of the Day award when he muses, “I must admit I am in 
danger of succumbing to the audacious lure of pomegranates.” Ah, those jewelled 
red beauties, so attractive to regard, so unfulfilling to devour. They taunt.

12.11pm GMT 

43rd over: South Africa 147-6 (du Plessis 17 Philander 0)

Pattinson is back, and sends down a maiden that hints of a bit of bite from 
this pitch. He had the ball jagging from back of a length there, if too wide to 
play. The ever considered John Starbuck ponders the imponderable fruits: “My 
favourite fruit is avocado, but one is so often disappointed because of an 
inability to judge exactly when it’s ripe enough; therefore my second favourite 
is banana, because you can’t go wrong with that.” Certainty versus possible 
joy. The avocado is the left-arm wrist spin of fruits.

12.05pm GMT 

42nd over: South Africa 147-6 (du Plessis 17 Philander 0)

Ah, Watteau de Cologne is resuming the charmingly scented attack, with Clarke 
hoping his reverse-swing man can get it going. Some people forget that last 
time he played here, Watson took what I understand was thesecond-fastest 
five-wicket haul in Test history. About 20 balls, it took him. I may be wrong. 
It happens. Today, he bowls six balls for a single.

12.01pm GMT 

41st over: South Africa 146-6 (du Plessis 16 Philander 0)

Harris is attacking the stumps a lot against Philander, maybe a bit too much, 
as Philander is able to keep shovelling the ball down to mid on, but he can’t 
get it into a gap for a score. A maiden. “Mandarins!” exults the delightfully 
named Nicholas Darling. I can just see him skipping down a road through autumn 
leaves. “Mandarins are so satisfyingly easy to peel and break apart (like this 
SA lower order?)” Hope springs eternal in the human breast, Nicholas. The heart 
is a hummingbird, or something along those lines.

Updated at 12.06pm GMT

11.57am GMT 

40th over: South Africa 146-6 (du Plessis 16 Philander 0)

A maiden from Johnson to du Plessis, mixing short balls with an off stump 
line. If you’re interested in Afghanistan’s team, they’ve bowled very nicely to 
Sri Lanka almost all night, but let it slip slightly 49 from the last four 
overs, letting Lanka get up to 253. Not a huge total, but if it were more like 
220 you’d fancy the newcomers’ chances a bit more. They’ve produced some 
terrific batting innings before though, so let’s see.

Updated at 12.06pm GMT

11.56am GMT 

39th over: South Africa 146-6 (du Plessis 16)

It was a busy over, that one. Du Plessis took a two and a one, Duminy took two 
doubles, then was dismissed from the last ball. Stats guru Ric Finlay is 
watching an important countdown. Harris, unlike Hilfenhaus, has a chance in 
front of him to move on to those three figures.
Ric Finlay (@RicFinlay) 
RHarris joins Hilfie on 99 Test wickets... #RSAvAus 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23RSAvAus&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/RicFinlay/statuses/440454605424431104> March 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/RicFinlay/statuses/440454605424431104> 
Updated at 12.06pm GMT

11.50am GMT 

WICKET! Duminy 4, c Haddin b Harris

The floating-bone man has done it again. He’s been reversing it for a while, 
now he bowls one across JP Duminy that moves away, Duminy drives at the full 
ball and can only edge behind. Australia right on top now.

11.47am GMT 

38th over: South Africa 139-5 (du Plessis 13 Duminy 0)

Haddin puts in a ripper of a stop as Johnson scorches one down leg side. He’s 
got a left-handed batsman in Duminy to bowl to, so Johnson is coming over the 
wicket with his left-arm reasonably brisk deliveries. Then with the last ball 
Johnson hits Duminy, quite hard, on the back as he tries to duck. Faf took a 
single early in the over, and that’s the only score. Tough times for the 
batsmen right now, the Australians are making it hostile, but we’ve seen how 
batsmen can prosper once they weather the early aggression.

What’s going on out there in OBO land? Where is everybody? Where are you 
reading along from? What’s going to happen? What’s your favourite fruit and why?

Updated at 12.06pm GMT

11.41am GMT 

37th over: South Africa 138-5 (du Plessis 13 Duminy 0)

Harris keeps swinging this ball all over the place. One delivery helps Faf 
out, it swings so much he’s able to glance it fine for four. Then he takes a 
single. He’s accumulating nicely.

11.37am GMT 

36th over: South Africa 133-5 (du Plessis 8 Duminy 0)

Just looking at that de Villiers dismissal again - flat-footed, I think he was 
expecting it to swing in toward him, instead it held its line and went across, 
and he got suckered into following it on the drive. Big nick, easily avoidable 
but Johnson managed to fool him. ABDV goes, JPD takes his place, and the only 
score was a du Plessis single before de Villiers departed.

11.34am GMT 

WICKET! de Villiers 14, c Clarke b Johnson

Oh, that’s huge! The big one is down, AB de Villers is gone, and who else but 
Mitchell Johnson takes the wicket. AB got half forward, probed at a ball angled 
across him, and edged through to slip.

11.33am GMT 

35th over: South Africa 132-4 (de Villiers 14, du Plessis 7)

Faf enjoys that little holiday, and comes back sufficiently refreshed to clip 
two runs through midwicket, then a single to fine leg. Harris is mixing up the 
way he’s holding the ball, sometimes curving it in with the reverse swing, 
sometimes holding the shiny side the other way to send it straight. It’s 
lottery time. I should also draw to your attention the Twitter account of Sexy 
Ryan Harris, for those who find a little more to love in Australia’s 
half-fridge, half-man hybrid.

https://twitter.com/SexyRyanHarris

11.26am GMT 

A bit rude, that

Faf du Plessis is now testing etiquette himself by having run off the field 
for about five minutes to fix up something to do with pads. He’s lucky not to 
be given out retired, taking this long.

11.23am GMT 

34th over: South Africa 129-4 (de Villiers 14, du Plessis 4)

A bit of weird byplay there as du Plessis dropped a ball at his feet, then 
picked it up to throw to the fieldsman, but found himself getting scolded 
roundly by several close fieldsmen for touching it. Just relax, guys, think of 
a dolphin or something. He gets a single off the last ball. AB got one from the 
first.

11.17am GMT 

33rd over: South Africa 127-4 (de Villiers 13, du Plessis 3)

Ryan Harris bowled beautifully before lunch, he knocked over Hashim Amla with 
a peach of an inswinger, then immediately had du Plessis nicking behind but 
didn’t review the not-out decision. If you haven’t read this, you should: our 
friend Will Macpherson on the beauty and fragility ofHarris’ late-blossoming 
career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/27/ryan-harris-test-career>. 
This over, Harris is bowling just as beautifully, a maiden that draws an edge, 
then nearly bowls du Plessis on the inswinging yorker. Spot on.

11.11am GMT 

They have to fill the time somehow

If you don’t have the pleasure of viewing Australia’s lunchtime cricket show 
at the moment, there’s something happening between Stuart Clark and a rugby 
player who isn’t sure what he’s doing there. As best I can tell they’re 
re-enacting that scene fromBreaking Bad where Jesse is held prisoner in a 
buried concrete tank. Possibly with a few more questions being asked about 
novelty cricket matters, and fewer about the optimum application of methylamine 
precursor. We’ve also had a long discussion about pink cricket balls, which are 
currently being used in a day-night round of the Sheffield Shield first-class 
competition. I’d like to tell you more, but I have the sound down, which is 
largely why I’m feeling so happy today.

10.57am GMT 

Lunch on

Yes, thanks to Scott for the last couple of hours of fun - a bit for both 
sides there, but the Safrican fans will be worried at having frittered away so 
many wickets. Australian fans will be worried about AB de Villiers, I can 
assure you. I’m told there was at least one case of a person lamenting my 
absence on the OBO yesterday, so to the gentleman in question, I hope you’re 
reassured as of today. I will say that I too have had occasions of being 
cripplingly hungover and wanting Geoff Lemon to save me, but that was because 
the hangover was so bad I didn’t actually know who I was. Today, however, I am 
bright-eyed and metaphorically bushy-tailed, having just fuelled up on a large 
Vietnamese dinner before taking to the keyboard. There will be no stopping us, 
OBO - you and I together will do beautiful things, we’ll look like the movie 
poster toEternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. 

10.40am GMT 

Advantage Australia ... Fair?

Clarke’s decision to declare is vindicated as Australia take session honours 
with four wickets, even accounting for adventurous batting that brought 127 
runs for the home side.

They still trail by 367 runs, however, and Australia’s quicks looked to have 
rediscovered the art of reverse swing in that session.

I’ve been Scott Heinrich and you’ve been wonderful company. I now place you in 
the safe hands of Geoff Lemon for the afternoon session.

10.33am GMT 

32nd over: South Africa 127-4 (de Villiers 13, du Plessis 3)

Pattinson’s latest offering takes us to the first long break of the day, an 
over punctuated by a nice pull from de Villiers which earns two backward of 
square.

10.30am GMT 

31st over: South Africa 124-4 (de Villiers 11, du Plessis 2)

Both batsmen keep a watchful brief against Harris, and fair enough. He’s 
making the ball do some amazing things all of a sudden. Time for one more over 
before lunch.

10.26am GMT 

30th over: South Africa 124-4 (de Villiers 11, du Plessis 2)

Pattinson also gains some movement off the pitch, and in the air, suggesting 
this deck isn’t as lifeless as we were led to believe.

Updated at 10.29am GMT

10.23am GMT 

29th over: South Africa 121-4 (de Villiers 10, du Plessis 0)

Harris gets the ball to talk some more, nipping another one back and appealing 
for du Plessis’s wicket, leg before, but there is an inside edge there. Still, 
ominously good fast bowling from Harris.

10.19am GMT 

Wicket! Amla b Harris 38 (South Africa 121-4)

What - A- Delivery. Harris pulls an absolute beauty from somewhere, nipping 
one back of a length to expose a hitherto non-existent gap in Amla’s defences 
... the result: stumps messed up.

Top-notch seam bowling and, for all of South Africa’s free scoring, they are 
now in strife.

10.16am GMT 

28th over: South Africa 121-3 (Amla 38, de Villiers 10)

Pattinson is ever so wide outside off-stump but that is more than enough for 
Amla, who brutalises the young paceman through the covers for four more. You 
almost feel sorry for the ball after a shot like that.

10.13am GMT 

27th over: South Africa 116-3 (Amla 33, de Villiers 10)

Classically tight from Harris until the end of the over when de Villiers leans 
into a full one and drives through extra cover for four. Way to ruin a good 
over, Rhino.

Gervase Green has something to say, though not sure precisely what it is: “I’m 
not sure if one-word epithets ever do justice to anyone very interesting, but 
this Test series begs a few. Dale Steyn is nothing if not “menacing” - I bet 
you the physio delegated to a nurse or back room minion the news that it was 
more than a hammy twinge - but Ryan Harris is even easier. He is nothing if not 
“busy”. The only thing quicker than his run-up is his run-back. They barely 
fitted in the advert for craap food this time, so he’s right up there for (his 
own kind of) pace. Great.”

10.07am GMT 

26th over: South Africa 111-3 (Amla 32, de Villiers 6)

Johnson makes way for Pattinson, whom Australia will hope has recovered from 
his last over which cost 18 runs. He has. He returns with a maiden.

Here’s another 18-run over, for the nostalgic and ignorant among us.

Updated at 10.09am GMT

10.03am GMT 

25th over: South Africa 111-3 (Amla 32, de Villiers 6)

Harris on for Lyon. Beautifully, and brutally, brilliant shotmaking again from 
Amla, who bludgeons the returning paceman through the covers for four more.

9.59am GMT 

24th over: South Africa 106-3 (Amla 28, de Villiers 6)

Amla again uses his feet to advantage, punching a not-awful ball from Johnson 
past mid-off for four. The boy can bat, if you needed telling.

Here’s Deepak: “Looks like the Mitchination has begun. Saffers, beware....”

Updated at 10.00am GMT

9.55am GMT 

23rd over: South Africa 102-3 (Amla 24, de Villiers 6)

Take That! De Villiers marches down the pitch and smacks Lyon down the ground 
for four.

How deep is your glove, AB?

Updated at 9.56am GMT

9.51am GMT 

22nd over: South Africa 96-3 (Amla 23, de Villiers 1)

De Villiers wastes no time getting comfortable, pulling Johnson for one with a 
shot that would have earned three more most days of the week.

Really critical juncture of the match. Add a quick wicket or two and it’s hard 
to see how South Africa could get out of this.

Updated at 9.52am GMT

9.48am GMT 

Wicket! Peterson c Haddin b Johnson 53 (South Africa 95-3)

A wicket against the tide of play, or maybe because of it, as Peterson follows 
a shortish one off Johnson down leg-side, but manages only to glove it to the 
waiting mits of Haddin.

A soft dismissal, really., but Australia are coack-a-hoop and will take that, 
thank you very much.

9.45am GMT 

21st over: South Africa 95-2 (Peterson 53, Amla 23)

Beautiful footwork from Amla enables him to send Lyon through the covers for 
four more. The scoring rate is plenty quick enough, almost five runs per over, 
suggesting South Africa are going after this total, rather than simply ensuring 
they don’t lose that match.

Updated at 9.45am GMT

9.42am GMT 

20th over: South Africa 89-2 (Peterson 52, Amla 18)

Peterson will have some war wounds to show the grandkids after deciding to let 
a short one from Johnson hit his arm rather than his bat. Ouch. But his wicket 
stays intact.

9.40am GMT 

19th over: South Africa 89-2 (Peterson 52, Amla 18)

Amla shows his penchant for spin with a couple of casual twos off Lyon.

9.39am GMT 

18th over: South Africa 84-2 (Peterson 51, Amla 14)

Eighteen runs from Pattinson’s previous over is quite enough for Clarke and 
Johnson returns to the fray.

It’s all the same to Peterson, who collects three past mid-off to register his 
fifty from about as many balls. Excellent, counter-punching batting after the 
loss of two early wickets.

9.29am GMT 

17th over: South Africa 81-2 (Peterson 48, Amla 14)

Lyon into the attack now. More of the same from South Africa after the break, 
however, as Amla collects four from a half-volley.

9.27am GMT 

16th over: South Africa 73-2 (Peterson 47, Amla 7)

Peterson helps himself to a chancy boundary over slip first ball after the 
drinks break before showing a great deal more class with an on-drive that 
yields three more runs.

Strange old shot later in the over earns four more, a sort of hybrid 
pull-scoop-chip over mid-wicket.

The blood-let doesn’t end there, with another boundary through extra-cover and 
two runs behind square to take 18 runs off Pattinson’s over.

9.17am GMT 

15th over: South Africa 55-2 (Peterson 30, Amla 6)

Amla gets off the mark courtesy of a misfield at mid-on but no need for 
intervention later in the over as a delightful off-drive brings four runs. 
Drinks please.

Updated at 9.21am GMT

9.12am GMT 

14th over: South Africa 48-2 (Peterson 29, Amla 0)

Too short from Pattinson and too easy for Peterson, who pulls for four.

The batsman then counts his blessings as a loose square drive finds the 
outstretched hands of Lyon at point ... but is dropped. Very tough chance.

9.08am GMT 

13th over: South Africa 43-2 (Peterson 24, Amla 0)

Not bad from Watson, which is something I guess.

9.04am GMT 

12th over: South Africa 42-2 (Peterson 23, Amla 0)

Did I say how good that catch was from Haddin?

It was better than this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvEFf9i0Tu2s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvEFf9i0Tu2s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvEFf9i0Tu2s&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvEFf9i0Tu2s&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvEFf9i0Tu2s>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvEFf9i0Tu2s&media=>
close 
Updated at 9.05am GMT

9.02am GMT 

Wicket! Elgar c Haddin b Pattinson 11 (South Africa 42-2)

Wonderful delivery and wonderful catch as Pattinson ties up Elgar and brings 
an inside edge that in turn brings out the best in Haddin, who pouches a 
one-handed screamer to his right. Another key breakthrough and a fine return to 
action by Pattinson.

Martin Sinclair has something to share with us: “Many years ago, my wife and I 
were in Sydney doing as all Brits on a work visa do, namely drinking in a bar 
during the day. At the time, there was a sumo bash organised in Sydney to 
promote trade with Japan or some such nonsense, so there were a few bona fide 
sumo wrestlers in the city. Lo and behold, three of them walked into the bar in 
the full regalia and ordered some tea. I went up to order some more beer and 
stood next to one of them. He was ENORMOUS. Unfortunately, he also stank. BO 
that could curdle a pint at thirty paces. Impressive and unimpressive in the 
same moment.”

8.55am GMT 

11th over: South Africa 41-1 (Peterson 23, Elgar 11)

Double change sees Watson brought into the attack. Welcome back, Watto. 
Thought we might never see ye again. Peterson takes it up to the all-rounder, 
collecting two boundaries and jumping out of his crease. Not sure Watson’s 
appreciating the treatment.

 Rocket fires up: “Great stuff from Tilo - of course Nick Riewoldt is from 
good German stock!”

8.49am GMT 

10th over: South Africa 31-1 (Peterson 13, Elgar 11)

Hello James Pattinson. How we’ve missed you. Peterson shows great judgement to 
leave one that most wouldn’t before gobbling up a slightly wide one that 
glances just wide of Haddin.

Who’s Pattinson, I hear you say. This is he:

Updated at 8.51am GMT

8.45am GMT 

9th over: South Africa 23-1 (Peterson 6, Elgar 11)

This time it’s Elgar who finds the rope, a push through mid-off off Harris.

8.42am GMT 

8th over: South Africa 19-1 (Peterson 6, Elgar 7)

Rare error in the field from Warner, whose errant return results in two 
overthrows before Elgar picks up three past square and Peterson helps himself 
to a boundary. Huh, 11 runs off Johnson’s over.

Updated at 8.43am GMT

8.38am GMT 

7th over: South Africa 8-1 (Peterson 2, Elgar 0)

Another tight over from Harris and another ruddy maiden.

That’s not exciting.

But this email from Thilo Fobes, the length of which would normally be 
disregarded, is:

“Dear Obo’ers,

Good work as usual. I have something to add to unimpressive encounters with 
cricketers and sportspeople in general. A bit of background.

Being born and bred in Germany am obviously a latecomer to the glory that is 
test cricket. Moved to Melbourne in mid 2010 and had my first rule explanation 
over a pint by an englishman in the motherland (hat tip Ross Hiscock, who came 
to dread that decision when I taunted him over England’s “performance” during 
these last ashes with no end). My first attended match was one of the worst 
boxing days ever, Australia crumbling to 98 not out at the MCG in 2010. I came 
to love cricket nonetheless, probably because supporting Australia allows me to 
barrack against England, a too familiar feeling for any self-respecting German.
This appreciation of cricket lead me to visit the magnificent Adelaide Oval 
during my first trip to the city of churches during the Adelaide festival 2012. 
I was lucky, as I did not know it was gonna get renovated. A truly beautiful 
ground, especially approached along the river on bike. There was a shield game 
on, last day of a draw between Tassie and SA. I sat on the famous hill under 
the even more famous scoreboard. Next day at the airport I ran into the team 
wearing their Tasmania Tigers gear. I recognized Krejza and my love for 
spinners almost made me approach him. Also saw a man being “mobbed” by two 
indian dudes. Turned out to be Punter Ponting. I was so surprised by how small 
he was that I did not talk to him, even though they were not a lot of people 
around and he would have been impressed with me attending a shield game, with 
less than 30 in the ground. This airport encounter is the opposite of running 
into St Kilda and being surprised how much bigger and stronger Nick Riewoldt 
looked in real live compared to the telly. Also once encountered soccer team 
Mönchengladbach, archrival of my team Cologne. Thus I completed the hattrick of 
non-exiting airport encounters with sportstars.
Regards,
Thilo Fobes
p.s. As great as it is to see Afghanistan stage a rise int cricket it is a 
shame that Lasith Malinga who is playing them in the Asia cup right now is not 
playing testCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> anymore. Also 
wanna point out that I can claim to be a not fairweather Australian cricket fan 
with supporting them through their worst period in a long time. Very 
unaustralian I know.”

Yes, very unAustralian ... you German!

Updated at 8.39am GMT

8.33am GMT 

6th over: South Africa 8-1 (Peterson 2, Elgar 0)

Johnson goes short but Elgar is up to the task ... at least he manages to get 
under the bouncers.

8.28am GMT 

5th over: South Africa 7-1 (Peterson 1, Elgar 0)

Big breakthrough for Australia. Did I really need to say that?

Updated at 8.30am GMT

8.26am GMT 

Wicket! Smith c Haddin b Harris 5 (South Africa 7-1)

Smith’s woes continue as he feathers an admittedly wondrous ball from Harris, 
one that nips off a fullish length, into the gloves of Haddin.

The early breakthrough comes for Australia. For Smith, at least it wasn’t 
Johnson who got him.

8.20am GMT 

4th over: South Africa 7-0 (Smith 5, Peterson 1)

Peterson goes after one from Johnson that’s wide outside off-stump. He misses 
everything. Another maiden.

8.17am GMT 

3rd over: South Africa 7-0 (Smith 5, Peterson 1)

Harris keeps things tighter than a fish’s what-have-you...

Review: Smith is trapped back on his crease by Harris, but high on his pads, 
and Australia refer the not-out decision upstairs. Really bad call: a bit high 
and missing off by some way.

8.11am GMT 

2nd over: South Africa 7-0 (Smith 5, Peterson 1)

Mitch operates from the other end as Peterson gets his scoring under way with 
a glanced single.

That brings Smith on strike - and we all want to see that - but a single first 
ball means we have to wait for anything meaningful.

8.04am GMT 

1st over: South Africa 5-0 (Smith 4, Peterson 0)

Plenty of movement in the air in Harris’s first over but first blood to Smith, 
who punches an overpitched ball through point for four.

Updated at 8.05am GMT

7.55am GMT 

Well I do declare

Australia have declared on their overnight score.

Interesting.

Two days have already passed in this Test, so with early use of the pitch at 
Michael Clarke’s disposal perhaps it’s not the most surprising of calls.

7.27am GMT 

Good evening/morning....

We’re set for a great day’s play in Cape Town in the deciding test of this 
gripping series. With a declaration certain some time this morning, will we see 
the South Africans crumble again against the Aussie quicksas they did in 
Pretoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/14/mitchell-johnson-seven-wickets-australia-south-africa>
? Ormaybe not? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/23/south-africa-australia-second-test-port-elizabeth>

Thanks to last night’s downpour which ended play early, play is set to start 
half an hour earlier today at 7pm (AEST) so keep close and Scott Heinrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/scott-heinrich> will be with you shortly. 

 