
South Africa have achieved what England so emphatically could not in 
Australia, responding to a crushing defeat in the opening Test by turning the 
tables on Michael Clarke's team to set up a mouthwatering series decider in 
Cape Town. Australia lost their last nine wickets for 64 runs in fading light 
in the last session of the fourth day in Port Elizabeth, withDale Steyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dale-steyn> the spearhead of a superb 
bowling performance that secured a 231-run victory for the world's No1 ranked 
Test team.

The tourists had made an ominous start having been set a target of 448, with 
David Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-warner> hitting 66 from 
73 balls in an opening stand of 126 inside 30 overs with Chris Rogers. But 
after Warner had gone lbw to JP Duminy, Australia crumbled to the formidable 
seam trio of Steyn, Morne Morkel and Vernon Philander – leaving Warner's 
opening partner Chris Rogers fighting a lone battle.

Morkel, who had generated more bounce and hostility than anyone in the first 
innings, dismissed Alex Doolan, then Philander sent back Shaun Marsh. But it 
was Steyn who ripped out the heart of Australia's innings, dismissing Michael 
Clarke, Steve Smith and Brad Haddin in quick succession and ending with four 
for 55.

"South Africa deserve credit," said Clarke. "We were outplayed and you have 
seen a class spell of reverse swing from all three of their bowlers but 
especially Steyn. We didn't get a ball to reverse swing all game."

Australia hope that Shane Watson will be fit for the decider, after missing 
the first two Tests with a calf injury.

Clarke has endured a lean spell with the bat, and admitted he has not been at 
his best. "Obviously I'd like to score a hundred every time I bat. I'm not 
looking forward to the next however many press conferences until I make a score 
over 25 or 50 or a hundred," Clarke said. "I have been there before. The one 
thing I will say is that in this game of cricket you have some great times and 
I remember those fondly.

"There are some tough times and it makes you enjoy the good times. Right now 
you're right, it is 11 innings since I've scored more than 25. I'm due."

Meanwhile the South Africa captain, Graeme Smith, was confident that his team 
can wrap up their first home series victory over Australia since readmission in 
1991.

"It [Newlands, the venue of the third Test] is a ground that we have a lot of 
confidence at, have performed well for a very long time," Smith said. "We know 
how to win there, which is exciting."

• This article was amended on 24 February 2014. An earlier version referred to 
the first series victory for South Africa over Australia since readmission in 
1994. That should have been the first home series victory for South Africa 
against Australia since readmission, which was in 1991.
 