
4.41pm GMT 

So, it's 1-1 with one to play

I don’t think it’s going too far to say that was one of the great South 
African performances, given the context, and this evening session has already 
gone into folklore: they took the last nine wickets for 64, with Dale Steyn 
thrillingly unplayable. Steve Harmison, on Sky, says it’s not possible to bowl 
a better spell of reverse-swing.

A five-Test series would be nice. A three-Test series will do: we have the 
mother of all deciders to look forward to, starting in Cape Town on Saturday. I 
don’t know about you, but I’m rubbing my thighs in excitement already. Thanks 
for your company; goodnight.

4.36pm GMT 

Lyon should not have been given out!

Dean Elgar – Dean Elgar – has won a Test with the ball, a few days after being 
old his central contract wasn’t being renewed! Sport, eh? The South African 
celebrations are a wonderful fusion of relief, pride and joy. Australia don’t 
look happy with that final LBW decision. You can see Johnson and Harris looking 
at it on the laptop. And that’s why: he got an inside-edge! Oh my. What a crazy 
match. Australia’s last nine batsmen scored just 22 runs, yet the man who 
scored 107 - Chris Rogers - is going to feel awful if it pours down all day 
tomorrow. Sport, eh?

Updated at 4.43pm GMT

4.33pm GMT 

SOUTH AFRICA WIN BY 231 RUNS

That was a stunning Test match, and a simply awesome comeback from South 
Africa after their devastating first-Test defeat. The final wicket came from a 
beautiful delivery by Dean Elgar, which pitched on middle and straightened 
sharply to hit the pad. Lyon couldn’t review it anyway, as Australia have used 
up their reviews. I had forgotten that, my noggin having long gone during a 
mesmerising evening session during which South Africa took nine wickets and 
Dale Steyn reminded us why he is the premier champion of his generation.

Updated at 4.48pm GMT

4.31pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 216 all out (Lyon LBW b Elgar 0)

Smith has been told that he must bowl the spinners because of the light, so 
Dean Elgar comes on. There are four overs left. “It’s another warm-up if you 
don’t oblige,” says Graeme Smith to a smiling Nathan Lyon.

Now Elgar has taken the final wicket, Lyon out LBW. Why didn’t he revew it? No 
matter, South Africa have pulled off a magnificent victory!


4.28pm GMT 

73rd over: Australia 216-9 (Siddle 3* Lyon 0*)

Duminy rushes through the remainder of the over so that Steyn can bowl. The 
light is fading and the floodlights are on. I’ve never seen a finish to afourth 
day’s play like this. It’s gloriously confusing.

Updated at 4.29pm GMT

4.23pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 214-9 (Rogers run out 107)

A crazy run-out! What was Rogers doing? He tried to take a needless single to 
mid-off off Duminy’s first ball, and the substitute fielder Alviro Petersen - 
who missed the start of the match with gastroenteritis - hit the bails with 
Rogers short. It seemed clear cut, though Aleem Dar looked at another five 
replays, just to induce a few more coronaries among South African fans. It’s 
out! That was a wonderful innings from Rogers. But if it rains all day 
tomorrow, he will hate the memory of it. On the balcony, the bowling Allan 
Donald raises his hands in triumph and roars, almost like he’s celebrating his 
own wicket.

Updated at 4.27pm GMT

4.22pm GMT 

72nd over: Australia 214-8 (Rogers 107, Siddle 1)

Philander replaces Duminy. Siddle defends calmly, although a last-ball cutter 
almost slips through the gate. A maiden.

4.19pm GMT 

71st over: Australia 214-8 (Rogers 107, Siddle 1)

Steyn is bowling with great vengeance and furious anger. This is sensational 
sport, because it’s not just bat v ball, it’s also man v weather. This spell 
could mean nothing, or it could decide the Test and maybe the series.

Siddle inside-edges the first ball onto his body, is beaten by the third but 
manages to get off strike next delivery. To exacerbate South Africa’s 
frustration, Duminy injured himself while fielding; he landed on the ball. The 
physio runs on and is then sent back. South Africa don’t have time for niceties 
such as health and well-being. Duminy winces and bears it.

Steynn then hits Rogers on the head with a bouncer, which isn’t a smart move 
actually because it allows Rogers to play with his helmet and waste time. He 
has plenty on time for niceties like health, well-being and anything else that 
will use up a few minutes while the light worsens.

Updated at 4.20pm GMT

4.12pm GMT 

70th over: Australia 209-8 (Rogers 107, Siddle 0)

JP Duminy is on. Rogers must surely start farming the strike. He tries to from 
the last ball, but can’t and it’s a maiden.

That Dharmasena LBW took so long as to be almost comical. In fact it was the 
extreme opposite of this LBW.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS9TbKU2jIY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS9TbKU2jIY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS9TbKU2jIY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS9TbKU2jIY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS9TbKU2jIY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS9TbKU2jIY&media=>
close 
Updated at 4.13pm GMT

4.10pm GMT 

69th over: Australia 209-8 (Rogers 107, Siddle 0)

That was the last ball of the over. Seven to go. Steyn’s celebration, a 
demented, puce-faced chainsaw, was another beauty.

Updated at 4.12pm GMT

4.07pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 209-8 (Harris LBW b Steyn 6)

We’re playing the extra half-hour now, with eight overs to be bowled. Harris 
defends a Steyn inswinger into the ground, from where it bounces up into the 
air. As it drops Harris is so paranoid about it spinning back onto the stumps 
that he hits it again - and in doing so nearly drags it back onto the stumps. 
That would have been a unique and absurd dismissal.

Now Harris is out, to the slowest LBW dismissal in history from Kumar 
Dharmasena. Harris has reviewed it straight away. I reckon this will be 
umpire’s call and therefore out. It was another sharp inducker from Steyn. 
That’s out! This is wonderful drama. It was hitting the top of the leg bail, so 
the on-field decision stands. Dharmsena took an age over that appeal - he made 
Steve Bucknor look like knee-jerk Nobby by comparison - but, again, we ended up 
with the right decision. Just.

Updated at 4.12pm GMT

4.04pm GMT 

68th over: Australia 205-7 (Rogers 107, Harris 2)

It seems Rogers did not review that, in which case there will be a little 
controversy because it was given out originally by Richard Illingworth. South 
Africa are unhappy about that, and you can understand why.I suppose it’s the 
same as Hansie Cronje against England in 1995-96 
<http://www.thefreelibrary.com/HANSIE+UP+IF+YOU+LOT+ARE+.+.+CHEATS!-a061317349>
. The most important thing, despite all that, is that the right decision was 
made, even if it did not necessarily come about in the correct way.

Updated at 4.09pm GMT

4.01pm GMT 

REVIEW! Australia 205-7 (Rogers not out 107)

Chris Rogers is out! Or is he? He flicked Morkel down the leg side, where de 
Villiers seemed to take a stunning catch diving to his right. That was almost a 
mirror image of Alec Stewart’s famous grab off Brian Lara at Lord’s in 1995. 
Richard Illingworth gave it out. Rogers hung around, and because of that the 
on-field umpires went upstairs. Or was it a formal review from Rogers?

Either way, it won’t be out. It seems to bounce a millimetre in front of de 
Villiers.

Updated at 4.01pm GMT

3.54pm GMT 

67th over: Australia 201-7 (Rogers 103, Harris 2)

Harris continues to repel Steyn impressively, with the except of one fresh-air 
cut. A maiden. Harris has only faced 22 balls, on day four, yet it might be a 
match-saving innings.

3.50pm GMT 

66th over: Australia 201-7 (Rogers 103, Harris 2)

Harris has some strapping applied to his left arm, which kills a couple of 
minutes. Rogers stretches for a wide yorker from Morkel, inside-edging it all 
along the floor to de Villiers; that aside he survives comfortably. Morkel does 
at least keep Rogers on strike, which means Steyn will have another go at 
harris.

Updated at 3.53pm GMT

3.44pm GMT 

65th over: Australia 201-7 (Rogers 103, Harris 2)

Harris is on strike, so back comes Steyn. There are seven overs remaining plus 
the extra half-hour, though we are unlikely to get all that play. The first 
ball rams Harris in the chest. Rogers tries to steal the strike, Harris 
responds late and is then sent back. Steyn is bowling reverse inswing at above 
140kph, yet Harris defends extremely well for the remainder of the over. That 
was beautifully played by Harris in the circumstances.

Updated at 3.45pm GMT

3.39pm GMT 

64th over: Australia 201-7 (Rogers 103, Harris 2)

Maybe South Africa are saving Steyn’s legs for an over which starts with 
Harris rather than Rogers on strike. Morkel continues to Rogers, who is playing 
beautifully. This all feels relatively low-key, as if South Africa have all the 
time in the world, yet they will not sleep easily if they don’t finish this 
tonight. I’m surprised they are not rushing back to their mark.

Now there’s a review against Rogers! It’s tactical, because of the identity of 
the batsman. AB de Villiers took the catch down the leg side, and Morkel was 
very confident it had hit something. It did – but only Rogers’ backside. 
Another fine decision from Richard Illingworth, and South Africa have no 
reviews left. They could have had Rogers just before tea but declined to review.

3.35pm GMT 

63rd over: Australia 201-7 (Rogers 103, Harris 2)

Steyn off, Elgar back on. Nothing happens. “How the hell did England beat 
Pakistan in that Test 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/63578.html>?” says Marcus 
Sharp. “Talk about bringing a knife to a gun fight. That attack we had must be 
the very definition of journeyman versus Wasim, Waqar and Mushtaq.”

Headingley is, or was, the greatest leveller. That appalling run-out decision 
to reprieve Gooch didn’t hurt either.

3.32pm GMT 

62nd over: Australia 200-7 (Rogers 102, Harris 2)

Morne Morkel replaces Vernon Philander. Harris survives a poor over pretty 
comfortably. There is a storm coming, and Kepler Wessels reckons we have about 
25 minutes before it hits.

“Forget what I said about Illingworth a few minutes ago, but the rest stands!” 
says Richard Thomson. No need to change your view of Illingworth: he’s has an 
outstanding match, and that was close to a borderline decision. Even Mikey 
Holding on Sky said it was “a wasted review” from South Africa at the time.


3.24pm GMT 

61st over: Australia 200-7 (Rogers 102, Harris 2)

Dale Steyn is coming back on. Rogers, sensibly and selflessly, protects Harris 
by taking the whole over, the only run from which is an off-side wide.

“That Test at Headingley where England went from 270-1 to 320ao also has the 
accolade of possibly last great horses for courses test selection in Neil 
Mallender,” says Phil Rhodes. “It could never happen in the modern game. That 
Dale Steyn is alright too.”

Poor old Mallender, dropped for good only two Tests having been Man of the 
Match in the first. Mind you, as inhumane as it would have been, they should 
really have dropped him after his first Test.

Updated at 3.27pm GMT

3.21pm GMT 

60th over: Australia 199-7 (Rogers 102, Harris 2)

Australia’s Nos 3-8 have scored 13 runs in this innings. The openers have 
scored 168 and counting. The new batsman is Ryan Harris; he’s a dangerous 
hitter but needs to survive here. Australia’s target is to get to the close and 
hope it rains all day, which is far from inconceivable.

Updated at 3.27pm GMT

3.18pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 197-7 (Johnson LBW b Philander 6)

Philander has a huge shout for LBW against Johnson turned down by Richard 
Illingworth. This looks close and Smith willreview. I reckon it will be 
umpire’s call. It jagged back off the seam to hit the roll of the pad as 
Johnson pushed around the ball. Height is the key.He’s out! What a fine review 
from Graeme Smith. I wouldn’t have risked that, not with only one review 
remaining. It was a fine delivery from Philander, and now South Africa have a 
big chance of giving me a day off tomorrow  wrapping up a famous victory 
tonight.


Updated at 3.19pm GMT

3.16pm GMT 

59th over: Australia 197-6 (Rogers 102, Johnson 6)

Ordinarily Johnson would slog-sweep someone like Elgar to his heart’s content, 
though the rough and the match situation make it a risk here. He contents 
himself with a single down the ground. There are 12 overs remaining today.

3.13pm GMT 

58th over: Australia 195-6 (Rogers 101, Johnson 5)

Well played Chris Rogers! He tucks Philander off the pads for two to reach his 
fourth Test century, and his third in the last four matches - all of them in 
the second innings. He will always be looking over his shoulder so long as his 
Test career lasts; that’s just the way it’s going to be. Yet even though he’s 
36, that Test career should last two or three more years yet. Rogers’ second 
coming is one of the feelgood stories of modern Test cricket.

3.08pm GMT 

57th over: Australia 189-6 (Rogers 98, Johnson 5)

Steyn takes a rest after a spell of 4-0-10-3, presumably with another 
pre-close burst in mind. On comes Dean Elgar, who might be a threat out of the 
rough to Johnson. Rogers drives him pleasantly for four and then sweeps another 
boundary to move to 98.

Updated at 3.09pm GMT

3.04pm GMT 

56th over: Australia 180-6 (Rogers 90, Johnson 4)

It’s all about time rather than runs now, so South Africa shouldn’t mind the 
four leg-byes off Philander’s bowling. Rogers might; he seemed to hit it. He 
survives a pretty big LBW appeal next ball, although Graeme Smith has reviewed 
it. This won’t be out, it looked too high. Replays show it was going over the 
top. Another good decision from Richard Illingworth.

“Surely The Joy of Six: Home Runs would be quite fun,” says Phil Crockford. “
This would have to be on there though 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7wDrw76ieTs>. He hits it out of Wrigley Field, 
across a street, and then onto the roof top. Also, the called shot, shot heard 
around the world, Kirk Gibson’s walk off home run in the 1988 world series...”

Updated at 3.04pm GMT

2.58pm GMT 

55th over: Australia 176-6 (Rogers 90, Johnson 4)

There’s nothing in sport quite like watching a struggling champion reassert 
himself in style. Darts-lovers will witness it at some stage in the next few 
weeks, and cricket-lovers are seeing it now. Every delivery with Steyn is 
crackling with menace; his pace is up and so, crucially, is his force. Johnson 
feels for a reverse outswinger, missing it by a mile, and then edges a snorter 
over the slips for four. That was very full yet burst from a foothold to take 
the shoulder of the bat. Johnson adds four leg-byes to the score off the last 
delivery.

Updated at 3.04pm GMT

2.53pm GMT 

54th over: Australia 167-6 (Rogers 89, Johnson 0)

Right, Duminy is replaced by Philander. Australia are in disarray - but there 
ie still hope of a draw. If they are bowled out tonight and it rains all day 
tomorrow they will be furious. They need to survive 17 overs plus, presumably, 
the extra half-hour.

“What did we do before reverse swing?” says John Starbuck. “We cowered under 
the onslaught from West Indian fast bowlers, that’s what we did. You could make 
a case for Pakistan inventing it as their response to Clive Lloyd’s brainwave.”


Hmm, maybe, though weren’t Sarfraz and Imran at it in the mid-1970s? 

Updated at 3.05pm GMT

2.52pm GMT 

53rd over: Australia 166-6 (Rogers 88, Johnson 0)

Look at Australia’s individual scores in order: 88*, 66, 5, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0*. 
Iain O'Brien (@iainobrien) 
How bloody good...?
 <https://twitter.com/iainobrien/statuses/437600807073370112> February 23, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/iainobrien/statuses/437600807073370112> 
Updated at 3.05pm GMT

2.47pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 166-6 (Haddin b Steyn 1)

Oh my goodness. This is one of the greatest deliveries of Dale Steyn’s career. 
He has cleaned Brad Haddin up in spectacular style. Steyn was desperate to get 
Haddin on strike, having bowled him with reverse swing in the first innings, so 
much so that Graeme Smith put the field back to give Rogers a single. Then, 
from the final ball of the over, Steyn sent a booming reverse inswinger through 
the gate and into middle stump. That was astorming piece of bowling. The best 
thing is that everyone knew that exact dismissal was coming, including Haddin, 
and there was not a thing he could do. This is glorious fast bowling, glorious 
reverse-swing bowling, and glorious Test cricket: Australia have collapsed from 
152-1 to 166-6.

Updated at 2.52pm GMT

2.42pm GMT 

52nd over: Australia 163-5 (Rogers 86, Haddin 0)

There are still 20 overs left tonight. Don’t forget the appalling forecast 
tomorrow. South Africa will want to get this done tonight if at all possible. 
Rogers takes a tight single to mid-on off Duminy, with Amla’s throw hitting the 
stumps. Rogers is fine.

2.40pm GMT 

51st over: Australia 162-5 (Rogers 85, Haddin 0)

This is serious stuff from Steyn now, who is reversing it both ways. It’s very 
hard for a new batsman to cope with, and Rogers does Haddin a favour by taking 
five of the six deliveries. What did we do before reverse swing? It provides 
some of the most memorable turnarounds imaginable.This is still my favourite: 
270 for one, 320 all out 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/63578.html>.

“What a champion,” says Daniel Harris. “An all-time great celebrator 
<https://vine.co/v/MmnXMprVntY>.”


2.36pm GMT 

50th over: Australia 161-5 (Rogers 84, Haddin 0)

Please press F5 for a full description of the wickets. The first one, Clarke, 
took a wonderful catch from du Plessis. He adjusted his body so quickly, 
falling to his right and leaning forward to get his hands under the ball. 
Australia lost four wickets for four runs in six wonderful overs.

They get the scoreboard moving again when Rogers takes a single off Duminy and 
gets the bonus of four overthrows. With Warner at the crease Australia scored 
126 in 29.2 overs; without him they have scored 34 in 20.4 overs. He is a 
priceless talent.

“Michael Clarke has just stopped moving his feet hasn’t he?” says Gary Naylor. 
“Maybe it’s the bad back or the regular attack to the body, but he’ll have to 
do something soon.” That was an odd, soft dismissal, Ian Bell-like in fact.

Updated at 2.40pm GMT

2.31pm GMT 

49th over: Australia 156-5 (Rogers 78, Haddin 0)

This is Test cricket at its most beautiful. Steyn is on a hat-trick, with Brad 
Haddin the new batsman. It’s wide of off stump and left alone. The end of an
magnificentover.

“Gary Naylor is onto something,” says Tim Sanders. “Test batsmen are 
extraordinary in what their brains and muscles can do in real time; but looking 
back at a passage of play lasting a fraction of a second, their memories are as 
muddled as those of mere mortals, playing tricks and making them wonder if they 
really saw what they thought they saw.”


Isn’t it partly that we are detached and therefore less likely to err? For 
example I’m not entirely useless at Countdown when I watch it at home every 
single day, whereas if I went on the show I’d be full of four-letter words.

2.29pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 156-5 (Smith LBW b Steyn 0)

Steve Smith is out first ball! Oh this is magnificent from Dale Steyn! It was 
full, straight and reverse-swinging back in to trap Smith plumb in front as he 
fell over towards the off side. Smith considered a review before running out of 
time. It doesn’t matter - he was palpably out to a glorious delivery. After a 
really poor match, Steyn has shown yet again what a champion he is. He couldn’t 
take a hat-trick. Surely.

Updated at 2.44pm GMT

2.26pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 156-4 (Clarke c du Plessis b Steyn 1)

Dale Steyn has done it! This is a huge moment in the game! Steyn hasn’t bowled 
well, he’s been hit round the park, but he has roared back to take the big 
wicket with the fourth ball of a new spell. It was a length delivery that just 
shaped away; Clarke tried to steer it to third man but got it too fine, and Faf 
du Plessis at second slip took a wonderful low catch. Steyn’s celebration is a 
beauty, a primeval roar as he leaps into the air, limbs splayed all over the 
place. That was a memorable bit of cricket, and possibly a match-winning one.

Updated at 2.37pm GMT

2.23pm GMT 

48th over: Australia 155-3 (Rogers 78, Clarke 1)

Duminy replaces Philander. I doubt Smith would have wanted to do that, with 
Clarke fresh at the crease, but you have to compromise when you lose a bowler. 
Rogers moves to 78 with a single. There is something of Paul Collingwood about 
Rogers, in that his place in the side seems to be constantly up for discussion 
regardless of what he achieves. He is 22 runs away from his third century in 
four Tests for goodness sake.
Alternative Cricket (@AltCricket) 
How Shaun Marsh can help your kids learn maths: pic.twitter.com/Nf27oEGyDo 
<http://t.co/Nf27oEGyDo>
 <https://twitter.com/AltCricket/statuses/437592411489849344> February 23, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/AltCricket/statuses/437592411489849344> 
Updated at 2.23pm GMT

2.20pm GMT 

47th over: Australia 154-3 (Rogers 77, Clarke 1)

Clarke plays out a maiden from Morkel, which might be it for the time being; 
that was Morkel’s fifth over in this spell. His figures are 5-3-2-1. With 
Warner at the crease they were 6-0-40-0. Fearless attacking openers are a rare 
and beautiful thing.
Nitin Sundar (@knittins) 
On a scale of 0 to Rohit Sharma, how frustrating is Shaun Marsh?
 <https://twitter.com/knittins/statuses/437591957993295873> February 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/knittins/statuses/437591957993295873> 
Updated at 2.22pm GMT

2.15pm GMT 

46th over: Australia 154-3 (Rogers 77, Clarke 1)

Clarke gropes at a length reverse-outswinger from Philander that ends in the 
hands of de Villiers. Philander thinks it’s out; nobody else does. Philander 
makes Stuart Broad seem unsure when it comes to his own appeals. He is bowling 
a beautiful spell here; the next ball reverses the other way and is repelled a 
little uncomfortably by Clarke. This could be the match, right here in this 
next 20 minutes.

“A backwater of the DRS debate is the extraordinary number of errors players 
make in calling for it or otherwise,” says Gary Naylor. “It suggests something 
I find surprising – that the elite may be able to do all kinds of things that 
us plodders cannot, but there are aspects of the game that are so difficult 
that we’re all at the same level.”

That’s a very good point. We should start DRS seminars, Naylor, generously 
priced at £9994 per team.

Updated at 2.20pm GMT

2.10pm GMT 

45th over: Australia 153-3 (Rogers 77, Clarke 0)

Rogers survives a big LBW shout from Morkel. It didn’t quite look right, and 
replays confirm it pitched outside leg. Smith almost compounded the pre-tea 
cock-up by reviewing it, but eventually decided against it. A zesty maiden from 
Morkel, who has bowled beautifully post-Warner.

2.09pm GMT 

44th over: Australia 153-3 (Rogers 77, Clarke 0)

Australia need Clarke to get runs. Clarke needs Clarke to get runs; he is 
averaging 19.71 in his last 10 innings, with a highest score of 24.

2.04pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 153-3 (Marsh LBW b Philander 0)

Shaun Marsh bags a pair. Surprisingly it’s the first of his Test career. He 
was stone dead LBW as he fell over a brilliant near-yorker from Philander that 
tailed back in just enough to beat the bat. South Africa have fought back 
outstandingly either side of tea. Marsh has played 16 innings in Tests; he has 
six ducks and two 140+ scores in that.

Updated at 2.06pm GMT

2.00pm GMT 

43rd over: Australia 152-2 (Rogers 76, Marsh 0)

“Afternoon Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “Was browsing through The 100 Most 
Pointless Arguments in the World – Solved book – yeah, that’s how I roll – and 
at Number 29 is: Are British Sports Better Than American Sports? during which 
Richard judges baseball to be better than cricket. The Joy of Six: Home Runs. I 
don’t think so.”

Updated at 2.03pm GMT

2.00pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 152-2 (Doolan c Smith b Morkel 5)

It’s time for Morkel to find his inner sociopath – we’ve all got one – and 
rough the Aussies up as he did in the first innings. That said, he will want to 
pitch it up to make the most of any reverse swing. Doolan, playing well away 
from his body, is beaten by one such delivery – and now he has gone, pushing at 
a lively delivery that straightened to take the edge. Smith, at first slip, 
took a difficult low chance extremely well, and then celebrated in such a 
low-key manner that it seemed the ball might not have carried. It had, and 
Doolan goes after a very difficult innings of five from 43 balls.

Updated at 2.01pm GMT

1.54pm GMT 

42nd over: Australia 151-1 (Rogers 75, Doolan 5)

There is a little reverse swing for Philander, though it lacks the sporadic 
spite and menace of Steyn’s before tea.

1.51pm GMT 

41st over: Australia 148-1 (Rogers 74, Doolan 3)

This session will be extended a little; after this over from Morkel we will 
have another 30 to bowl.Here’s the forecast for tomorrow 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/weather/964420>, by the way. If this ends in a 
rain-affected draw I’ll do time for GBH of the weather gods. Morkel continues; 
we’re having a few technical problems but you haven’t missed anything of note.

1.46pm GMT 

40th over: Australia 148-1 (Rogers 74, Doolan 3)

“Obvious thing to say, I suppose, but SA are really missing Parnell in this 
innings, what with Morkel not firing and no real front-line spinner,” says 
Richard Thomson. “Parnell was outstanding in the first innings – that first 
over was better than anything Johnson has done in the match.”

Updated at 1.46pm GMT

1.42pm GMT 

39th over: Australia 145-1 (Rogers 72, Doolan 2)

Rogers, like his opening partner Warner, has almost been a second-innings 
during this Australian summer. Since the start of the return Ashes series, 
Rogers averages 24 in the first innings and 64 in the second; Warner’s figures 
in the same period are 35 and 90.

Now then, Morkel is replacing Steyn. It should be much safer to bowl now that 
Warner has gone. So it proves: he bowls his first maiden of the innings, 
including a wide half-volley that beats Rogers’ attempted drive.

Updated at 1.45pm GMT

1.35pm GMT 

38th over: Australia 145-1 (Rogers 72, Doolan 2)

A dramatic start to the session, with Doolan surviving a third-umpire referral 
from the first delivery! It was a loosener from the new bowler Philander and 
even looser stroke from Doolan, a crooked waft away from his body. He edged it 
towards de Villiers, who took it almost on the half-volley. South Africa were 
confident it was out. Richard Illingworth went upstairs to check whether the 
ball had carried; replays showed it had bounced fractionally short of the 
diving de Villiers.

Updated at 1.40pm GMT

1.13pm GMT 

Tea: Australia 141-1 (need a further 307 to win)

What a reprieve for Rogers. That’s the second time in the match that South 
Africa have not reviewed a decision that would have overturned had they done 
so. The first, Nathan Lyon, was understandable because he was a tailender and 
they had only one review remaining. This was a minor shocker. South Africa have 
committed self-DRSification. We’ll find out how costly that will be in the 
evening sessions, which begins in precisely 15 minutes. See you then.

Updated at 1.31pm GMT

1.12pm GMT 

37th over: Australia 141-1 (Rogers 69, Doolan 1)

Steyn will bowl the final over of the session. Rogers doesn’t pick the 
inswinger, offering no stroke to a ball that zips not far wide of off stump. 
Rogers, rattled, cuts miles away from his body at the next delivery, which 
flies through to de Villiers. There was certainly a noise, and Steyn was 
convinced, but Dharmasena said not out and South Africa didn’t review it. That 
was out! A bottom-edge came up both on Hotspot and Snicko. The weird thing is 
not just that that didn’t review it, but that they barely discussed doing so. 
You can understand their caution if only review was remaining, yet they have 
two.

Updated at 1.26pm GMT

1.08pm GMT 

36th over: Australia 141-1 (Rogers 69, Doolan 1)

Rogers cuts Duminy for four more to - you got it, stud - third man. That’s at 
least six boundaries down there in this innings, four from Rogers. It’s a 
productive area for Rogers, who hit nine fours in that area during his MCG 
century against England in December.

1.04pm GMT 

35th over: Australia 136-1 (Rogers 64, Doolan 1)

Rogers pushes a single from the fourth ball, which gives Steyn two deliveries 
at Doolan. The first is too straight and swings down the leg side; the second 
is much better and defended well. This is a good spell for South Africa. The 
value of dismissing Warner is twofold: you get the wicket, and you get 
scoreboard control. Since he was out Australia have scored 10 in 5.4 overs.

Updated at 1.05pm GMT

1.00pm GMT 

34th over: Australia 133-1 (Rogers 61, Doolan 1)

Doolan is looking uneasy against both Steyn and Duminy, and plays a couple of 
vaguely false defensive strokes in Duminy’s over. “Feel a soft one coming here 
boys,” says one of the South African fielders. It might not be the worst idea 
for Rogers to be Doolan’s teawatchman and take as much strike as possible from 
both ends. There are 10 minutes remaining.

12.57pm GMT 

33rd over: Australia 133-1 (Rogers 61, Doolan 1)

Steyn has Doolan in his sights for the first time. There is significant 
reverse swing back into the right-hander, so this is going to be a really 
difficult 15 minutes for Doolan before tea. He survives a desperate LBW 
delivery from a full delivery that was missing leg. Reverse swing, the great 
game-changer, has altered the mood of the match.

Incidentally, if the description of the wicket hasn’t appeared, press F5 and 
it will do so; we have an enduring problem with our auto-refresh.

12.52pm GMT 

32nd over: Australia 132-1 (Rogers 61, Doolan 1)

Doolan is beaten, groping for a wide, full delivery from Duminy that goes 
straight on. He doesn’t look particularly comfortable, with some spinning and 
others not.

Updated at 12.52pm GMT

12.49pm GMT 

31st over: Australia 131-1 (Rogers 61, Doolan 0)

With a new batsman at the crease, Dale Steyn replaces Dean Elgar. We have 25 
minutes until tea. There is some discernible reverse swing, though that doesn’t 
preclude Rogers steering yet another boundary to third man.

“I hope we can knuckle down (the Aussies that is) and play for a draw,” says 
Dave Gibbs. “Loose balls will come, runs will follow and at sometime tomorrow 
we may be able to put the pedal down. What I don’t want to see is going down in 
a blaze of glory playing the good ole ‘natural game’. If we cannot win then the 
next objective is not to let them win. Not really that much of a hard concept. 
This will be a good test as to where we really are.”


Updated at 12.52pm GMT

12.41pm GMT 

30th over: Australia 126-1 (Rogers 57, Doolan 0)

Doolan survives a big LBW shout third ball. He was beaten on the inside by 
some very sharp spin, but the point of contact was outside the line. So in this 
war between the two best pace attacks in the world, South Africa are troubling 
Australia with a pair of part-time spinners.

“Graeme Smith’s declaration seems a good one given the weather forecast,” says 
Tim Sanders. “If South Africans are experiencing The Fear, it will be based on 
the worry that the forecasters have got it wrong and the thunderstorm will 
skirt around the ground, raining on the car park whilst the ground is bathed in 
batsman-friendly, bowler-sapping sunshine.”

Updated at 12.49pm GMT

12.39pm GMT 

WICKET! Australia 126-1 (Warner LBW b Duminy 66)

He’s out! It was indeed umpire’s call, with maybe 30 per cent of the ball 
hitting leg stump. That is such a vital wicket for South Africa, and another 
very good decision from Richard Illingworth, who has had an outstanding match.


Updated at 12.42pm GMT

12.38pm GMT 

REVIEW! Warner LBW b Duminy 66?

JP Duminy replaces Morkel, so we now have part-time spin twins. And Warner has 
been given out LBW! After a discussion with Chris Rogers he decides to review 
it. It dipped onto middle stump from over the wicket, and straightened to hit 
the pad as Warner pushed a little absent-mindedly across the line. Did it 
straighten enough? This will be close, probably umpire’s call and therefore out.

Updated at 12.42pm GMT

12.35pm GMT 

29th over: Australia 126-0 (Rogers 57, Warner 66)

Rogers survives a deceptively decent LBW shout from Elgar. South Africa didn’t 
appeal with that much enthusiasm, yet replays show the point of contact with 
leg stump was umpire’s call. So it was pretty close, even if it would not have 
been overturned on review. Two balls later Warner blazes a cracking cover drive 
for four. Elgar is getting significant turn from out of the rough.

12.31pm GMT 

28th over: Australia 120-0 (Rogers 56, Warner 61)

Morkel continues to haemorrhage runs. Rogers glides him deliberately to the 
third-man boundary to reach an excellent fifty from 95 balls, and works him to 
the same area for two more. Then he is beaten, wafting a little loosely at a 
short one. Australia need another 329. If they get them, Port Elizabeth 2014 
will be likePort Elizabeth 1997 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/63743.html> to the power of
Hobart 1999. <http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/63855.html>

South Africa badly need some reverse swing. On Sky, Mikey Holding reckons 
there are some early signs of it doing that.

12.27pm GMT 

27th over: Australia 113-0 (Rogers 47, Warner 61)

Elgar has another naive LBW shout turned down. Rogers was comfortably outside 
the line when it hit the pad. Elgar is bowling well though. Wickets slow the 
scoring rate, and so does the threat of wickets: Elgar has threatened Rogers 
sufficiently that just six have come from his three overs.

“Was Australia just hustling SA by batting ineptly in the first innings?” says 
Tom Barbour. If that’s the case, England had a magnificent grift going during 
the Ashes. You just wait until 2015!


Updated at 12.27pm GMT

12.24pm GMT 

26th over: Australia 112-0 (Rogers 48, Warner 61)

South Africa should be concerned, though there is no need to panic. Yet. We 
have seen millions of examples of teams starting a huge fourth-innings chase 
extremely well, only to fall in the last few furlongs.The most recent came at 
Auckland earlier in the month 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/new-zealand-v-india-2014/engine/match/667651.html>
: India, chasing 407 to beat New Zealand, were 222 for two at one stage and 
eventually lost by 40 runs.

Morkel replaces Steyn. Warner continues his thrilling calculated assault on 
South Africa’s most dangerous bowler, pulling his first two deliveries for 
four. The first was an orthodox pull, the second a lovely flick-pull through 
midwicket. Morkel responds later in the over by taking the bouncer to the next 
floor and hitting Warner on the shoulder. An eventful over concludes with a 
clunked pull not far over the head of Philander at mid-on. Warner has hit 28 
from Morkel’s last two overs.

Updated at 12.27pm GMT

12.19pm GMT 

25th over: Australia 102-0 (Rogers 46, Warner 51)

Elgar has an optimistic shout for LBW, with Rogers hiding his bat behind the 
pad. Even if the umpire decides he’s not playing a shot, he would have to guess 
whether it would have hit the stumps. Hawkeye shows it did not turn enough and 
was missing off. Good stuff from Elgar, though, who is threatening the 
left-handers a little out of the rough.

12.12pm GMT 

24th over: Australia 99-0 (Rogers 46, Warner 50)

Warner reaches a fine fifty, more controlled than the first innings, with a 
push for two off Steyn. It’s taken just 61 balls. Steyn is nowhere near his 
best here; he knows it and Australia know it, as Rogers demonstrates with a 
stunning pull over the top for a one-bounce four.

“Looking forward to seeing how Australia’s top order deals with Duminy and 
Morkel,” says Michael Nelson. “Can’t help but feel that pre-Boof, they would 
have wilted like month-old daffodils. These days, maybe they have a sense of 
greatness about them ... fingers crossed for a rain free day tomorrow and 
Harris cracking a six off the last ball of the day to win by two runs.”


I don’t know about greatness, but they certainly have a seriously powerful 
sense of destiny.

Updated at 12.17pm GMT

12.09pm GMT 

23rd over: Australia 90-0 (Rogers 40, Warner 47)

Shaun Pollock, commentating on Sky, sounds worried: “if they don’t get it to 
reverse swing there are going to be troubles.” Can youimagine what it would do 
for Australia if they chase this down. They’d win a decade’s supply of 
self-belief.

It might be time for Graeme Smith to ask: what would Michael Clarke do here? I 
reckon Clarke would risk a couple of overs of Faf du Plessis’ legspin. In fact 
Smith has gone for the slightly safer left-arm spin of Dean Elgar. Rogers is 
beaten on the outside by a sharply spinning second delivery which hits the pad 
outside the line. Two from the over.

“You don’t think Australia could do it, do you?” says Chris Drew. “I know it’s 
never been done, but this team has so much self-belief now, I actually think 
it’s on. Best Sunday wishes (have just finished my Sunday lunch – roast chicken 
and trimmings!)”

Given the staggering advancements in Test batting, particularly mentally, and 
the reduction in the number of impossible day-five pitches, I have never really 
understood why a team hasn’t chased 450+ in the last decade. Sehwag at his best 
could have done it on his own. There is no logical reason why it should not 
happen soon. If it doesn’t rain I think Australia have a wonderful opportunity 
here.

Updated at 12.12pm GMT

12.04pm GMT 

22nd over: Australia 88-0 (Rogers 39, Warner 46)

Rogers tries to hook a sharp bouncer from Steyn and is beaten, with Steyn 
thinking for a split-second that he had top-edged it to de Villiers. This is 
exactly the sort of situation in which Steyn has repeatedly made important 
breakthroughs down the years, perhaps the principal manifestation of his 
genius. Does he still have it in him? He’s only 30, though he has a ridiculous 
number of miles on the clock. Later in the over, Rogers has time to force 
through three runs through the covers.

12.01pm GMT 

21st over: Australia 85-0 (Rogers 36, Warner 46)

Warner launches Duminy effortlessly down the ground for six, a formidable 
demonstration of his extreme talent.

“Are heavier bats better against fast or slow bowling? Should batsmen change 
their bats depending on who is bowling to them?” They would certainly change 
them based on pitches – a lower middle in the subcontinent, say – but you 
couldn’t do it for bowlers really.

11.58am GMT 

20th over: Australia 77-0 (Rogers 35, Warner 39)

Steyn continues. He is raging against dying of his light, but can’t get quite 
get the pace of force he managed in his peak years. A maiden.

Incidentally, for those who use auto-refresh, it’s worth pressing F5 every now 
and then - particularly after wickets - to get the updated entries. Our 
auto-refresh does not work properly.

11.51am GMT 

19th over: Australia 77-0 (Rogers 35, Warner 39)

Rogers waves a low full toss from Duminy through extra cover for two. 
Australia look really comfortable here, worryingly so for South Africa.

Updated at 11.55am GMT

11.51am GMT 

18th over: Australia 73-0 (Rogers 32, Warner 38)

Steyn, who has taken some tap in this match, replaces Philander. Rogers avoids 
a couple of spiteful short balls, bowled from around the wicket, and there’s 
just a single from the over.

11.45am GMT 

17th over: Australia 72-0 (Rogers 32, Warner 37)

Warner is dropped by the bowler Duminy! He chipped a gentle return catch low 
to the left of Duminy, who dropped the chance as he collided with the 
non-striker Rogers. It’s hard to be sure, but you have to think he’d have taken 
that had he not been put off by Rogers. It’s not that Rogers did anything wrong 
- he didn’t move - but he probably saved Warner there.

11.39am GMT 

16th over: Australia 70-0 (Rogers 31, Warner 36)

After 59 runs from the first 12 overs, the game has taken a moment to breathe, 
Philander is trying to tempt Warner into something indiscreet. Warner is not 
interested. In fact it’s Philander who blinks first – his last ball is too 
straight and tucked off the pads for four.

“Even further back before your time, there was Basil D’Oliveira, the first 
cricketer I can remember having people going on about his brawny forearms,” 
says John Starbuck. “That, and a bit later for Lamb, Botham and Gooch, was when 
the heavier bats started to come in, swooping through the air, they were.”


Gooch’s bat should have been used as a weapon in a trashy horror film; it was 
terrifying..

Updated at 11.43am GMT

11.38am GMT 

15th over: Australia 66-0 (Rogers 31, Warner 32)

Duminy is a reasonable spinner, with a Test and first-class average in the low 
40s, but he’s certainly a part-timer and he shouldn’t worry Australia unduly. I 
thought they might go after him; for now they are content to milk low-risk 
singles. Rogers is beaten in the flight by the last delivery, which turns 
violently out of the rough for two byes.

Updated at 11.43am GMT

11.35am GMT 

14th over: Australia 62-0 (Rogers 31, Warner 31)

This feels a little like the Langer/Hayden partnership in the second innings 
at Edgbaston in 2005 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/215010.html>. Australia 
were chasing only 282 then, of course; even so, South Africa could do with a 
Flintoff over.

Updated at 11.36am GMT

11.31am GMT 

13th over: Australia 61-0 (Rogers 30, Warner 31)

Graeme Smith is forced to turn to the part-time offspin JP Duminy. Warner will 
surely try to take him on, because if he does Smith will have hardly anywhere 
to turn. I hope the weather doesn’t intervene because this is already shaping 
up to be a classic. The forecast, sadly, is diabolical for tomorrow, although 
it might simply be that somebody fancies a game of golf.

Anyhow, a quiet first over from Duminy brings precisely two singles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5oX-8TbQhk0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5oX-8TbQhk0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5oX-8TbQhk0&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5oX-8TbQhk0&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5oX-8TbQhk0>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5oX-8TbQhk0&media=>
close 
11.27am GMT 

12th over: Australia 59-0 (Rogers 29, Warner 30)

Rogers edges Philander wide of the slips for four, all along the floor. Why do 
almost all modern captains eschew third man? Presumably it is based on computer 
evidence, yet instinct suggests that literally gazillions of runs are scored to 
third man. South Africa have got a problem here. Not because Australia are 59-0 
but because of the way in which Australia have reached 59-0.

“Robin Smith, Martin McCague and Mark Ramprakash!” exclaims Robert Wilson. 
“Impeccable. So far as it goes. The Smith square cut (brutality thrills like no 
elegance could or should), McCague, Larne’s finest (or in the top five at 
least), Ramprakash (be still my beating heart!). But where oh where is Peter 
Willey? Seriously, that stance. That hair! I thought you had more taste, more 
depth. Mitch is gonna score a double ton. I canfeel it.”

Ah Willey was before my time, although I do occasionally have nightmares about 
being in a DeLorean, pressing the wrong buttons and ending up in 1978 in an 
arm-wrestling contest with Peter Willey and Brian Close.

11.24am GMT 

11th over: Australia 55-0 (Rogers 25, Warner 30)

Morkel’s fourth over disappears for 18! Glorious batting from Warner. He 
starts by nailing thrilling boundaries off the first two deliveries, the first 
cut square and the second larruped swaggeringly through the covers off the back 
foot. Warner makes it three consecutive boundaries with an astonishing stroke. 
Morkel moved around the wicket, so Warner jumped across to the off side and 
flick-pulled lazily and brilliantly for four. Morkel goes back over the wicket 
again, this time drawing an edge that flies fractionally wide of the diving 
gully for another boundary, the fourth in a row. Australia still need 393 but 
you can bet South Africa are feeling the first stirrings of The Fear.

Updated at 11.25am GMT

11.19am GMT 

10th over: Australia 37-0 (Rogers 25, Warner 12)

Vernon Philander continues his burgeoning bromance with David Warner. He tries 
to work on him, hitting a fourth-stump line with every delivery, but a misfield 
by Faf du Plessis at short extra allows Warner off strike. Rogers then punches 
a brilliant drive through extra-cover for four. This is one of those games 
where you could easily see Australia being 280 for three and then 389 all out. 
Or maybe 449 for six. If they win this it would knock Port Elizabeth 1997 into, 
er, whatever you knock things into.
Jason Gillespie (@YCCCDizzy) 
Australia can do something special here.... #SAFvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAFvAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/YCCCDizzy/statuses/437545917487796224> February 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/YCCCDizzy/statuses/437545917487796224> 
11.14am GMT 

9th over: Australia 32-0 (Rogers 21, Warner 11)

South Africa are down to three main bowlers, with Wayne Parnell injured. The 
pitch is fine, too, so this could well develop into one of Ashley Giles’s 
beloved derriere-nippers. Morne Morkel’s third delivery of the afternoon 
session is a beauty that snaps back off the seam to hit Warner in the chest. 
It’s followed inevitably by the fuller delivery, and Warner, stuck in the 
crease, is fortunate that an inside-edge goes back onto the pad. Beautifully 
bowled, and a very lively start to the session.

Updated at 11.19am GMT

11.04am GMT 

Hello! Pride, it seems, can come after a fall too. South Africa’s response to 
being brutalised at Centurion has been a masterpiece of pride and mental 
strength. It has been clever, too; they almost lulled Australia into a false 
sense of security with their methodical first-innings batting, then suddenly 
raised hell by handing the ball to Morne Morkel. Now, weather permitting, they 
should square the series.

That said, they will have slight worries about a reversal of either Perth 2008 
 <http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/351681.html>or Adelaide 
2012, <http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/573008.html> 
certainly while David Warner is at the crease. If you want to claim to be the 
best team in the world, chasing a world-record target of 448 to win a series 
against the current world no1 is a reasonable place to start.

Updated at 11.13am GMT

10.40am GMT 

And that is lunch

A good start from Australia to their massive run-chase.

Rogers and Warner could have done no better in a tricky period before the 
interval, but greater challenges await after lunch and when the ball gets older 
- and starts to reverse.

That’s all from me. Rob Smyth, a man who counts Robin Smith, Mark Ramprakash 
and Martin McCague as his cricketing heroes, will take you through the 
afternoon and evening sessions.

Please be gentle with him.

10.31am GMT 

8th over: Australia 31-0 (Warner 10, Rogers 21)

Three more for Rogers, who pushes the re-introduced Steyn through the covers.

Warner then drives uppishly through square for three more, Rogers rushing 
though for the last run.

10.28am GMT 

7th over: Australia 25-0 (Warner 7, Rogers 18)

Rogers punches an overpitched Morkel ball through the covers for three as his 
free-scoring start to the innings continues. Well, free scoring for him. He’s 
farmed the strike yet Warner’s rate is still better.

10.24am GMT 

6th over: Australia 22-0 (Warner 7, Rogers 15)

Rogers picks up a single as Philander keeps things very tight.

Good start from Australia, but surely they’re no hope.

Right?

10.18am GMT 

5th over: Australia 21-0 (Warner 7, Rogers 14)

Morkel is brought on for his first bowl of the innings as Steyn is given an 
early rest.

He switches from around the wicket to Rogers, to over the wicket to Warner. No 
breakthrough, and just one single from the over.

10.14am GMT 

4th over: Australia 20-0 (Warner 7, Rogers 13)

Great ball from Philander squares Warner up as the leftie edges just short and 
wide of the keeper to collect four fortuitous runs.

10.10am GMT 

3rd over: Australia 14-0 (Warner 2, Rogers 12)

Steyn overpitches ever so slightly as Rogers cashes in with an on-driven 
boundary.

The opener then follows up with another four to the same part of the ground 
off of a shorter delivery.

10.07am GMT 

2nd over: Australia 6-0 (Warner 2, Rogers 4)

Warner pushes Philander past extra couple for two runs.

What do you think, people: did Smith declare too early or too late?

Or ride on time?

10.03am GMT 

1st over: Australia 4-0 (Warner 0, Rogers 4)

Steyn gets things moving, but Rogers ups the ante with a four driven through 
the covers.

Good start from the under-pressure veteran ... just 111 more of those and 
Australia win.

Easy. Just like one of those days in the week.

9.49am GMT 

64th over: South Africa 270-5 (Amla 127, Duminy 18)

Amla rides his luck, French cutting just past his stumps before surviving an 
ambitious appeal for leg before.

Duminy then shows how it’s done, driving over extra cover for four.

Declaration! Smith has now seen enough as he calls the batsmen in, with a lead 
of 447 to protect.

To win, Australia will need to break just about every record in the book.

9.44am GMT 

63rd over: South Africa 263-5 (Amla 126, Duminy 13)

Lyon leaks a few singles but it’s actually a very good over.

Hello again to John Starbuck: “Statement of the bleeding obvious: the SA 
batsmen could be trying to score quickly, but the Aussie bowlers are too good 
for them?”

Could be a good point, John, if South Africa weren’t almost half a thousand 
runs up.

9.40am GMT 

62nd over: South Africa 260-5 (Amla 124, Duminy 12)

Lovely shot from Amla first ball after the drinks break, as Siddle goes 
through mid-wicket for four. Duminy then gets in on the act, driving over 
mid-on for four more.

Surely the declaration comes soon ... South Africa 437 to the good.

9.34am GMT 

61st over: South Africa 247-5 (Amla 119, Duminy 4)

A couple of singles off Lyon’s over. Hard to tell what the Proteas are 
thinking: seems they have enough runs but there doesn’t seem much urgency out 
there.

Why wouldn’t you just get Australia in, or at least go for broke with some 
quick runs?

9.29am GMT 

60th over: South Africa 245-5 (Amla 118, Duminy 3)

South Africa seem to be looking for runs but Siddle does a good job in keeping 
things tight, conceding just a couple of singles before two to to Amla that 
could, and should, have been a boundary save for Johnson’s excellent rescue on 
the rope.

Updated at 9.31am GMT

9.26am GMT 

59th over: South Africa 241-5 (Amla 115, Duminy 2)

Lyon tries to keep things tight but Amla succeeds in getting the spinner away 
for two to deep square.

Updated at 9.31am GMT

9.24am GMT 

58th over: South Africa 236-5 (Amla 112, Duminy 0)

Amla lights up an otherwise drab over with a delightful square-driven four off 
Siddle. SA going for runs now ahead of the declaration.

9.21am GMT 

Wicket! De Kock c Clarke b Lyon 34 (South Africa 231-5)

Australia get their (first) much-needed breakthrough as de Kock picks out 
Clarke off Lyon, going for quick runs off the last ball of the over.

9.19am GMT 

56th over: South Africa 227-4 (Amla 106, de Kock 31)

Just a few singles result as Siddle tightens his line and length.

9.17am GMT 

55th over: South Africa 224-4 (Amla 105, de Kock 29)

Lyon into the attack now. De Kock rides his luck as he edges a ball just in 
front of Clarke at slip.

Updated at 9.17am GMT

9.15am GMT 

54th over: South Africa: 221-4 (Amla 104, de Kock 27)

Siddle into the attack now. A few singles and two to de Kock result in a 
loosener of an over.

Updated at 9.15am GMT

9.12am GMT 

53rd over: South Africa 216-4 (Amla 103, de Kock 23)

Siddle keeps Amla to a single. That is all.


Thanks to all pointing out it is South Africa batting, not Australia. 

Updated at 9.12am GMT

8.55am GMT 

52nd over: South Africa: 215-4 (Amla 103, de Kock 22)

De Kock starts the over with a boundary but Amla steals the show with a 
boundary of his own to seal his 21st Test century. Not bad. Not bad at all.

Here’s Simon, all confused and all: “two smiths is confusing enough, but now 
i’m wondering what i drank last night.”

How about three Smiths, you charming man?

Updated at 9.10am GMT

8.49am GMT 

51st over: South Africa: 206-4 (Amla 99, de Kock 17)

Amla shifts to 99 with a cheeky single off Johnson, but de Kock repeats the 
dose last ball to retain the strike..

And it’s a good ruddy morning to Peter Farlam: “Yes, the Saffers are smug 
today. These moments come along so rarely in a home series against Australia 
that we savour them like, well, fine wine.

“But I will be interested to see how the Aussies respond. Days 4 & 5 will be a 
perfect opportunity for the Australians to show mettle / bottle / depth of 
character (insert your own cricketing cliche here). I can’t really see Warner 
and Rogers doing an Atherton and battling boringly for two days but it’s 
possible. The alternative is a fourth-innings record and a victory. I’ll be 
interested to hear your thoughts.”

Agree the only way out of this for Australia is victory. At least they’ll die 
trying. They shut up shop for a draw and they’ll die not trying.

Updated at 9.08am GMT

8.45am GMT 

50th over: South Africa: 204-4 (Amla 98, de Kock 16)

Amla moves to 97 with a big edge that fortuitously splits slip and gully at 
catching height, and goes for four.

No luck needed later in the over as de Kock drives supremely through 
mid-wicket for four more.

Updated at 10.36am GMT

8.41am GMT 

49th over: South Africa: 195-4 (Amla 93, de Kock 12)

Good first-up offering from Johnson keeps de Kock rooted on the crease and 
rooted on the scorecard.

Updated at 9.07am GMT

8.39am GMT 

48th over: South Africa 195-4 (Amla 93, de Kock 12)

Dropped catch! A big leading edge from de Kock off Harris gives Smith a tough, 
but gettable, chance at short cover but Smith lets it slip.

Updated at 9.07am GMT

8.30am GMT 

Super Sub

Hello all ... I’m Scott Heinrich and I’ve been subbed in like Ole Gunnar 
Solskjaer, ready to score some junk goals.

Please get in touch and let me know your thoughts on Australia’s mission 
impossible.

8.25am GMT 

Well, Geoff is running a wee bite late so Scott Heinrich will be taking over. 
He wins today’s medal for general superbness


2.23am GMT 

Geoff will be here shortly, in the meantime here’s an extract from the third 
day’s match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/22/south-africa-australia-port-elizabeth-test>
:

For the first time in the last few months the Australians are under the pump. 
They will have to bat for the best part of two days to save the Test match in 
Port Elizabeth and thereby retain their 1-0 lead in the series. By the close on 
the third day South Africa led by 369 runs with Hashim Amla contributing an 
unbeaten 93. After a quick thrash from the home side on Sunday morning the 
Australians will soon be batting again.

Australia lasted just 57 overs on a docile track (compared to the 150 faced by 
South Africa in their first innings). So the Australian bowlers experienced 
what their English counterparts habitually had to deal with during the Ashes 
series. There was no time to rest those weary limbs and this was especially 
noticeable when Ryan Harris lumbered up to the wicket so ponderously in the 
final session. For an over or two Harris made Tim Bresnan look like Freddie 
Trueman.

Updated at 7.31am GMT
 