
If you thought your day was ruined by the unexpected use of the phrase 
“President-elect Donald Trump”, just imagine being a South Park writer: they 
had torewrite their election night episode 
<http://www.esquire.com/entertainment/tv/news/a50524/south-park-presidential-election-trump-win/>
 at the last minute because it initially featured a Clinton win.

Back to the future: how the Simpsons and others predicted President Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/simpsons-predicted-president-trump-back-to-the-future>
Though South Park had election-themed episodes in 2000 
<http://www.southparkstudios.com/full-episodes/s04e13-trapper-keeper> and 2004 
<http://www.southparkstudios.com/full-episodes/s08e08-douche-and-turd>, the 
2008 election episode 
<http://southpark.cc.com/full-episodes/s12e12-about-last-night> was completed 
after the results were in. In 2012, theycaptured the results correctly 
<http://southpark.cc.com/full-episodes/s16e14-obama-wins> but completed the 
episode in advance – which, apparently, had been the plan for this year’s 
episode, necessitating the new scenes.

The episode, originally titled The Very First Gentleman and then retitled Oh 
Jeez, is the seventh in South Park’s election-themed 20th season. It has 
featured the boys’ school teacher, Mr Garrison, newly spray-tanned and running 
for president with Caitlyn Jenner, trying to throw the election for Hillary 
Clinton by saying incredibly offensive things about everybody. Garrison and 
Jenner have been stymied in their efforts in part byMember Berries 
<http://www.avclub.com/tvclub/chaotic-south-park-season-premiere-sets-stage-seas-242477>
, talking fruit that whisper nostalgic things at those who eat them (“’Member 
when there weren’t so many Mexicans?” they asked in the first episode; their 
meaning and history isexplained in episode five 
<http://www.avclub.com/tvclub/south-park-mixes-todays-trump-outdated-conspiracy--244499>
, and they escaped an effort by Randy Marsh to destroy them inepisode six 
<http://www.avclub.com/tvclub/member-when-member-berries-stole-show-south-park-244916>
) and completely mellow the consumers out to external stimuli.

There are four intersecting plot lines in the episode: the election results, 
the war between the town’s boys and girls, Cartman’s conversion to a caring 
boyfriend and the escalating problem with trolls.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZtzLq2yoPU8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZtzLq2yoPU8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZtzLq2yoPU8&media=>
This episode opens outside South Park’s election night viewing party, where we 
see residents stumbling drunkenly outside and puking on the sidewalk. Inside, 
people watch the results with horror as a news anchor calls the election for Mr 
Garrison. Randy Marsh, Stan’s dad, runs to the center of the room and screams: 
“What have you done? You maniacs!”

Behind him, a man pulls out a handgun and kills himself.

The anchor cuts to Mr Garrison’s acceptance speech, in which he says: “The 
people have spoken. Just like JJ Abrams did with Star Wars, I will make America 
great again.” (A running gag is that the new Star Wars reboot wasn’t very good, 
a topic with which Randy is obsessed and Garrison had agreed, and the Member 
Berries often spout Star Wars trivia in between racist sentiments, as seen in
episode six 
<http://www.avclub.com/tvclub/member-when-member-berries-stole-show-south-park-244916>
.)

“This isn’t how this was supposed to happen,” Randy says, back in South Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/south-park>.

“All my efforts the past week have paid off,” says Mr Garrison, as ominous 
music swells. “And now let’s begin … fucking them all to death!” (One of his 
campaign’s central pledges, often applauded by his audiences, has been to fuck 
all his enemies, including immigrants, to death.)

Samantha Bee on the US election: 'White people ruined America'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/samantha-bee-donald-trump-white-people>
Later in the episode, Randy pounds on Mr Garrison’s door. “Garrison, what the 
fuck have you done?!” he shouts.Caitlyn Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/caitlyn-jenner> answers, but Randy 
barges right past her. Garrison, in orange face, sits stiffly on his sofa. 
“Garrison, do you have any idea what you’ve done to our country?”

“Yeah,” Mr Garrison replies in a daze. “Fucked them all.”
 Photograph: Comedy Central 
Randy says he thought they had an understanding that Mr Garrison wasn’t 
supposed to win, and that the Star Wars reboot sucked and we should leave great 
movies alone, but Garrison says he changed his mind. Caitlyn Jenner sidles up 
and tells Randy that some people like the comfort of nostalgia and he ought to 
accept that; she then vomits Member Berry remains all over his face, and Randy, 
in a daze, agrees to watch the reboot again.

In the last third of the episode, Randy, under the influence of Caitlyn 
Jenner’s pre-masticated Member Berries, is having dinner with his family. “I 
don’t know about you guys, but I sure am excited. America’s going to be great 
again,” he says. Shelly Marsh is, to say the least, not excited. “It sucks, 
dad. This country’s going to suck for four years!” she yells. Randy says he’s 
happy, and his wife, Sharon, doesn’t understand what’s going on: she says he’s 
been trying to convince her that the country was voting for Garrison because of 
misplaced nostalgia embodied by the new Star Wars. When she refuses to watch 
it, Randy vomits masticated Member Berries on both of them.

Aaron Sorkin publishes letter urging daughter to fight after Trump win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/10/aaron-sorkin-publishes-letter-urging-daughter-to-fight-after-trump-win>
The other plotlines are more complicated: while Randy and Mr Garrison have 
been (mostly) obsessed with the election this season, rest of the town in up in 
arms about online harassment. Kyle Broflovski’s father, Gerald, is a prolific 
anonymous online troll who targets the town’s girls and celebrities for his own 
amusement. Earlier this season, he harassed a Danish former Olympian and breast 
cancer activist Freja Ollegard to the point that she killed herself, and 
Denmark vowed revenge and invented Troll Trace, a program that will reveal 
everyone’s internet history and connect it to their real identities.

Troll Trace was unleashed on the Colorado town of Fort Collins as a test run 
in the last episode; this one revealed that murders and suicides are up in the 
town, the divorce rate is 100% and the US military has built a huge, beautiful 
wall around it to prevent anyone else from being exposed to the full truth of 
the internet … and to keep Fort Collins residents from revealing to anyone else 
what they’ve learned.

Gerald, then, gets a visit from federal agents, who take him to a remote 
location where Hillary Clinton appears, reveals that she knows he’s a troll and 
gives him an assignment: he has to infiltrate Troll Trace in Denmark and plant 
an EMP, in order to salvage the election by destroying their servers. (It’s 
unclear how destroying Troll Trace will make her the winner and not Mr 
Garrison; one suspects they have a few more plot points to rewrite.)

Gerald suits up and heads to Denmark, but when he arrives and is shown the 
Troll Trace server rooms, he doesn’t find servers at all: he finds his one-time 
troll ally turned enemy, Dildo Schwaggins, also wearing a suit and carrying the 
same briefcase. Schwaggins reveals that Clinton recruited all the trolls 
involved in the Freja Ollegard incident and sent them to Troll Trace as part of 
some deal the US government made with the Danish. They are all shown, in the 
same suits with the same briefcases, hanging out just behind Dildo.

Then, at the moment they were all told the EMP would be unleashed, their 
briefcases open and a screen appears: Rick Astley, singing Never Gonna Give You 
Up. They’re all been rick-rolled. Gerald’s fate remains up in the air.

Cartman, of course, was the main suspect in the trolling of the town’s girls. 
But though he’s innocent, Cartman’s friends destroy his electronics to keep him 
off the internet, and with nothing else with which to amuse himself, he gets 
together with a girl, Heidi, and, totally in love, becomes a changed boy who 
acts as a feminist ally. Cartman spends this episode trying to figure out how 
to keep Heidi from discovering mean things he’s said about women on the 
internet, and eventually alights on a plan: they’re going to Mars to avoid the 
violent fallout when Troll Trace goes global. The episode ends as the two 
lovers arrive at SpaceX headquarters, as Cartman’s plan to find a place without 
Wi-Fi may be to commandeer a rocket.
South Park (@SouthPark) 
#SouthPark <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SouthPark?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/VrIRXtxZID <https://t.co/VrIRXtxZID>
 <https://twitter.com/SouthPark/status/796597643946455041> November 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SouthPark/status/796597643946455041> 
The attacks on Cartman’s technology had other consequences: the girls of the 
town all dumped their boyfriends for not understanding them, causing Butters to 
start a protest movement called“Wieners Out” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wieners_Out> in which the boys walk around with 
their genitals out to protest against the girls’ desire to have them be nice. 
The bro-tastic PC Principal calls a post-election assembly in the gym and 
declares it’s time to end the divisions in the school, and introduces Bill 
Clinton. He invites the boys to join Bill Clinton’s Gentlemen’s Club and then 
brings out … Bill Cosby. They do a little softshoe, and Clinton invites Cosby 
to join his gentlemen’s club, too.

Clinton’s first recruit is, apparently, Stan, who wants to get his girlfriend, 
Wendy Testaburger, back. Bill and Bill coach him through an apology and then 
explain he’ll have to convince her that he’ll be less selfish. They’re 
interrupted by Butters and a group of boys outside, calling Stan a traitor for 
trying to make up with Wendy. Butters smears his genitals on the window.

Late-night hosts on Trump victory: 'It feels like the end of the world'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/09/late-night-hosts-donald-trump-victory-stephen-colbert-trevor-noah>
Butters, who has been grounded for “pressing pickle at the nail salon again”, 
later gets a visit from Clinton, who finds him “smushing snake” on his bedroom 
window. Clinton ascertains that Butters is persisting in his pickle-pressing 
because he’s sad that he got dumped, and gives a speech.

“I know. I know how hard they can be,” he tells Butters of women. “But 
something’s about to happen that you aren’t aware of. You see, hell hath no 
fury like a woman scorned. And, trust me, my wife is a crazy bitch. She and all 
the other women in the world are about to get payback, and we are all 
completely fucked.

“It’s my fault, really. I’ve done things my whole life that gradually broke 
her spirit. And now that’s she’s lost everything, let me assure you, she is 
pissed. Now, our only chance is to keep our heads low and act like we’re 
changed men. Because we’re very close to the end.”

He continues: “Women are sick of our shit, son. And soon, they’re going to 
know everything we’ve said and done online. Unless we start kissing their 
asses, we’re all going to be put in a big chamber underground and milked for 
our semen.”

The fate of the world’s men remains up in the air, at least until next week.
 