
AB de Villiers has agreed to become South Africa’s Test captain on a permanent 
basis. De Villiers, who will also lead his country in a five-match one-day 
international series against England, starting next week, was in charge for the 
last two Tests of theseries lost 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/england-south-africa-fourth-test-day-five-kagiso-rabada>
.

After taking over the Test captaincy from Hashim Amla as a short-term measure, 
however, he appeared equivocal about the role – and his subsequent form, 
including a pair in the final match at Centurion last week, was below his 
established standards as one of the world’s finest batsman.

It was nonetheless announced, following a Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South Africa board meeting on 
Friday, that the 31-year-old will lead the Test team for the foreseeable future.

“This is an exciting time for South African cricket, and I am honoured to have 
been asked to captain the Test team into a new era,” he said. “I thoroughly 
enjoyed captaining in the last two Tests against England – and although I still 
have a lot to learn in this role, it’s a new challenge that I’m excited to take 
on.”

He is optimistic about the potential of a team which appears in transition but 
contains several promising players.

“I have been privileged to play in several outstanding Proteas teams over the 
past 11 seasons, and I believe we are witnessing the emergence of another great 
team,” De Villiers added.

“There is plenty of hard work ahead of us; we are rebuilding and have a long 
way to go to being a finished product as a squad.

“We may have to fight through some tough times. But the recent performances of 
Kagiso Rabada, Temba Bavuma, Dane Piedt, Dean Elgar and others have created an 
opportunity to build a team that delights and unites our country as never 
before.

“I could not be more excited about the future. I am fully committed to the 
Proteas – but more than anything, I am grateful for the support from my 
team-mates, Cricket South Africa and the people of our rainbow nation.”

Dale Steyn ruled out of South Africa’s ODI series against England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/dale-steyn-ruled-out-odi-south-africa-england>
The CSA chief executive Haroon Lorgat is confident the right captain has been 
chosen.

“AB is a class cricketer and a special person,” he said, “and the board is 
delighted that he has taken on the responsibility to lead the Proteas Test team 
during this crucial phase of guiding new players and rebuilding the team to 
once again be the best in the world.

“AB’s commitment to the Proteas and international cricket is a lesson for many 
other cricketers, and the board was unanimous in appointing him to take charge 
of the team.2

At the conclusion of the board meeting, a CSA press release also addressed the 
anti-corruption investigation which has led to the former Test player Gulam 
Bodi’s 20-year ban for contriving or attempting to fix Twenty20 matches.

The CSA chairman, Chris Nenzani, said: “The board is satisfied with the 
progress that has been made so far and with the lengthy ban that was imposed on 
Mr Bodi. We will strongly uphold our stance of zero tolerance on any corruption 
matter.

“The internal investigation under the CSA anti-corruption code continues, and 
we are confident our experienced investigative team will leave no stone 
unturned.”

On Sunday, South Africa are expected to announce replacements for the injured 
pace bowlers Dale Steyn and Kyle Abbott in their ODI squad.
 