
South Africa’s AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> has confirmed he is looking 
to lessen his international workload amid claims he is considering retiring 
from Test cricket.

South Africa v England: first Test, day three – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/dec/28/south-africa-v-england-first-test-day-three-live>
Local newspaper reports in South Africa emerged on Sunday suggesting that De 
Villiers, rated the No3 Test batsman in the world, was considering ending his 
long-form career afterthe current series against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket/match/2015-12-28/england-cricket-team>
. He referenced those suggestions before the start of play on day three of the 
first Test and, although he did not offer specifics, the 31-year-old did say he 
would need to take time off in the near future.

He told the host broadcasters, SuperSport: “There are a lot of rumours flying 
around I hear, but for the last two to three years the only talk I’ve been 
doing is to keep myself fresh and to have a bit of rest here and there.

“It’s always been the most important thing for me to enjoy my cricket. It’s 
just important to look at the schedule moving forward, that’s the talk in the 
camp and for me maybe not to play all kinds of cricket.

New Zealand’s Martin Guptill hits 93 off 30 balls in rout of Sri Lanka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/28/new-zealand-sri-lanka-second-odi-report-martin-guptill>
“If I play all the IPL games the whole season, I do get a bit tired towards 
the end. That’s the only thing that I’ve been talking about in the last while. 
To keep myself fresh and to keep enjoying the game. I love representing my 
country and nothing has changed.”

Dale Steyn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dale-steyn> appeared to suffer a 
shoulder strain after lunch on day three, but returned to the field and began 
bowling before tea before later leaving the field again. Steyn will be sent for 
scans after play finishes to assess the extent of the injury.

South Africa’s fast-bowling spearhead missed the last three matches of South 
Africa’s Test tour in India with a groin injury and came through a vigorous 
fitness test before lining up on Boxing Day for the start of the England series.
 