
SOUTH AFRICA’S SWITCHEROO

Much as, often as not, the answer to any Trivial Pursuit question about 
British politicians seems to be ‘Winston Churchill’, so, when searching for a 
source for old aphorisms, the best guess is often Abraham Lincoln. Who is 
supposed to have said, variously, “you can’t fool all the people all the time”, 
“better to remain silent and be thought a fool than to speak and remove all 
doubt”, and “don’t swap horses in mid-stream”. The last quote is one of the 
rare ones which we can be sure really did pass from his lips, in an address 
given on 9 June 1864. Lincoln attributed it to an “old Dutch Farmer”. The 
saying has grown so well worn since that it was used for a running gag about 
tired campaign slogans in Barry Levinson’s political satireWag The Dog 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qABA0X6IzxU>.

Swapping horses in mid-stream is, of course, exactly what South Africa have 
just done. One-nil down with two Tests to play, Hashim Amla has quit the 
captaincy,and AB de Villiers has taken over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/07/hashim-amla-burden-south-africa-captain>
. So they’ve broken Lincoln’s maxim. And in cricket circles, too, few would 
ever have said that such a switch was a sign of anything other than a team in 
some disarray. It smacks of uncertainty. The English, inevitably, have made 
something of a habit of it. They used three different captains against the West 
Indies in 1966, swapping MJK Smith for Colin Cowdrey, and then Cowdrey for 
Brian Close. Then a generation later they went one better, and famously used 
four for the West Indies’ 1988 tour, Cowdrey’s son Chris among them. More 
recently, they used two against the South Africans in 2003, when Nasser Hussain 
made way for Michael Vaughan, and again in 2008, when Vaughan made way for 
Kevin Pietersen.

Australia draw first blood in ODI series after chasing down India's big total
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/australia-draw-first-blood-in-odi-series-after-chasing-down-indias-big-total>
The common theme being that they didn’t win any of those four series, their 
best result being the two-all draw Vaughan’s England managed to salvage in 
2003. History suggests some hope, then, for England this time around. Or 
perhaps not. Consensus seems to be that South Africa will likely be a better 
team nowwith De Villiers as skipper 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/cricket/international/england/12085696/England-beware-Hashim-Amla-resignation-as-South-Africa-captain-could-see-him-and-AB-de-Villiers-prosper.html>
. “Sometimes change is good,” says head coach Russell Domingo. “Hashim has done 
a great job but it might just be the change that can trigger something.” De 
Villiers, Domingo says, will be a more proactive captain. “He is more of a 
spontaneous leader. Hashim might be a little bit more methodical and 
thoughtful. AB is very much spur of the moment. He plans a lot but does things 
instinctively.”

Amla certainly seemed a little lost during the opening days at Cape Town, as 
anyone might when marshaling a callow attack against such an assault. It was 
strange to see Amla give the second new ball to the debutant Chris Morris 
rather than Morne Morkel late on the first day, and stranger still to see him 
persist with Morris the morning after. By the afternoon, Amla had lost control 
altogether. If, as Domingo suggests, De Villiers is more deft, better able to 
react to the changing rhythm of a match as it unfolds around him, then South 
Africa will be stronger for it. The biggest benefit, though, won’t necessarily 
be in the field, but at the batting crease.

In 2015, Amla only scored 251 runs in eight Tests, with a top score of just 63 
and an average of 23. He made almost as many in a single innings at Cape Town, 
and you can’t help but wonder whether that was because he had finally decided – 
midway through the match – that he was going to give up the captaincy. “It is,” 
he admitted in his post-match press conference, “a bit of a relief”, because he 
had been stewing over the decision before the start of the series. Now he is 
free to think about his own game, his mind uncluttered by the myriad issues 
that a captain has to concentrate on.

Amla wouldn’t be the first man whose form improved once relieved of the burden 
of leadership. It happened, most obviously, to Ian Botham, when he quit after 
two Tests of the 1981 Ashes, and was replaced by Mike Brearley. Botham had 
become so brooding that he was holding back his own team. As Graham Dilley 
remembered: “I don’t think we were ever going onto the field thinking we were 
going to win a game. Botham found it very difficult to get his points across 
without their being that air of defeatism about him.” Brearley later said: 
“Without doubt, and whatever Botham’s view may be, it was a relief to him to be 
captain no longer.” No one needs to be toldwhat happened in the next Test 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OkkvgiZJkhM>, when Botham was back in the 
ranks.

There is a flip-side, too. If being freed of the captaincy can bolster some 
players, so being appointed to it can boost others. Especially those who aspire 
to what Don Bradman called “the highest honour which the game has to bestow.” 
As, they say, De Villiers does. He has described it as the “fulfilment of a 
lifelong dream”. De Villiers’ form hasn’t slumped anything like as low as 
Amla’s, but he only scored the one century in the eight Tests he played in 
2015, and that was against the West Indies, way back in January. Before this 
series he was starting to grumble about his workload; some said he waseven 
contemplating quitting the team 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/south-africa-v-england-2015-16/content/story/955631.html>
. He will be happier now, and more motivated too.

And ominously for England, De Villiers has always seemed to succeed at 
everything he turns his hand to, whether wicketkeeping, attacking batting, 
blocking, or even, on occasion,bowling 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OkkvgiZJkhM>. He also plays golf off a 
handicap of two, was a member of South Africa’s national junior tennis team, 
turned down an offer to join the Blue Bulls as a fly-half, and has written, 
performed, and releasedhis own album of MOR rock ballads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=12zUOGNanwA>.

All of which means that this may be one of those rare instances when Honest 
Abe’s advice is all wrong.

 * This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket 
email. To subscribejust visit this page, find ‘The Spin’ and follow the 
instructions <https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>.  