
2.31pm GMT 

Play abandoned for the day

And that’s it. The rain has not relented, and with an hour or so until the 
close, play has been called off for the day, which might just help South 
Africa’s chances of avoiding defeat in a match in which almost nothing has gone 
for them thus far. Which will mean the world’s No1 Test side will have failed 
to win either of their home series this season, though some of the blame for 
that must go to the idiot schedulers who deemed a series against India worth 
only two Tests, and one against Australia only three. And with my current pet 
cricketing rant out of the way, I’ll bid you good day/night/afternoon/whatever. 
Thanks for sticking with it, and the team will be back tomorrow. Bye.


2.16pm GMT 

On patience: the need for, during OBO rain-breaks

This Movement Needs Discipline, reckons Robert Wilson: “You should not reward 
that flibbertigibbet Starbuck for straying onto the OD! OBO,” he says. “That 
encourages faithless permissiveness. The hardy, the Luddite, the frankly 
strange will stay with you. Rain is nothing. Don’t be afraid. I’m here.We‘re 
here. If we can’t manage a couple of hours of futile F5ing during a rain spell, 
Test cricket will not see the end of this decade.”

Maybe so, but I hope comrades will permit me a perfunctory public information 
announcement, to relay the fact that West Indies are 41-3 after 12 overs in The 
Other Place, and Simon Burnton can tell you more about ithere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/02/west-indies-england-live-cricket-odi-obo>
.


2.02pm GMT 

Still raining…

… and John Starbuck can’t even respond to a simple request for a yarn or two.


“Oh, I don’t have any stories to tell,” he confesses, “I just wanted an OBO 
record. We readers don’t have statistics compiled about us - number of 
contributions per session, riffs started and so on - though I expect Gary 
Naylor, Mac Millings and Sarah Bacon could come up with a few figures. It would 
be a pretty pointless exercise but that is at least something in these 
conditions.”


Have you known us to be averse to “pretty pointless exercises”? Some OBO 
Banter* Stats might make interesting reading.

* Except we’re above calling our sharp, quickfire exchanges “banter”, 
obviously.


1.47pm GMT 

Exciting/excitable email

“Tom, Simon,” yelps John Starbuck. “As this is possibly the first time there 
have been simultaneous OBOs, the challenge falls to readers to get on both of 
them simultaneously, too. Any chance?”

Go on then John, but there’s nowt happening here. So tell us a story.


1.37pm GMT 

Dampening expectations

Prospects of play latest:
jim maxwell (@jimmaxcricket) 
Looks like tomorrow is the next day pic.twitter.com/1LiZ0fpKh2 
<http://t.co/1LiZ0fpKh2>
 <https://twitter.com/jimmaxcricket/statuses/440117903153971201> March 2, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/jimmaxcricket/statuses/440117903153971201> 
1.34pm GMT 

Dale Steyn news

The latest is that the South Africa pace bowler is ruled out of bowling in 
this innings (no surprise there) and will undergo a fitness test before the 
start of the second, Cricinfo reports. Newlands is now drizzly and deserted.


1.25pm GMT 

Pour your misery down

It’s still raining. Frustrating for the Australians, and the spectators, 
though perhaps not the South Africa bowlers, given the two days they’ve had. So 
what’s to do? What do people do to while away the time when they’re at a ground 
and the heavens open? I once saw a pretty competitive actual game hastily 
cobbled together with umbrellas (bat), tennis ball and bin (stumps) in the 
Western Terrace concourse at Headingley during a rain-ravaged England v 
Zimbabwe ODI in 2003. Or do you just scurry off to a nearby pub to do yourself 
some damage?

Over in the West Indies, England have won the toss and decided to bowl. Simon 
Burnton will gratefully receive your insights on that oneover here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/02/west-indies-england-live-cricket-odi-obo>
.


1.10pm GMT 

In the meantime

Get a load of that Morkel spell at Clarke again, which now seems several days 
ago given the state of the match, and the Australia captain’s score, but is 
pretty essential to understanding just what a fine innings it has been.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di0iPU_VLzL0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di0iPU_VLzL0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di0iPU_VLzL0&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di0iPU_VLzL0&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di0iPU_VLzL0>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di0iPU_VLzL0&media=>
close 
1.07pm GMT 

Afternoon everyone

Or whatever time it is wherever you are.

It’s still raining at Newlands, so who knows what state the groundstaff are 
now in - I’m imagining the scene in which the child, and the goat, and the 
nurse get lodged together in the Tunnel of Goats in that episode of Father Ted 
- but there’s exciting team news from the Caribbean where Lancashire’s spinner 
Stephen Parry has been granted his England debut for the second ODI. You can 
blether about thathere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/02/west-indies-england-live-cricket-odi-obo>
, of course.


12.55pm GMT 

Some reading material for the rain delay

Mike Selvey gives some insights into Ashley Giles’ attempts to secure the 
England coaching job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/01/ashley-giles-england-cricket-culture-change>
 and a nice little Q&A withformer England keeper Chris Read 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/magazine/content/story/708231.html> over at 
Cricinfo.

That’s it from me. Thanks for your company and make sure you stick around for 
the final session, during which Tom Davies will join you.

12.45pm GMT 

That is tea

With that rain lingering the umpires have decided to take an early tea and 
leave us to the serious business of laughing at ground staff.

12.40pm GMT 

More ground staff magic

David Cotton has a great addition to the ground staff fun. I actually saw the 
exact same thing happen at Yankees Stadium last year. It got bigger cheers than 
Derek Jeter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTSIJzvNIM8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTSIJzvNIM8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTSIJzvNIM8&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTSIJzvNIM8&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTSIJzvNIM8>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWTSIJzvNIM8&media=>
close  Tarp Trouble 
12.30pm GMT 

The lead balloon

I chose to read this entry from James Steerforth with the theme tune from Curb 
Your Enthusiasm playing in my head. “I was waiting at the bar of a rugby club 
in North Sydney, at which I tended to spend most lunch hours, when I looked to 
my right and realised the man next to me waiting for his order was Mark Ella,” 
he says. “I mumbled something stupid about the Wallabies’ current form and was 
a bit nonplussed when he offered a curt “yes” and then turned around abruptly 
and went back to his friends. I was feeling a bit peeved about his rudeness 
until I realised he was at a wake.”

Smooth work, James.

12.25pm GMT 

Actually this one is even better
FOX SPORTS Cricket (@FOXCricketLive) 
Some classic work done by the Newlands groundstaff. #SAvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/UU7u5C9Mna 
<http://t.co/UU7u5C9Mna>
 <https://twitter.com/FOXCricketLive/statuses/440099013182758912> March 2, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/FOXCricketLive/statuses/440099013182758912> 
12.24pm GMT 

A thankless task

One bloke was actually being dragged along on his stomach as the cover acted 
like a sail.
Jesse Hogan (@Jesse_Hogan) 
Poor buggers are struggling. #gusty 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23gusty&src=hash> #SAvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/e2pLLXMCQZ 
<http://t.co/e2pLLXMCQZ>
 <https://twitter.com/Jesse_Hogan/statuses/440098456297021440> March 2, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Jesse_Hogan/statuses/440098456297021440> 
12.20pm GMT 

More Warwick Capper

Don Oliver says, “On the subject of Warwick Capper and catching a ball, OBOers 
of the non-AFL ilk might be interested in some context. Check out the link 
below for examples of Aussie Rules marks (catches) and hairstyles through the 
ages…note the recurrence of the word “ripper” to denote something really, 
really good. Like Michael Clarke…”

I really want to paste the clip that Don has suggested but I will leave that 
to intrepid YouTubers and instead go with a blast of Warwick’s minor pop hit, 
‘I only take what’s mine’. There is some footy in it too, after all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT0kLDpK_YNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT0kLDpK_YNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT0kLDpK_YNo&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT0kLDpK_YNo&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT0kLDpK_YNo>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT0kLDpK_YNo&media=>
close  Warwick Capper - I only take what’s mine 
12.17pm GMT 

128th over: Australia 490-7 (Clarke 161, Harris 4) - rain stops play

As Ryan Harris takes guard for his first delivery from Philander some very 
dark clouds are beginning to hover over the ground. Harris takes the paceman on 
and watches a top edge fly over the head of de Villiers for a boundary.

With that the umpires decide they’ve seen enough drizzle and call the ground 
staff onto the ground to cover the pitch. It’ll be no mean feat because the 
covers are being blown all over the shop by these strong winds.

12.13pm GMT 

127th over: Australia 489-7 (Clarke 160, Harris 0)

The Johnson dismissal finished the over so now is a good time to cut back to 
Pepp Fitzgerald with a celeb spot. It’s not a sports one, but I’m still letting 
it through.

“I once run over Mel Gibson on my bicycle,” says Pepp. “he wasnt too pleased.. 
he had a farm up in Yackandandah in those early days of fame, my dog flew out 
of the basket and went him, I was so rattled, I knew I knew him but thought I’d 
seen him as wicket keeper in a local match the previous week! Mel wasnt 
interested in my gibbering explanations. He curtly told me to conrol my dog and 
ride my bike on the road in future... which of course , I have done.”

12.10pm GMT 

OUT! Johnson c de Villiers b Duminy 0 (Australia 489-7)

Well Duminy has four now and this is getting a little ridiculous. The faint 
edge was there and Johnson has to go.

12.07pm GMT 

REVIEW!

JP Duminy and AB de Villiers now believe they have Johnson out caught behind 
down the leg side. In the absence of skpper Graeme Smith the pair call for the 
review.

12.06pm GMT 

WICKET! Haddin c Amla b Duminy 13 (Australia 489-6)

Haddin’s lean patch continues with the keeper somewhat lazily slapping Duminy 
straight to a juggling Amla at mid-off. That one came against the flow of a 
short but very comfortable stand between he and Clarke. Like Watson, Haddin 
might rue the missed opportunity to ammass some cheap runs.

Updated at 12.11pm GMT

12.02pm GMT 

126th over: Australia 486-5 (Clarke 158, Haddin 12)

Haddin welcomes Philander back into the attack by slamming the paceman into 
the gap between mid-wicket and mid-on, with a boundary taking him into double 
figures and also reminding us that Philander is now past his ton, a truly rare 
sight in the Test arena.

Nicholas Darling wants to know why keepers wear pads. “Has anyone seen a 
keeper’s pad’s defend an otherwise shin-shattering blow?” Erm, yes. Yes I have.

Updated at 12.11pm GMT

11.59am GMT 

125th over: Australia 480-5 (Clarke 157, Haddin 7)

JP Duminy continues with little penetration into a strong breeze, enabling 
Clarke and Haddin to push singles in a quiet over.

Greg Potter stooged himself. “My tale’s lamer than most,” he says. “12 year 
old me was catching the tram home from the MCG with my dad after a Richmond 
game (his team) and I couldn’t believe my luck when I saw that we were sitting 
opposite a sports legend and one who I was dead keen on, Keith Greig - a dual 
Brownlow medallist by then. Dead-set legend. For some reason, he was also 
sitting with his dad. Go figure. Anyway, I mustered up my courage and asked him 
for his autograph. My dad looked unaccountably uncomfortable, given that he’d 
helped me get autographs from such luminaries as Ron Barassi and Malcolm Blight 
in the past. Keith whispered to Mr Greig, and it’s possible that a glance was 
exchanged with me Da. Keith signed my autograph pad, I thanked him profusely, 
and it was about 6 years before I twigged that I’d hassled some poor bugger 
with a carrot-top and a passing resemblance to a legend.”

Updated at 11.59am GMT

11.54am GMT 

124th over: Australia 478-5 (Clarke 156, Haddin 6)

Clarke brings up his 150 by slinking onto the back foot and depositing Abbott 
for a boundary to the on side. His pull shot is then replayed with an added 
gun-shot sound effect as the ball strikes the blade, a genuinely odd production 
quirk of this South African telecast. As that happens we see the first drops of 
rain for the day and high winds cause an issue for Umpire Dharmasena, who has 
something in his eye. The rain clouds look threatening at this point so we 
could be due for a delay soon.

Art Vandelay has a very niche sports star sighting. “back in the 90’s i was 
playing beach cricket with some mates on the gold coast. “Warwick Capper walked 
past and asked if he could play for a couple of overs. A catch was hit in his 
direction, and as he went to take it he jumped in the air and yelled out 
“CAPPER!” - that story will mean nothing to international readers but 
Australians from AFL states will love it. We don’t discriminate here. All 
sports are welcome, no matter how provincial.

11.47am GMT 

123rd over: Australia 471-5 (Clarke 149, Haddin 6)

A bowler down and with his side losing enthusiasm by the minute, Graeme Smith 
perserveres with JP Duminy. That’s all fine by the new man Haddin, who slams 
him over mid-wicket for a boundary.

Graham O’Reilly has a stat that makes for good reading to Aussie eyes. “I see 
that Australia have at different times in this innings been 1 for 111, 2 for 
222, 3 for 333 and just now 4 for 444. At this rate they’ll get to 10 for 1100 
some time late Monday. That should be enough.”

11.45am GMT 

122nd over: Australia 467-5 (Clarke 149, Haddin 2)

With Abbott still plugging away, Clarke is in pursuit of his 150 milestone and 
has no such nervous trembles as those that preceded his century.

Pepp Fitzgerald is back and says, “I got lucky last night, Russ... I could get 
lucky again, Pup keeping at it, and Watson.. can never tell with Watto though.. 
could be good, could be maddening...”

Pepp then sends me a favoured cover of Get Lucky and I think it might be a 
wind-up...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdrCsB23GoU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdrCsB23GoU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdrCsB23GoU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdrCsB23GoU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdrCsB23GoU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdrCsB23GoU&media=>
close  Get Lucky 
11.41am GMT 

121st over: Australia 466-5 (Clarke 149, Haddin 1)

There is an interesting start to the over as Vernon Philander’s throw from the 
deep is not backed up by the bowler Duminy, who probably should have taken the 
stumps and run Brad Haddin out. Haddin had actually given up on it, he was that 
far gone.

Robert Wilson is in need of salvation, though clearly hasn’t seen any West 
Indian fast bowlers out on the town because he would have blurted the anecdote 
out straight away. “The sun is splitting the trees here in Paris and I have a 
hangover that could sell sponsorship rights. I woke up to no milk for my coffee 
and a very serious assault by my cat. I turned fifty on Monday. My question is 
this. Where is Geoff Lemon? I want Geoff Lemon. Geoff Lemon can save me.”

I think he’s back tomorrow, Robert. Have a Lucozade and some grease. 

Updated at 11.41am GMT

11.37am GMT 

120th over: Australia 462-5 (Clarke 146, Haddin 0)

Clarke is in super form now and strokes a truly delightful cover drive for a 
rare boundary against Kyle Abbott. The latter might be tiring after a day and a 
half of luckless toil.

Now this is a stat...
Jesse Hogan (@Jesse_Hogan) 
Only 2nd time in past 8 years that Aus has got 50+ partnerships for first 5 
wkts of any inns. Last done vs Pak at MCG in Dec 2009.#SAvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Jesse_Hogan/statuses/440087149703348224> March 2, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Jesse_Hogan/statuses/440087149703348224> 
11.33am GMT 

119th over: Australia 457-5 (Clarke 141, Haddin 0)

If Darren Lehman’s theory that a laughing team is a winning team holds true, 
then Australia might win this game in a canter. With cameras catching Shane 
Warne dozing off again, Warner, Harris, Johnson and even skipper Clarke in the 
middle are all in stitches at the sight of old man Warnie having a a nanna nap 
on the big screen.

Watson’s wicket is followed by a single to Clarke, as ‘keeper Brad Haddin 
joins him at the crease.

11.31am GMT 

WICKET! Warson c Amla b Duminy 40 (Australia 454-5)

Having slog-swept Duminy for a towering six, Watson holes out to Amla at deep 
mid off and shakes his head ruefully as he trudges off. Many more runs were 
there for the taking, to be truthful. Watson knows it.

11.26am GMT 

118th over: Australia 448-4 (Clarke 139, Watson 33)

Has anyone else got an impressively unimpressive tale of meeting a sports 
identity? Some of the ones that came through after I’d logged off last night 
were genuinely impressive.

Back at Cape Town, Clarke rolls his wrists over a pull shot out to the deep 
after Abbott bowls a rare half-tracker. That matters not to the camera crew, 
who are too busy getting a good shot of David Warner using a roll of 
elastoplast like a monocle. Genius all round.

Updated at 11.31am GMT

11.23am GMT 

117th over: Australia 446-4 (Clarke 138, Watson 32)

When Watson isn’t flogging Duminy over the fence he looks at sea against the 
very gentle spin on offer, getting off strike with miscued heave to the leg 
side. Clarke is more orthodox, getting a decent stride in before his lovely 
forward defence comes into play. Duminy is operating with Graeme Smith at a 
very wide slips position and there’s a brief break in play when heavy gusts of 
wind force the umpires to bring out the ‘heavy bails’.

So am I actually...
Matt Webber (@MattWebberWrite) 
I'm genuinely quite fond of Kyle Abbott's delivery stride crazy eyes. #SAFvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAFvAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/MattWebberWrite/statuses/440083851080003584> March 2, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/MattWebberWrite/statuses/440083851080003584> 
11.18am GMT 

116th over: Australia 444-4 (Clarke 137, Watson 31)

Abbott, who has genuinely impressed me so far despite failing to pick up a 
wicket, resumes after lunch to Clarke and is straight on the money again. Those 
three maidens he bowled while the Aussie skipper was stuck on 99 were 
everything his own captain could have asked of him and built an almost 
unbearable amount of pressure on Clarke.

His fourth delivery here draws and edge from Clarke but the bowler can only 
watch on in frustration as it drops short of Faf du Plessis at gully.

11.14am GMT 

115th over: Australia 444-4 (Clarke 137, Watson 31)

“That’s right out of his bracket,” bellows Mark Nicholas as Shane Watson 
slog-sweeps JP Duminy for a huge six to get us underway. It’s followed by a 
straight one, which only just eludes the outstretched arm of Hashim Amla before 
bouncing once over the rope.


Out of his bracket? Really Mark? Blimey...

11.10am GMT 

Just a little bit about me..

Not only have Australian broadcaster cut to tourism advertorials and a rugby 
show, they’ve pinched my twitpic of Damien Fleming and claimed it as their own. 
Cheeky.

Meanwhile, Clarke and Watson are now jogging onto the ground and we’ll be 
underway shortly.
Russell Jackson (@rustyjacko) 
Damien Fleming playing "Free Love Freeway". pic.twitter.com/X33GRaPfVO 
<http://t.co/X33GRaPfVO>
 <https://twitter.com/rustyjacko/statuses/436836977497751552> February 21, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/rustyjacko/statuses/436836977497751552> 
11.00am GMT 

Over Rate Gripes

The oddly-named Rocket Rocket writes in with a peeve. “How is it possible for 
SA to only bowl 26 overs this morning?” he asks. “Abbott 6, Philander 6, Morkel 
6, Spinners 8.And Abbott’s six overs went for a total of ONE run, surely 
speeding things up.And there was only ONE wicket to fall. What is happening?Is 
SA in some strange space-time discontinuity where time is running at a 
different rate?”

Well, it’s not fast Rocket, but it’s no worse than expected. I always bank on 
around 27 overs in the first session these days and I can understand that the 
Proteas are hardly keen to rush through things. It’s nothing compared to the 
Windies teams of the late 80s, that’s for sure.

Right as I type that the Australian broadcaster is showing highlights from one 
of those glorious South Africa v Australia encounters featuring Andrew ‘Ronald’ 
McDonald, who was my spirit animal though Victoria’s decade of (relative) 
domination in Australian domestic cricket. It’s cruel that he only played 4 
Tests. Not as cruel as if he hadn’t played any at all though, I suppose.

10.50am GMT 

Afternoon/evening all

Here are my observations from the first session:

- Michael Clarke has played a truly special innings, once that I simply 
couldn’t envisage when he was being physically annihilated by Morne Morkel in 
the middle session yesterday. I’ve always considered his physical bravery one 
of his most undersold traits but that was something else. As it stands it could 
be a match-winner and it’s all uphill now for the Proteas.

- I want to get a tattoo of Steve Smith’s lofted straight drive. On my face. 

- Kyle Abbott has bowled much better than 0-53 from 23 overs. Dean Elgar has 
bowled muchworse than 1-99 from 22 overs, though it was probably poetic justice 
that it was his ropey part-time spin that claimed the wicket of Smith, himself 
a master of the art.

- Shane Warne looks like a WAG. Who is advising him on the spray-tan colour? 
You could only describe it as “terracotta”, though he did at least provide some 
entertainment when cameras showed him sleeping in the Australian viewing area.

Gary Naylor has some observations on Clarke, though I think he was a little 
harsh at the outset. “When Morne Morkel was beating up Michael Clarke 
yesterday, I tweeted that his Test career could be disintegrating before our 
very eyes. He had no means to defend himself effectively, his back was so stiff 
that he seemed incapable of ducking or swaying to avoid the ball and the 
spectacle looked more cruel than sporting. Had it been boxing, the referee 
would surely have stopped the fight. But the game, as ever, knows more than us 
mere observers. Well played Michael Clarke.”

What about the two centuries he made to kick-start a 2-0 lead for the Aussies 
early in their home Ashes, Gary? I know he’s had a lean trot in the five Tests 
since but he had a lot of credits in the bank.

10.36am GMT 

And that would be lunch

Australia add 103 runs for the session for the loss of Smith.

Clarke remains steadfast and looks like he could score as many runs as he 
likes. You could probably write your own ticket for how many runs Australia 
will score in this first innings.

The South Africans miss Steyn like sleep. I’m Scott Heinrich and on that note, 
I’ll leave you with Tim Rogers before Russell Jackson picks up the afternoon 
session.

10.32am GMT 

114th over: Australia 434-4 (Clarke 137, Watson 21)

Elgar seemingly goes through the motions to take us to lunch, neither batsman 
troubled at all until Watson gets a rush of blood to the head and miscues a big 
drive that nevertheless clears the rope - and an unwitting Philander at 
long-off.

Updated at 11.13am GMT

10.28am GMT 

113th over: Australia 425-4 (Clarke 136, Watson 13)

Duminy comes on as South Africa go all-spin just before lunch. To no effect, 
it must be said.

10.25am GMT 

112th over: Australia 423-4 (Clarke 135, Watson 12)

Clarke helps himself to a driven four off Elgar through the covers as the 
score continues to build at a quick rate. How the Proteas are missing Steyn.

Scott ‘not Ponting’ Poynting writes: “The mouthing-off of the much maligned 
Warner seems to have made it much more difficult for SA to obtain the right 
atmospheric conditions for reverse swing, no?”

Updated at 10.26am GMT

10.22am GMT 

111th over: Australia 415-4 (Clarke 128, Watson 11)

Watson cuts Morkel over gully for four to keep the score ticking over. The Big 
Tuna is now over the wicket to Clarke, and not so short. Hmm.

 Hello again to Julian McClung: “Your thoughts on the result of this match? 
Australia’s to lose?”

Quite. There are only two possible results to this Test match. And neither 
points to a South African series victory.

Updated at 10.22am GMT

10.17am GMT 

110th over: Australia 407-4 (Clarke 127, Watson 4)

Elgar and co choose not to review a half-hearted lbw appeal for Clarke that is 
turned down, the Aussie skipper advancing down the pitch to meet the ball. Bad 
call: had they gone upstairs, Clarke would have been out.

Updated at 10.22am GMT

10.12am GMT 

109th over: Australia 404-4 (Clarke 125, Watson 3)

Watson barely survives a run-out attempt, and a swish outside off-stump off 
Morkel, but he stays alive in a nervy return to Test cricket.

It’s hello to Andrew: “If South Africa need a wicket quickly or they are in 
danger of falling behind their average of one wicket per session.”

Nope, it’s one wicket per session thus far.

Updated at 10.22am GMT

10.07am GMT 

108th over: Australia 402-4 (Clarke 125, Watson 1)

Review! Enter the forgotten man, Shane Watson, and Elgar rises in appeal for 
lbw, the batsman trapped back in his crease trying to cut. Decision is not out 
and rather a bizarre review from the Proteas - not even close. Did it even hit 
his pads? No.

10.03am GMT 

Wicket! Smith b Elgar 84 (Australia 401-4)

Clarke goes over the infield, lifting Elgar to the fence to bring up the 400 
for Australia.

But South Africa then have their breakthrough as Smith unluckily drags one off 
Elgar, that keeps low, onto his stumps.

South Africa hadn’t looked close to a wicket but now they’ve got one.

9.58am GMT 

107th over: Australia 396-3 (Clarke 120, Smith 84)

Morkel extracts a bit of life from the pitch but still no breakthrough. One 
ambitious bouncer is even called a wide.

Updated at 10.03am GMT

9.53am GMT 

106th over: Australia 395-3 (Clarke 120, Smith 84)

Elgar continues with his dobbers, to no effect at all. The batsmen either pick 
runs or block with ease.

Andrew in Brisbane says: “Now might be a good time to remind the viewers about 
Graeme Smith’s pre match comment. ‘We can handle pressure, we can handle 
expectation and we can handle things been thrown at us’ There’s those who can, 
do; those who can’t, talk.”

Updated at 9.54am GMT

9.49am GMT 

105th over: Australia 391-3 (Clarke 116, Smith 84)

Morkel around the wicket again to Clarke, and again short, but Pup has all the 
answers.

Updated at 9.50am GMT

9.43am GMT 

104th over: Australia 385-3 (Clarke 115, Smith 80)

Singles all round off Elgar and it really looks like the Proteas are out on 
their feet.

Julian McClung: “Here’s a vid for you. Australia “Slam the Door” on any chance 
South Africa have of winning this match? Sorry - notcricket related but thought 
you’d take an interest.”

Yeah, I’m interested.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUWmm6SYJ6AU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUWmm6SYJ6AU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUWmm6SYJ6AU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUWmm6SYJ6AU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUWmm6SYJ6AU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUWmm6SYJ6AU&media=>
close 
Updated at 9.46am GMT

9.39am GMT 

103rd over: Australia 383-3 (Clarke 114, Smith 79)

Morkel keeps things nice and tight but offers no real threat to the batsmen. 
His venom from yesterday looks absent, even in a short one to Clarke which 
misses by a long way.

9.34am GMT 

It's drinks...

...meanwhile, how well does this bloke bang those drums?

9.32am GMT 

102nd over: Australia 381-3 (Clarke 114, Smith 78)

South Africa bring on Elgar and the field placings already betray a defensive 
mindset. There were clouds overhead this morning and a bit of renewed life in 
the pitch, but any hopes of a breakthrough have been dashed. It’s hard to see 
where the wickets will come from.

Updated at 9.35am GMT

9.28am GMT 

101st over: Australia 377-3 (Clarke 111, Smith 77)

Morkel enters the fray for the first time today. Will he try to knock Pup’s 
block off? More to the point, will he try to get him out?

Nevermind that, Smith is the focus as he lofts Morkel high over long-off for a 
quite remarkable six. Besides being a locked-in future captain of Australia, 
this boy can play.

9.22am GMT 

100th over: Australia 371-3 (Clarke 111, Smith 71)

Smith treats Philander with contempt, straight driving Philander for a 
wonderful six, before rotating the strike with a single ...

... and Clarke finally gets there after an interminable period stuck on 99, 
pushing through the covers for four to register another century. A thick edge 
then beats slip for four more before the over is concluded with a boundary 
through mid-wicket. The shackles are broken.

Updated at 9.22am GMT

9.17am GMT 

99th over: Australia 352-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 64)

No joy yet for Clarke, who stays on 99 for what seems to be an eternity now.

9.12am GMT 

98th over: Australia 351-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 63)

Smith punches Philander through the covers for four before picking up two more 
behind square. A single then puts Clarke on strike for the last ball, but no 
luck. At this rate Smith will get to triple figures first.

9.08am GMT 

97th over: Australia 344-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 56)

Clarke cuts at one that was probably too straight for the shot and his thick 
edge is cut off by Du Plessis. Another maiden from Abbott. Clarke stays on 99 
for 18 straight deliveries.

9.05am GMT 

96th over: Australia 344-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 56)

Four to Smith, who whips Philander through midwicket, but Clarke stays on 99.

9.02am GMT 

95th over: Australia 340-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 52)

Clarke shows incredibly good judgement to leave one on length from Abbott, 
which just clears the stumps. He remains on 99.

Here’s Deepak, making me feel bloody old: “You’ve had a Hotmail account since 
‘98?!! Wow....I must’ve been about two then...Oh yeah, I was born on 9 August 
‘96, exactly 41 years after the US of A dropped an “obese individual” on 
Nagasaki. Probably tells you something, that. Glad to see Pup’s back in form, 
though. Now we just need a repeat of 2012 & the dastardly Oz plan of world 
domination will be well and truly underway. MWAHAHAHAHAHA...”

Updated at 9.03am GMT

8.57am GMT 

94th over: Australia 339-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 51)

Smith resumes his scoring after 20 dot balls, but Australia look quite happy 
to see off the early attack from South Africa, who remain a man down.

8.54am GMT 

93rd over: Australia 338-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 50)

Smith backs up beyond the call of duty as he tries to help his skipper to 
triple figures and is lucky to survive as he retreats to the non-striker’s end 
and the shy at the stumps misses.

Clarke still stranded on 99.

Updated at 8.54am GMT

8.48am GMT 

92nd over: Australia 338-3 (Clarke 99, Smith 50)

Clarke moves to 98 with a well-timed push wide of mid-on for four before 
scampering through for a risky single to get to 99. A direct might have had him 
in trouble, but it was way wide of the mark.

Updated at 8.49am GMT

8.45am GMT 

91st over: Australia 333-3 (Clarke 94, Smith 50)

Abbott keeps Smith back in the crease and rises for one or two half-hearted 
lbw appeals. But no runs or no wickets.

8.42am GMT 

90th over: Australia 333-3 (Clarke 94, Smith 50)

Solid, probing start from Philander, but no real threat to Clarke, who opens 
the scoring for the day with two to third man. It’s all the threes.

Good day to Marissa Dosen: “How long have you had your email address? Few have 
Hotmail addresses these days and certainly not ones with their name in it – 
normally it’s something likelustbucket69@hotmail.com 
<mailto:lustbucket69@hotmail.com>. Maybe I have wrongly assumed your name is 
Scott Heinrich and that in fact your email address speaks of your fetish for a 
certain movement or something. Who knows these days? By the way, what’s the 
latest on Steyn?”

I’ve had my hotmail account since 1998, Scott Heinrich is my real name, my 
fetishes are my business and Steyn is unlikely to bowl in this innings, if at 
all. Happy?

8.35am GMT 

89th over: Australia 331-3 (Clarke 92, Smith 50)

Good start from Abbott, nipping the odd one off the seam. But Smith keeps the 
paceman safely at bay. A maiden.

Updated at 8.36am GMT

8.25am GMT 

Steyn

One word: I’ll put it out there.

If he’s out for the game, even this innings, how can South Africa win this 
Test match?

Dare I say it, how can they even save it?

8.10am GMT 

Wat's on?

At some stage today, it will be Shane.

Australia will be hoping he doesn’t make his Test reappearance until late in 
the day (if not tomorrow). See below for how he’s looking in the nets.

But South Africa first have to get through Australia’s fourth-wicket pair. And 
that might be tough. Clarke won’t give up his wicket after working harder than 
a farmer’s dog for his 92 on day one, and Smith’s in form.


Will South Africa go the short stuff again. Or will they actually try to get 
Clarke et al out?

6.21am GMT 

Scott will be here shortly, in the meantime, here’s Vic Marks on the first 
day’s play:

David Warner frustrated South Africa on the field for a change. After 
Australia’s defeat in Port Elizabeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/23/south-africa-australia-second-test-port-elizabeth>
, Warner, who seldom gives the impression that he thinks long and hard before 
opening his mouth,cast aspersions about the South Africans’ ability to find 
reverse swing so quickly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/27/david-warner-fined-australia-south-africa>
. In Cape Town, at the start of the third and final Test of the series, he 
opened his shoulders rather more eloquently.

Warner struck 135 from 152 balls, his fourth Test century of the winter, an 
innings that makes it well-nigh impossible for South Africa to win the series. 
Australia ended the first day on 331 for three with their captain, Michael 
Clarke, unbeaten on 92, his first significant contribution with the bat on the 
tour. To make matters worse for the home side, they were without their prime 
match-winner from mid-afternoon when Dale Steyn left the field with a hamstring 
problem.

“[Steyn] is going to have a little fitness test tomorrow ... there’s still 
hope,” the South Africa bowling coach, Allan Donald, said. “If you lose your 
gun bowler, which is Dale Steyn, then the rest are going to have to step up. 
We’ve done that on numerous occasions.”
 