
South Africa’s batsman AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> has scored the fastest-ever 
one-day international century during his side’s run-laden innings against the 
West Indies on Sunday.

The Proteas’ captain needed only 31 deliveries to reach three figures in the 
second ODI in Johannesburg, five fewer than the previous record holder, New 
Zealand’s Corey Anderson, who needed 36 balls to reach a century,also against 
West Indies, last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/01/corey-anderson-fastest-ever-one-day-century>
.

De Villiers had earlier broken Sanath Jayasuriya’s 19-year-old record for the 
fastest ODI fifty, taking a mere 16 deliveries to achieve the feat by launching 
Jason Holder over the long-off boundary.

He needed a further 15 balls to break Anderson’s year-old fastest ODI century 
record and any West Indian hopes that De Villiers would subsequently relax were 
soon dismissed as he and Hashim Amla continued to pepper the New Wanderers 
Stadium boundary.

De Villiers soon set his sights on breaking another record - the most sixes in 
an individual ODI innings - and equalled the record Rahul Sharma set in 2013 
against Australia when he smashed his 16th maximum on the penultimate ball of 
the penultimate over.

The wicketkeeper-batsman could not score another to make the record his own, 
however, when he went for another huge hit off Andre Russell and was caught at 
deep extra cover with two balls left having scored 149 from 44 balls.

The Proteas ended their innings on 439 for two, four runs shy of the highest 
ever ODI score by a team - set by Sri Lanka in 2006 against the Netherlands.

Earlier, South Africa’s openers Amla and Rilee Rossouw both scored centuries 
as they made 247 in just over 38 overs for the first wicket. Rossouw made 128 
from 115 balls before he was caught at mid-off to give Taylor a wicket, while 
Amla finished unbeaten on 153 from 142 deliveries.

Fastest ODI centuries

31 balls AB de Villiers v West Indies, 2015

36 Corey Anderson v West Indies, 2014

37 Shahid Afridi v Sri Lanka, 1996

44 Mark Boucher v Zimbabwe, 2006

45 Brian Lara v Bangladesh, 2006

45 Shahid Afridi v India, 2005
 