
Ryan McLaren has been ruled out of the second Test in Port Elizabeth, where 
Australia can seal their first Test series win on foreign soil since beating 
the West Indies in April 2012.

McLaren was suffering from post-concussion syndrome, brought about by a brutal 
Mitchell Johnson bouncer that drew blood in the first Test at Centurion.

However, Peter Siddle said McLaren’s ill-health didn’t sit well with any of 
the Australian bowlers.

“On the field it’s hard and aggressive, but when you see things like that 
happening it is a little bit disappointing,” Siddle said. “You don’t want to 
hurt anyone in a way that they can’t come up [for the next match]. It’s not as 
if you’re trying to do it. At the time you’re just obviously trying to build a 
bit of pressure and get a wicket.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F19%2Faustralia-south-africa-video-preview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F19%2F1392772920932%2FPeter-Siddle-Press-Confer-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Siddle%3A%20South%20Africa%20shouldn't%20expect%20respite%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F19%2Faustralia-south-africa-video-preview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Siddle%3A%20South%20Africa%20shouldn%27t%20expect%20respite%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F19%2Faustralia-south-africa-video-preview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F19%2F1392772920932%2FPeter-Siddle-Press-Confer-016.jpg>
 Peter Siddle on the second Test (Australia only) 
Left-armer Wayne Parnell is expected to take McLaren’s spot in the hosts’ XI 
for the second Test that starts on Thursday.

“A couple of the netties [net bowlers] were left handed so it gave the boys a 
bit to look at there,” Siddle said after training on Tuesday.

However, if South Africa selectors opt to shore up their batting order then 
left-hander Dean Elgar could come into contention. Elgar made a pair on Test 
debut, against Australia in 2012 when Johnson twice dismissed him at the Waca.

Morne Morkel suggested the squad had full faith in Elgar, who was 12th man for 
the first Test and dropped a catch provided by David Warner when the eventual 
centurion was on 26.

“Dean is like a Staffy. He’s tough as nails. I’m sure if he gets the nod he’ll 
be more than capable of doing the job,” he said. “It’s a tricky question [who 
replaces McLaren].”

The Proteas are expected to retain spinner Robin Peterson, who was largely 
unthreatening in the first Test.

Morkel described Johnson’s short ball to McLaren as part of part of the reason 
cricketers love the sport.

“Spectators also love that sort of bodyline action in Test matches,” he said.
 