
Southerners in large parts of Louisiana and Arkansas awoke to tornado watches 
on Wednesday, two days before Christmas. Forecasters warned that the pain could 
soon spread, with powerful tornadoes, thunderstorms and flooding possible across
Mississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi>, Alabama, 
Tennessee and parts of Georgia.


Record US temperatures are work of El Niño and polar vortex, experts say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/15/temperatures-polar-vortex-el-nino-climate-winter-weather>
The biggest threat for tornadoes on Wednesday will be in a region of 3.7 
million people in northern Mississippi, westernTennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee>, and eastern Arkansas, as well 
as slivers of south-east Missouri, southern Illinois and western Kentucky, 
according to the national Storm Prediction Center in Oklahoma.

“Multiple tornadic supercells” will be possible in that area from midday on 
Wednesday through the afternoon, the Storm Prediction Center said in an 
advisory.

In Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, heavy rains 
overnight left some downtown Mobile streets flooded during the morning rush 
hour. The city was under a tornado warning before the workday began, but no 
touchdowns or damage were reported.

Across Mobile Bay in the small town of Loxley, Mandy Wilson was watching the 
angry gray sky and telling drivers to be careful as she worked a cash register 
at Love’s Travel Stop.

“It’s very ugly; it’s very scary,” Wilson said. “There’s an 18-wheeler turned 
over on I-10. There’s water standing really bad. It’s a really interesting way 
to spend Christmas Eve eve.”

The University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa said it would suspend normal 
operations at noon on Wednesday because of the severe weather threat. Shelters 
on the campus will remain open, the university said in a statement.

In Georgia, a flood watch was posted through Friday evening for northern and 
central parts of the state, including all of metro Atlanta. A total of more 
than four inches of rain could fall in some spots inGeorgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia> by Friday night, the 
National Weather Service said in its forecast.

The threat of severe weather just before Christmas is unusual, but not 
unprecedented in the south, said Greg Carbin, a meteorologist at the national 
Storm Prediction Center. On Christmas Day in 2012, a storm system spawned 
several tornadoes across the south and damaged homes from Texas to Alabama.

 Forecasters said that by Wednesday night, the severe weather threat could 
shift east into the southern Appalachian mountain region.

Once the strong storms clear out, forecasters say, the high temperature in 
Atlanta on Christmas Eve is expected to be in the mid-70s. That could break the 
record for 24 December, which is 72F set in 1984, according to weather service 
records.

 