
New revelations over expenses claims have emerged in connection with the 
leading contenders to succeed Michael Martin as Speaker of the Commons.

With the Speaker's election set for tomorrow, the Sunday Telegraph disclosed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/5588929/MPs-expenses-Secrets-of-MPs-bidding-to-lead-Commons.html>
 what it said were the full, uncensored files for Margaret Beckett, the Labour 
former foreign secretary, the Tory MP John Bercow and Sir Alan Beith, a Liberal 
Democrat.

Beckett allegedly claimed almost £11,000 in gardening expenses, including 
£1,380 for plants. Last month she acknowledged that a £600 claim for plans for 
hanging baskets, tubs and planters in 2005, which was rejected by the fees 
office, was a mistake. According to the Telegraph, she made similar claims 
between 2001 and 2003.

Bercow reportedly twice claimed for an accountant to complete his tax return, 
costing the public purse more than £480 each time. Beith reportedly used office 
expenses to pay for his Westminster-based secretary to spend a month in his 
constituency during the 2005 general election campaign.

The new Speaker will be elected in a complex and probably lengthy procedure in 
the Commons tomorrow. Martin, who has fought against the disclosure ofMPs' 
expenses <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> details for years 
and was heavily criticised by colleagues for his handling of reform, officially 
vacates his position today.

The incoming Speaker will be under immense pressure to play a key role in 
cleaning up the expenses system and restore public confidence in the Commons 
lost since the revelations about expenses that followed the Telegraph obtaining 
the MPs' expenses files.

In an interview for today's Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/21/michael-martin-interview>, 
Martinhttp://tinyurl.com/laaluu said he was the victim of snobs who focused on 
his humble background, and insisted he would have survived if he had fought for 
his job.

The vote will be held against the backdrop of criminal inquiries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/19/mps-expenses-met-police-investigation>
 into a number of MPs and at least one peer, focusing mainly on claims towards 
"phantom" mortgages. Meanwhile, more than 50 MP have been found this weekend to 
have over-claimed for council tax – some by thousands of pounds – and there 
were claims that some had used their taxpayer-funded expenses to pay firms with 
which they were connected.

The News of the World accused the Tory MP John Gummer of paying £9,980 to the 
consultancy firm Sancroft, of which he is the founder and chairman, out of his 
parliamentary expenses. The former cabinet minister has already faced criticism 
for claiming £9,000 a year towards gardening work, including the removal of 
moles and jackdaw nests from his Suffolk property.
 