
The Mississippi valley remained gripped by record-breaking floods on Wednesday 
morning, after heavy rains doused the region over the Christmas weekend. At 
least 20 deaths have been linked to the flooding regionally, with river levels 
expected to rise through Thursday in especially hard-hit areas around St Louis,
Missouri <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/missouri>.

'Historic' flooding in Missouri and Illinois leaves at least 18 dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/29/flood-warning-illinois-storms-kill-43-southern-midwestern-us>
Dozens of counties across Missouri, Arkansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> and Illinois have been declared 
disaster areas by state governors.

“Nobody that is living has ever seen anything like this,” said Rick Davis, the 
emergency management director in Pleasant Hope in western Missouri.

Three-day rainfall totals of 9-11 inches (up to 270mm) were records in some 
parts of an area that stretched from southwest to east-central Missouri, said 
Mark Fuchs, a hydrologist for the National Weather Service in St. Louis. 
Rainfall totals of that magnitude occur only every 100 to 300 years, according 
to rainfall frequency data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.

Around St Louis, Missouri’s second most populous city, suburban officials 
began mandatory evacuations on Wednesday. In areas that border the Mississippi, 
Missouri and Meramec rivers around St Louis, flood warnings are not expected to 
lift until 7 January, the NWS said. Federal officials are further monitoring 19 
vulnerable levees in the region, the Associated Press said.

Along the Meramec river, a smaller waterway which flows through the western 
suburbs of St Louis, waters are expected to crest at records levels on Thursday 
morning.

In Valley Park, a suburb 18 miles west of St Louis along the Meramec, 
mandatory evacuations were instated after the NWS told the town’s mayor that 
water levels would continue to rise. Waters are forecast to crest there more 
than 3ft above record levels by Thursday, and 27ft above minimum flood levels.

“Once the water recedes to safe levels, the evacuation will be lifted,” Valley 
Park’s mayor,Michael A Pennisse 
<http://www.valleyparkmo.org/news/flood-level-update-12-at-1230-am-tuesday-december-30th-2015/>
, said, in a note that told residents evacuations would begin at 7am on 
Wednesday. “We have been assured by the US Corps of Engineers that our levee is 
in great condition.” He also promised “round-the-clock security and law 
enforcement” for evacuated areas, addressing fears that flooded areas may fall 
victim to looters.

South-east of Valley Park in Arnold, Missouri, waters are forecast to reach 
46.1ft around the same time, nearly a foot above the record for flooding, and 
22.1ft above minimum flood levels.

Along the Mississippi river in Alton, Illinois, about 25 miles north of St 
Louis, the city’s mayor asked residents to volunteer to make sandbags along the 
river. The city’s casino, which stayed open during a disastrous flood in 1993, 
has shut down. Power at several locations around the town has been shut off by 
police,a reporter for the Alton Telegraph 
<https://twitter.com/JohnBadmanNews/status/682220962796851200> said. 

An hour south of St Louis, in Chester, Illinois, the Menard County 
correctional facilitytransferred inmates out of the prison 
<http://thesouthern.com/news/local/menard-inmates-evacuated-from-flooded-prison/article_57c82d81-0ab1-53e4-8851-acde78c765d4.html>
 on Tuesday as floodwaters threatened. In Chester, the Mississippi is expected 
to reach record levels at 49.7ft. A local newspaper, the Randolph County Herald 
Tribune, has declared the disaster the “great flood of ’15 
<http://www.randolphcountyheraldtribune.com/?refresh=true>”. 

A wastewater treatment plant in Fenton, Missouri, stopped operating on 
Tuesday, officials suspect because of the high water levels. The plant sent 
untreated sewage into flooded rivers and streams in the area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fst-louis-evacuations-mississippi-floods-wreak-havoc-across-three-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf04d5219c8a4ba8c997ef1abd581886768664fe%2F0_178_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=St%20Louis%20faces%20more%20pain%20as%20Mississippi%20floods%20wreak%20havoc%20across%20three%20states&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fst-louis-evacuations-mississippi-floods-wreak-havoc-across-three-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=St%20Louis%20faces%20more%20pain%20as%20Mississippi%20floods%20wreak%20havoc%20across%20three%20states&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fst-louis-evacuations-mississippi-floods-wreak-havoc-across-three-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf04d5219c8a4ba8c997ef1abd581886768664fe%2F0_178_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 John Tosti, owner of Tosti’s Transmission wades in the water after inspecting 
his business on Wednesday in Fenton, Missouri. Photograph: Michael B 
Thomas/Getty Images 
“We suspect the river is going to go three feet above our levee. We expect 
this plant to be flooded completely before the event is over,” the metropolitan 
sewer district director, Brian Hoelscher, toldlocal television station KMOV 
<http://www.kmov.com/story/30845535/fenton-waste-plant-not-operating-sewage-flowing-into-rivers-and-streams>
.

The plant was designed to treat 6.75m gallons of waste a day, but was treating 
24m gallons a day due to flooding at the time officials discovered the plant 
stopped operating, KMOV reported.



Seven Illinois counties were declared disaster areas by Governor Bruce Rauner. 
Missouri’s governor, Jay Nixon, activated the national guard on Tuesday. In 
Arkansas, Governor Asa Hutchinson declared a dozen counties disaster areas on 
Tuesday, and addednine more counties 
<https://twitter.com/AsaHutchinson/status/681977762945593345> on Wednesday. 
Oklahoma’s Governor Mary Fallin extended a state of emergency in all 77 
counties of the state because of flooding and wintry conditions.

Of predictions released by the NWS field office in St Louis 
<http://www.weather.gov/crh/weatherstory?sid=lsx&embed=#.VoPdhMBsNFQ>, just the 
Bourbeuse river near Union, Missouri, is expected to fall before the New Year 
weekend, after it crested at 34.3ft, 0.8ft above the record.

Disastrous flooding in 1993 set several records for high water levels in the 
upper midwest, and also made it one of the most expensive years on record for 
damages caused by flooding.

Floods in 1993 caused more than $30bn in damages nationwide. That is just 
below 2005, when flooding cost the country an estimated $55bn after Hurricane 
Katrina struck the Gulf coast. Each year, flooding causes about $1-2bn in 
damages, according to figures collected annually by theNWS 
<http://www.nws.noaa.gov/hic/>. 
 