
How can the arts effect social change? That was the question raised in a 
conversation about theatre, grassroots and activism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre> that took place at 
the Senedd in Cardiff last Saturday. This latest debate in the Guardian and 
BAC’s A Nation’s Theatre series was also part of National Theatre Wales’sBig 
Democracy Project <https://www.nationaltheatrewales.org/big-democracy-project>. 

There is a long history of performance as activism, from the street 
interventions ofBread and Puppet Theater 
<http://breadandpuppet.org/about-bread-and-puppet> to the secret shows of 
Belarus Free Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/10/belarus-free-theatre-uk-festival-stage-life-under-authoritarian-rule>
, or the recentReclaim Shakespeare Company’s protest 
<http://www.artnotoil.org.uk/blog/reclaim-shakespeare-company-action-eloquence> 
against the links between the RSC and BP. The artistJudy Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/nov/04/judy-chicago-art-feminism-britain>
 once argued that “performance can be fuelled by rage in a way a painting or 
sculpture cannot”. Any kind of street-level protest, from an anti-Trident 
demonstration to thepro-democracy umbrella protests in Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/-sp-hong-kong-umbrella-revolution-pro-democracy-protests>
, is effectively a form of theatre (although in the UK a flash mob is more 
likely to be a sign of someone trying to flog you something).

So when art and activism go hand in hand do they really change anything? The 
high-profile campaign againstthe Tate and oil money 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/magazine/284/article/what-should-tate-have-done-differently>
 has certainlyhad an impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-arts-sponsorships-to-continue-despite-cutting-ties-with-tate>
. But can we really expect even the most urgent and rage-fuelled piece of 
theatre to have audiences rushing to man the barricades and topple governments?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftheatre-effective-protest-activism-change-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72d669ff3fef76f3d7de33d32b74a8fa946c0003%2F131_0_1848_1365%2F1848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Staging%20a%20revolution%3A%20can%20theatre%20be%20an%20effective%20form%20of%20activism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftheatre-effective-protest-activism-change-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Staging%20a%20revolution%3A%20can%20theatre%20be%20an%20effective%20form%20of%20activism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftheatre-effective-protest-activism-change-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72d669ff3fef76f3d7de33d32b74a8fa946c0003%2F131_0_1848_1365%2F1848.jpg>
 Folk punk activist Efa Thomas. 
There is not much sign of it in the UK at the moment, despite the ferocious 
impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/14/tory-welfare-cuts-would-hit-poorest-third-of-uk-families-research-shows>
 of the Tory-implemented cuts on everyday lives, particularly of the most 
disadvantaged and vulnerable. There has been plenty of political theatre, from
Jack Thorne’s Hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/03/hope-jack-thorne-royal-court-review>
 at the Royal Court to Chris Thorpe’s#Torycore 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/reviews/2015/torycore>, but do such shows do 
anything but preach to the converted?

In the debate in Cardiff, the singer and activist Efa Thomas 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/sJb1TCcl8nlltVDcZy1qPz/efa-thomas> 
observed that sometimes it’s not just about making protest art but about 
artists aligning themselves with other campaigns. She cited protests in Wales 
where those against cuts to the library service were well supported by artists, 
but those against cuts to services helping people with drug addiction were not. 
“All these things are connected,” she said.

The Turkish theatre-maker and activist Memet Ali Alabora argued that arts 
events can certainly contribute to political change. He and others involved in 
staging the playMi Minör <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mi_Min%C3%B6r> now live 
in exile in Cardiff after the Turkish government and pro-government media 
accused the play of incitement and being a “rehearsal” forthe 2013 Gezi Park 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/gezi-park-protest-trial-turkish-court-acquits-all-26-defendants>
 in Istanbul, and Alabora had threats made against him. As with the Belarus 
Free Theatre, using performance as a means of protest threatened to become a 
matter of life and death. It has certainly changed his life.

Such dangers may not exist in the UK, but it’s clear that arts and theatre can 
still make a difference to people’s lives at grassroots level, even if – as one 
participant pointed out – there’s few such events happening in rural areas. Is 
it the case that, like art itself, activism is only within reach of those 
living in major cities?

Maybe not. Geraldine Maddison, from the Forsythia Youth Project 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/local-news/award-winning-forsythia-youth-project-gurnos-2504401>
 in Merthyr, talked passionately about the young people she works with, many of 
whom have been excluded from other organisations, who “refuse to be written off 
by their postcode”. They have used art in local campaigns that have not just 
brought about change within the community but also empowered the young people 
leading them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftheatre-effective-protest-activism-change-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd262184ca930b7bca41eb437e78d156c92404154%2F815_191_1859_1115%2F1859.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Staging%20a%20revolution%3A%20can%20theatre%20be%20an%20effective%20form%20of%20activism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftheatre-effective-protest-activism-change-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Staging%20a%20revolution%3A%20can%20theatre%20be%20an%20effective%20form%20of%20activism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftheatre-effective-protest-activism-change-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd262184ca930b7bca41eb437e78d156c92404154%2F815_191_1859_1115%2F1859.jpg>
 Memet Ali Alabora at an anti-war rally in Istanbul in 2006. Photograph: Murad 
Sezer/AP 
Rhiannon White, from Common Wealth Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/16/theatre-show-domestic-violence-victims>
, argued that artists working within communities need to adopt the projects 
those communities really want rather than vice versa. She believes community 
art will have changed nothing if it doesn’t have the enduring effect of 
empowering the community to continue what has been started.

Battersea Arts Centre’s artistic director David Jubb observed recently 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/david-jubb-lets-rethink-what-theatres-are-for/>
 that theatres “over-serve the most advantaged people in this country and risk 
becoming irrelevant to the many, in favour of the few”. He said this was “a 
huge disservice to artists and their potential role as change makers”.

This idea of artists driving change is a powerful one, and has particular 
appeal during a time when the right is on the rise, both at home andacross 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/13/european-far-right-on-the-rise-how-to-tackle>
. The act of gathering people together is potent, potentially even dangerous.

Perhaps a play at the Royal Court, however angry and urgent and edgy, is 
unlikely to bring about social change on its own, but at a grassroots level 
theatre-makers can enable communities to come together socially, end isolation, 
solve local problems and articulate their ambitions. Every time they do so they 
are challenging the dominant culture and established ways of thinking and doing 
and proving that theatre and activism are excellent bedfellows, more powerful 
together than apart.
 