
Guardian Australia columnist Stan Grant has won the 2015 Walkley award for 
coverage of Indigenous affairs.

The television broadcaster and writer won the award at a ceremony in Melbourne 
on Thursday night for a collection of three opinion pieces about indigenous 
Australia.

It was Grant’s deeply personal commentary on AFL star Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
 which was singled out for praise.

Grant’s column saying that “I can tell you how Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> feels. Every Indigenous person 
has felt it”, hit a nerve with the Australian public and was one of Guardian 
Australia’s most popular articles.

“But this is how Australia makes us feel,” Grant wrote in July of the racism 
directed at Goodes on the football field.

“Estranged in the land of our ancestors, marooned by the tides of history on 
the fringes of one of the richest and demonstrably most peaceful, secure and 
cohesive nations on earth.”

Grant, the international editor at Sky News and anchor of Reporting Live with 
Stan Grant, beat out strong competition from Buzzfeed’s young indigenous 
reporter Allan Clarke and The Australian’s Michael McKenna and Paige Taylor.

“With his commentary, Grant cut through the noise to drive and deepen the 
national conversation on the issues of his people,” the judges said. “The piece 
on Adam Goodes, in particular, communicated the experience of growing up 
Indigenous in Australia in a way that felt game-changing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjohnathan-thurston-they-told-me-i-was-too-small-and-slow-for-rugby-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448938227191%2FKP_629776_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnathan%20Thurston%3A%20They%20told%20me%20I%20was%20too%20small%20and%20slow%20for%20rugby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjohnathan-thurston-they-told-me-i-was-too-small-and-slow-for-rugby-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Johnathan%20Thurston%3A%20They%20told%20me%20I%20was%20too%20small%20and%20slow%20for%20rugby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjohnathan-thurston-they-told-me-i-was-too-small-and-slow-for-rugby-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448938227191%2FKP_629776_crop_640x360.jpg>
Stan Grant speaks to Australian rugby league legend Johnathan Thurston about 
being told he would never make a career in the sport because he was ‘too small’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/dec/01/johnathan-thurston-they-told-me-i-was-too-small-and-slow-for-rugby-video>
Other winners included the ABC Four Corners team of Caro Meldrum-Hanna, Sam 
Clark and Max Murch, who won the Gold Walkley award for their “courageous” 
expose of cruelty in the greyhound racing industry in Australia, the programme 
titled Making A Killing.

Sccop of the year went to Annika Smethurst 
<http://www.walkleys.com/walkleys-winners/annika-smethurst/> of the Herald Sun 
for her story about Bronwyn Bishop’s use of a helicopter to go from Melbourne 
to Geelong, which ultimately brought aboutthe speaker’s resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
.

Seven News won best coverage of a news event for its handling of the Lindt 
cafe siege <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney-siege>.

Grant’s entry was for three columns: 

I can tell you how Adam Goodes feels. Every Indigenous person has felt it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>

Indigenous or American, we need to protect black bodies everywhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/12/indigenous-or-american-we-need-to-protect-black-bodies-everywhere>

Eddie Mabo’s legacy reminds us that this is Aboriginal land, and you are 
welcome too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/25/eddie-mabos-legacy-reminds-us-that-this-is-aboriginal-land-and-you-are-welcome-too>

Grant is from the Wiradjuri tribe of Australia and has worked across 
Australian and international television, from the Seven network and CNN 
International to SBS and NITV where he hosts the channel’s flagship current 
affairs program, Awaken.

Clarke’s entry “Kimberley in Crisis” was commended by judges for its “new, 
youth-centric online” approach. “Clarke did terrific work from the field to 
share rarely heard voices from remote areas,” the judges said.

The full list of winners is here <http://www.walkleys.com/2015walkleywinners/>.
 