
If you’ve achieved higher A-level grades than predicted, then congratulations! 
Some students will be happy with their firm offer, which is great – but 
better-than-expected results can be an opportunity to set your sights a little 
higher. If you’d prefer a university that offers exceptional teaching, an 
outstanding student experience and unique opportunities to improve your 
employability, thentake a look at Aston 
<http://www.aston.ac.uk/clearing/?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=html5_MPU&utm_term=clearing_guardian&utm_campaign=guardian_MPU_clearing>
 – a friendly, research-led university that punches well above its weight.

Want to improve your employment prospects?

In an increasingly crowded graduate job market, Aston equips its students with 
the skills and experience that will give them a sharp competitive edge over 
other graduates. Three-quarters of our undergraduates undertake a placement 
year, either studying abroad or in paid work with big names such as Accenture, 
Morgan Stanley, Microsoft and Unilever. More than a third are offered graduate 
jobs by their placement employer. Those firms recruit Aston students because of 
their strong workplace skills: an Accenture recruitment officer describes our 
graduates as having “excellent academic records, combined with good teamwork 
and communication skills”.

Student placements are chosen with the utmost care. At the beginning of your 
second year, a member of our dedicated placements team will sit down with you 
and talk to you about your background, your aspirations and your strengths and, 
using the contacts and experience built up over a number of years, help you 
find the right employer for your skills and interests. Few universities can 
offer a bespoke service that approaches the one you’ll receive at Aston.

As well as being an integral part of your degree, the placement year gives you 
the opportunity to earn a real-world income – our students have an average 
salary of £15,000 while on their placement.

A course that prepares you for the real world

There’s more to employability than the placement year. Our degree courses have 
a keen focus on skills and knowledge that will improve your chances of gaining 
a job. In some universities, staff have limited contact with the outside world, 
but our lecturing staff come from professions closely allied to your degree 
subject, so can share their industry experience, expertise and contacts. They 
are also engaged in carrying out research with real-world applications – and 
that research, in turn, informs their teaching.

And when it comes to applying for jobs in your final year, you will benefit 
from Aston’s top-class careers service.

Aston students are global citizens

In today’s globalised economy, finding the best opportunity can often mean 
travelling outside your home country. Modern languages are more important than 
ever, so we give every student at Aston the chance to learn a new language 
alongside their degree for free. We also aim to give all our students the 
opportunity to spend part of their degree abroad, which can range from a 
two-week student exchange or a year-long paid professional placement. Aston 
students have undertaken their placement year in countries as varied as Chile, 
Australia and Hong Kong.

And finally…enjoy yourself!

Aston life is not all about preparing yourself for a job when you graduate. 
Our students have a wonderful time experiencing all that Birmingham has to 
offer. Some universities have remote campuses away from city life, while others 
are based in cities but lack that welcoming campus feel. Aston offers the best 
of both worlds. Our attractive landscaped campus is only a few minutes’ walk 
from Birmingham city centre, combining all the benefits of a close-knit student 
community with the shops, cafes, theatres, concert halls and night-life of one 
of the country’s most vibrant cities.

It’s no surprise, then, that Aston regularly scores highly on student 
satisfaction indicators – 89% in the 2013 and 2014 national student survey. As 
one student says: “My university experience at Aston was unforgettable.”

 * Find out about applying to Aston University through Adjustment or Clearing 
<http://www.aston.ac.uk/clearing/?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=html5_MPU&utm_term=clearing_guardian&utm_campaign=guardian_MPU_clearing>
 