
Even as the champagne cork flew across a peaceful park in Melbourne and the 
cameras clicked to capture the moment, the man holding the bottle, Stanislas 
Wawrinka, still looked like a king whose coronation had left him bewildered.

It might have been the celebrations that went on until dawn after his win over 
Rafael Nadal in the Australian Open final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/stanislas-wawrinka-rafael-nadal-australian-open>
 that gave his permanently blushed features an extra glow. Or was it the 
realisation that, at 28, after years of struggle, he now had to set aside his 
shyness and embrace his new responsibility of leading the challenge to the 
elite who have ruled tennis for a decade?

"I looked up to all the big guys all these years," he said, bleary eyes 
blinking in the Melbourne sun, "and now it is my turn to win."

He won once, in his first grand slam final. Can he win again? It will be no 
easier – perhaps more difficult, because of the raised expectations – but, 
having had a taste of glory after "the best two weeks of my life", he wants 
more.

"Now I know that I can beat everybody at this stage of a grand slam, it 
doesn't matter if it's a final, semi-final, quarter-final," he said. "That has 
changed everything. All the top 15 players already were thinking last year that 
the four major guys were still there, still amazing players, but we had more 
chance to beat them. We didn't win a grand slam but we were closer to them. I 
don't know about the others but now I have my grand slam trophy and no one can 
take it back."

The next year or so could define his career and there is no denying the signs 
of fracture at the top but Wawrinka, elevated five places to No3 in the world 
in the rankings released on Monday and all the other contenders, will have to 
deal with four great players whose pride and prestige have taken a pounding in 
Melbourne.

Nadal has a new physical challenge to address, after his back gave way in the 
second set – although his knee seems to have been fixed and he can reflect on 
the most astonishing comeback from injury over the past 12 months. He has 
titles to defend in Paris (naturally) and New York but it would be remarkable 
if he could do in 2014 what he did in 2013. If he is fit, and his uncle and 
coach, Toni, has said his back injury requires only a few days' rest, he 
remains the rightful No1, nearly 4,000 points clear ofNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>.

Djokovic, whom Wawrinka beat in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/21/stanislas-wawrinka-knocks-out-novak-djokovic-australian-open>
 after 14 straight defeats against him, must look again at his faltering 
efforts in finals, having lost to Nadal at Flushing Meadows and Andy Murray at 
Wimbledon. He roared like a lion in Melbourne but the quiet man slew him.

Murray can be reasonably satisfied with his return after four months away. He 
slips to No6 but that will not concern him unduly. He might have done better
against Roger Federer in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/22/andy-murray-out-roger-federer-australian-open>
 but the speed, strength and flexibility will grow. He had confidence in his 
reconstructed lower back, which was a victory in itself.

And Federer, the original Swiss prince, Wawrinka's friend and overarching 
shadow for so long, is still stylishly a menacing presence but again he could 
not finish a grand slam campaign the way he started it and it will soon be two 
yearssince he last won a major 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/08/andy-murray-wimbledon-roger-federer>
. Soon enough, also, he will be 33. Will the arrival of a third child in 2014 
distract him? Perhaps.

This is now a story as much about those knocking on the door as those trying 
to hold it shut. It can only be good for the game which, despite the excellence 
of the big four, the big three or the big two, had begun to take on an air of 
predictability. Now there is doubt and wonder.

Until Wawrinka slapped his concluding forehand wide of Nadal to wrap up 
business at Rod Laver Arena in four dramatic sets on Sunday night, he was just 
another challenger. Not a single expert or paid commentator predicted he would 
unseat the Spaniard. Not one. He had not taken a set off the world No1 in their 
12 matches.

After having the world on his shoulders, he has the world at his feet. It is 
some adjustment to make. He is the first player outside the top four to win in 
Melbournesince Thomas Johansson (seeded 18) beat Marat Safin 12 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2002/jan/28/tennis.australianopen2002>.

That win did not upset the older order, because Federer arrived the following 
year and settled in for a long reign, soon to be challenged by Nadal.

There is no guarantee that Wawrinka's victory will inspire a revolution but it 
excites the possibility of change – much as Juan Martín del Potro didwhen he 
beat Federer to win the US Open in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/sep/15/juan-martin-del-potro-us-open>, 
before injury cut him down.

Del Potro, who so drained Djokovic at Wimbledon last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/05/novak-djokovic-del-potro-wimbledon-semi>
 that the Serb had nothing left against Murray in the final, was off-key here, 
dropping a set to the American qualifier Rhyne Williams then losing in five 
sets to the new Spanish contender Roberto Bautista Agut. Still, the Argentinian 
is back in the top four for the first time since April and a threat in every 
tournament.

So, at last, is Grigor Dimitrov, who accounted for Bautista then went down in 
convincing flamesagainst Nadal in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/22/rafael-nadal-defeats-grigor-dimitrov-australian-open>
. He moves inside the top 20.

The morning after the night before, Wawrinka cleared his head but not his 
schedule. With theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title in his kitbag 
(notionally at least), he had to negotiate a journey from the ecstasy of 
Melbourne to Novi Sad on the banks of the Danube.

There Switzerland's new champion – Le Matin produced a 14-page supplement to 
celebrate his triumph – will lead his country in their Davis Cup tie against 
Serbia. While he will not get an early rematch with Djokovic, who is taking a 
rare break from the competition, there is a slim chance Federer will be there.

"We talked a lot for two weeks," Wawrinka said, "because he had been in that 
situation many times. He was a great help to me, the greatest player ever."

But, for now at least, not the best player in Switzerland.

ATP world rankings

1 Rafael Nadal 14,330pts (unchanged)

2 Novak Djokovic 10,620pts (-)

3 Stanislas Wawrinka 5,710pts (+5)

4 Juan Martín del Potro 5,370pts (+1)

5 David Ferrer 5,280pts (-2)

6 Andy Murray 4,720pts (-2)

7 Tomas Berdych 4,540pts (-)

8 Roger Federer 4,355pts (-2)

9 Richard Gasquet 3,050pts (-)

10 Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 2,885 (-)
 