
The shock of Novak Djokovic losing to Stanislas Wawrinka in the quarter‑finals 
will ripple through the rest of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, confirming that past 
assumptions are crumbling more quickly than anyone imagined even a week ago. 
The old order may not be about to collapse but the thunder of approaching 
cavalry is growing louder.

If Wawrinka, seeded eight, does not win the men's singles title on Sunday, 
perhaps his opponent in the first semi-final on Thursday, the seventh-seeded
Tomas Berdych 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/21/tomas-berdych-beats-david-ferrer-australian-open>
, will. What is certain is that there will be a finalist from outside the big 
four, following on from last year's French Open. David Ferrer, who lost to 
Berdych in the first quarter‑final here, made it to the last match at Roland 
Garros in 2013, only to fold in the presence of Rafael Nadal, whose reign on 
clay is still one of the game's certainties.

So entrenched has the ancien regime become since Nadal arrived to challenge 
the dominance of Roger Federer a decade ago that very few outsiders have been 
able to disturb the seating arrangements at the top table in any of the four 
majors. In the past five years, before Ferrer, Robin Soderling reached the 2009 
and 2010 French Open finals, while Juan Martín del Potro won the US Open in the 
first of those years and Berdych lost the Wimbledon final the following season.

When Andy Murray joined Nadal, Djokovic and Federer at the summit of the game 
with two slams (and an Olympic gold medal), there was still the feeling that 
the next generation were not quite ready and that might yet prove to be the 
case in 2014.

There is at least a zephyr of change evident. Can Federer's 32-year‑old legs, 
which have carried him to four excellent victories here, respond to the 
questions Murray will ask of him in Wednesday's quarter-final? It is, after 
all, in these closing stages of a major where he has been continually 
frustrated since beatingMurray at Wimbledon in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/08/andy-murray-wimbledon-roger-federer>
.
ESPNTennis (@ESPNTennis) 
“Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail Better.” 
#Wawrinka <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Wawrinka&src=hash> #AusOpen 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AusOpen&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/chwECCTQ6c 
<http://t.co/chwECCTQ6c>
 <https://twitter.com/ESPNTennis/statuses/425594783688450048> January 21, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ESPNTennis/statuses/425594783688450048> 
Nothing lasts for ever, as every young contender prays at night, and the 
appearance at the back end of the tournament here of the elegant Grigor 
Dimitrov, for one, has given his contemporaries encouragement to believe that 
mantra.

Until Djokovic pushed his final volley wide around midnight on Tuesday, it 
probably seemed to Wawrinka that exactly nothing did last for ever. Having 
suffered two five-set disappointments against him in the past year – in 
Melbourne and New York – for a combined total of nine hours and 11 minutes of 
zero return for his efforts, as well as 14 consecutive defeats by the world 
No2, the Swiss appeared condemned to be on the wrong end of the score against 
the Serb until he retired.

So his relief and joy after four hours of enthralling tennis that reaped him a 
2-6, 6-4, 6-2, 3-6, 9-7 win over his shattered one-time nemesis was as 
predictable as it was applauded by an audience whose sympathies seemed heavily 
weighed in his favour.

At courtside, he declared himself "very, very, very, very, very, very happy". 
After a long ice bath to sooth tightening quads and cramping in his tired legs, 
he was still beaming. And he managed to put his win in proper context, too.

"The top four guys – Roger, Novak, Rafa, Andy – have been winning every grand 
slam for many years," he said. "They are just better players than us, than all 
the rest. That's why they always win everything. You have to deal with that. 
You have to fight. I have so many losses against them. It's always a tough 
challenge.

"But last year I took a lot of confidence from those matches with Novak. They 
were really close, and I was playing well. I came on court knowing that if I 
play my best game, I will have a chance against him..

"But I'm still far from winning this tournament. There are two matches, two 
difficult matches. Tonight I'm enjoying the victory."

Asked about the prospect of beating his fellow-Swiss Federer in the final, he 
said: "I don't think so. We all know that if Roger is playing his best tennis, 
he can beat everybody here. For me, it's not the case. I have to play my best 
tennis but I have to hope that Novak is not on his best form, or Rafa, or 
Roger. It's completely different for me."

Djokovic did not varnish his defeat. "Every time he was in trouble," he said, 
"he was coming up with big serves. He took his opportunities. He deserved this 
win. I tried to fight until the last point, as I did in a very similar match in 
the fourth round last year, same court, but it wasn't to be this time.

"In the last 15 months he's had his best results. He's established now in the 
top 10. He's been winning against top players in big tournaments. He won 
against Murray in the US Open last year. He knows how to play on the big stage. 
You could feel that with his game. He's really taking it to the opponent and 
stepping in."

And if that is not a blueprint for insurrection, nothing is. Wawrinka, who has 
theSamuel Beckett <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_Beckett> slogan, "Fail 
Better", tattooed on his left arm, knows all about that.
 