
Standard Life’s chief executive David Nish is stepping down and will be 
replaced by the head of the insurer’s increasingly dominant fund management arm.

Nish will hand over to Keith Skeoch, who runs Standard Life’s £258bn 
investment division. Nish is stepping down in August but will be paid his 
£835,000 salary and all other benefits until June 2016, and will be on 
gardening leave until April 2016.

The FTSE 100 company, which was mutually owned until 2006, said Nish, 55, had 
no other job lined up.

Skeoch’s appointment underlines the growth of his business and Standard Life’s 
move away from traditional products such as annuities and life insurance. The 
plan was in place before the governmentlet savers cash in their pension pots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/20/budget-2014-george-osborne-pensions-savers>
 but the change made the sale of investment products more important to the 
company.

Standard Life Investment Management’s assets have increased from £57bn when 
Nish became chief executive. The group’s other assets have fallen as Nish has 
sold businesses, including the£2.2bn disposal of Standard Life’s Canadian arm 
announced in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/04/standard-life-david-nish-windfall-manulife>
.

Standard Life warns against Britain leaving EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/20/standard-life-warns-against-britain-leaving-eu>
Standard Life’s chairman, Sir Gerry Grimstone, said the sale of the Canadian 
business and last year’s acquisition of Ignis Asset Management, which expanded 
Skeoch’s division, prompted the board to review Standard Life’s leadership in 
late 2014. With Nish kept informed, Grimstone approached Skeoch about becoming 
chief executive, he said.

“After the sale of Canada and the purchase of Ignis, we gradually focused on 
what that meant in terms of personalities and that eventually led to the 
decision that we have taken,” Grimstone said. “We are very, very familiar with 
the marketplace and once we identified what kind of person we wanted we 
realised the right person was very close to home and I approached Keith in 
February this year.”

Nish joined the Edinburgh-based firm nine years ago as group finance director 
and became chief executive in January 2010. Skeoch has worked at the company 
since 1999 and was also a candidate for the top job five years ago.

Grimstone said: “In a sense, he [Nish] has been replaced but it’s more 
complicated than that because the company is a very different company.”

Nish said: “One of the most important responsibilities of a chief executive is 
recognising the right time to pass the baton and also to help ensure it is 
passed on to the right person. Now is the right time for both the group and 
myself.”

Nish will be entitled to a bonus for this year and the first three months of 
next year. He will also keep his shares under the company’s long-term incentive 
plan (LTIP).

His total pay rose to £5.5m last year from £4.2m in 2013, while Skeoch was 
paid £5.3m, up from £4.4m. The Institute of Directors has saidthere is a tension
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/01/fund-managers-could-be-the-new-investment-bankers-says-iod>
 between their high earnings and responsibilities as custodians of other 
people’s money.


Standard Life <https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardlife> said 
Skeoch’s salary as chief executive would be £700,000 and his maximum annual 
bonus would be 175% of his wages – the same as for Nish.

The new chief executive will be able to earn a maximum of five times his 
salary under the LTIP. The companyannounced an increase in the maximum LTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/20/standard-life-warns-against-britain-leaving-eu>
 from 300% to 500% in February, less than a year after its pay policy was first 
endorsed by shareholders.

Investors accepted the measure in principle at Standard Life’s annual general 
meeting last month and Grimstone said the company would now seek the backing of 
big investors for the specific change in Skeoch’s case. Grimstone said Skeoch’s 
pay would be based more on long-term performance than the arrangements for Nish.
 