

The man sitting across from me had been defined by war and conflict. It had 
cost him his home, he had lost family members, he had fled violence and 
upheaval. But he could never truly escape. War had come again, the sounds of 
jets and bombs and the cackle of gunfire provided the soundtrack to a life from 
which all certainty had been removed.

 War had brought us together. I was sitting inside his home in a suburb of 
Baghdad with my CNN television crew. The US-led coalition had toppled the 
government of Saddam Hussein: the dictator’s statue brought down by jubilant 
locals welcoming the liberation of their country. It didn’t just symbolise the 
collapse of a brutal regime, the country, too, shattered into so many pieces.

 Here was a man like many others caught up in events outside his control. 
These lives are not determined by their own actions so much as the forces of 
history. We talked about life and family; the little things like getting kids 
to school, shopping at the market, the things we take for granted like flicking 
a switch and turning on a light – these things he could no longer rely on.

Stan Grant: I can tell you how Adam Goodes feels. Every Indigenous person has 
felt it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
 Suddenly he rose and went into another room, returning with a bottle half 
filled with soil. This is my true home, he said. He wasn’t from here; Iraq was 
meant to be a haven, an exile from what he called the Nakba or catastrophe.

 Home, he told me, was Jenin, a Palestinian city in the West Bank; captured by 
Israeli forces in the six-day war in 1967. His family had fled but he always 
dreamed of return and carried with him that reminder of what he had lost.

 We were alike in so many ways, this man and me. What he carried in a bottle, 
I carried in my heart. I had spent years away from my home; my own personal 
exile. I had gone out into the world to cover the great stories of our time, 
reporting for one of the world’s largest news organisations.

 My journey had taken me to more than 50 countries; I had lived in London, 
Hong Kong, Beijing, Abu Dhabi and Dubai. I had spent so much time abroad that 
cities such as Islamabad, Amman and Jerusalem had the familiarity of home. I 
knew where to get a haircut or the best, hidden lunch spot in each of them; I 
knew where to buy a guitar in Kabul.

But home – true home – was far away. It was in western New South Wales, in the 
plains beyond the Blue Mountains. I had been raised in a series of small towns, 
travelling with my parents as they sought work.

I had spent years away from my home; my own personal exile

 This was the life of an itinerant Aboriginal family. We often lived on the 
margins: the fringes of town, bound in poverty under the weight of our 
country’s history.

 Through good luck, good timing, a special family and my own persistence I had 
found a way out. Journalism had opened doors I could never have imagined, first 
in Australia reporting politics and current affairs, then overseas.

 Each step broadened my horizons, deepening my knowledge and understanding of 
the world. It also brought into sharper focus my own life and the plight of my 
people. My country had never appeared so clear to me as when I viewed it from 
afar.

 I was drawn to those who also lived in the cracks shaped by the great 
ruptures in our world. Like me, these people – from China to Korea to Pakistan 
or Israel and Palestine – had known persecution, injustice and suffering. They 
had seen their land seized, their cultures obliterated and their languages 
silenced.

 I have said many times how living away from Australia liberated me. I often 
thought I had no wish to return.

 But the pull of home is strong. Each time I would return for a holiday I 
would melt at this country’s beauty. I bathed in its golden evening light and 
filled my senses with the sounds and smells I had never found anywhere else.

 Each time I left I felt the separation more deeply.

 To come home would ultimately demand a reckoning, not just with my past, our 
country’s history; but how I had changed. I could never again report on the 
mundane or the trivial – the staple Australian television news diet of suburban 
crime, court cases, opinion polls or shonky businessmen – as I once had. Any 
frivolity I may have had was blunted in the suffering of overcrowded refugee 
camps or terrorist bombings.

 I returned to Australia three years ago but have felt adrift, looking for 
that sense of purpose and meaning I had found overseas. I have continued to 
report and debate the big shifts in our world as international editor of Sky 
News but it has often felt laboured. Australia is just too far away to feel 
connected; the discussion feels remote and academic.

 This isn’t to deny the importance of the issues – how the troubles of the 
world can reach us, no matter how far away – or Australia’s place in the world. 
But I had spent years in the dirt, living and breathing these stories, and now 
I felt cut off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e864f0e3c76ad01084dfc9d8766b75365929ed2%2F0_468_3264_4428%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stan%20Grant%3A%20why%2C%20after%20years%20of%20foreign%20reporting%2C%20I'm%20now%20turning%20my%20focus%20on%20to%20my%20own%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stan%20Grant%3A%20why%2C%20after%20years%20of%20foreign%20reporting%2C%20I%27m%20now%20turning%20my%20focus%20on%20to%20my%20own%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e864f0e3c76ad01084dfc9d8766b75365929ed2%2F0_468_3264_4428%2F3264.jpg>
 Stan Grant: ‘I have never wanted to be defined as the “Aboriginal reporter”. I 
have always wanted to be judged good or bad alongside my colleagues as a 
journalist in my own right.’ Photograph: Dean Sewell for the Guardian 
 It has been the pattern of my career that I have found stories less often 
than the stories have found me. Now I have felt called by the story most close 
to me, most personal.

 It is a story I have sought to distance myself from; not because I didn’t 
care but because I cared too much; it is too revealing, too painful and 
disheartening.

 I have never wanted to be defined as the “Aboriginal reporter”. I have always 
wanted to be judged good or bad alongside my colleagues as a journalist in my 
own right, covering the same stories as the reporter alongside me. I have 
fought against being typecast or marginalised; I wanted the right to explore 
the whole world.

But in 2015 my career turned in ways I could not have anticipated. This is the 
year the festering sores of Australian racism were torn open.Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes>, a Sydney Swans AFL footballer, 
retreated from the field amid a chorus of boos that echoed from one ground to 
the next, week after week.

 Goodes had been Australian of the Year, now he felt rejected by Australia.

 There have been many thousands of words written and spoken about what this 
all means. To some it was the ugly face of the Australian character, a hangover 
from a past when Indigenous people were seen as barely human.

 Others argued that this was nothing but sporting passion; the right of 
spectators to cheer or jeer whomever they wished. Goodes, they said, needed to 
toughen up.

 What it told me was how far we apart we still are in this nation. It is still 
true that most Australians have never met an Indigenous person; many would not 
even know if they had. We remain at a distance: a people remote, unseen and 
unknowable, trapped in the legacy of two centuries of colonisation.

 Few Australians could have known how we – Indigenous people – felt when we 
heard the booing of Goodes. They could not have known what wounds that 
reopened; what painful memories it revived.

We speak of reconciliation, recognition, ending disadvantage but platitudes 
are easy: our record is failure

I had been back in Australia for a while by then but this felt like my true 
homecoming. This was a reminder of the country I had grown up in, a country 
that made us feel apart; a country in which the black kids I went to school 
with all sat apart in our own section of the playground. It was a country I had 
thought – had hoped – we had moved beyond.

In July I wrote an article for Guardian Australia that sought to tell our story
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
; not to look into the minds and hearts of those who were booing Goodes, but to 
tell readers how we felt; what we heard in those boos. I wrote how we felt 
estranged in our land and how that humiliation of Goodes roared like a howl 
across our history of dispossession, injustice and suffering.


 I didn’t anticipate a great response; I wanted to write as much for myself as 
anyone else. I was wrong – I had underestimated people in this country. The 
reaction to my article was overwhelming. It was shared from the Guardian site 
100,000 times in that first day. It lit a fire on social media: Twitter and 
Facebook.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8edb78c5aa07f884522b5ed58d135885fcf632e1%2F0_0_4025_2683%2F4025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stan%20Grant%3A%20why%2C%20after%20years%20of%20foreign%20reporting%2C%20I'm%20now%20turning%20my%20focus%20on%20to%20my%20own%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stan%20Grant%3A%20why%2C%20after%20years%20of%20foreign%20reporting%2C%20I%27m%20now%20turning%20my%20focus%20on%20to%20my%20own%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8edb78c5aa07f884522b5ed58d135885fcf632e1%2F0_0_4025_2683%2F4025.jpg>
 Fans display flags in support of Adam Goodes during the round 18 AFL match 
between the Sydney Swans and the Adelaide Crows at Sydney Cricket Ground in 
March. Photograph: Matt King/AFL Media/Getty Images 
 Australians wanted to know. They didn’t necessarily understand what was 
happening but they didn’t like what it said about them. Many people said they 
simply did not know what had happened to my people and how we felt.

 I was invited on to television and radio programs and the response grew. It 
was profound, it was moving and it was humbling. I don’t pretend to be a leader 
of my people and I certainly don’t have the answers. But I am a storyteller and 
now I had found my story.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fstan-grant-australia-is-ready-to-ask-itself-is-this-who-we-want-to-be-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449629657715%2FKP_705339_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stan%20Grant%3A%20Australia%20is%20ready%20to%20ask%20itself%2C%20'is%20this%20who%20we%20want%20to%20be%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fstan-grant-australia-is-ready-to-ask-itself-is-this-who-we-want-to-be-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stan%20Grant%3A%20Australia%20is%20ready%20to%20ask%20itself%2C%20%27is%20this%20who%20we%20want%20to%20be%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fstan-grant-australia-is-ready-to-ask-itself-is-this-who-we-want-to-be-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449629657715%2FKP_705339_crop_640x360.jpg>
Stan Grant speaks on Breakfast on Wednesday about his drive to avoid being 
‘typecast’ as an Aboriginal reporter and the booing of Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/dec/09/stan-grant-australia-is-ready-to-ask-itself-is-this-who-we-want-to-be-video>
. Source ABC 
This is the story of a people – my people – who have lived in this land for 
more than 50,000 years. Like many throughout the world we have borne the impact 
of the march of history, the quest of new lands, spread of technology and the 
devastation of war. We have lost our lands, our languages – indeed, for some, 
our very identity. Children have been stolen from families; people were 
massacred and brutalised and herded on to missions; we have had to fight for 
citizenship and recognition. All of this happened: it is undeniable.

We die 10 years younger than other Australians. We are 3% of the national 
population yet a quarter of those locked up in prisons. I have never met an 
Indigenous extended family that has not had someone jailed. An Aboriginal or 
Torres Strait Islander child is 24 times more likely to go into detention than 
a non-Indigenous child.

I don’t pretend to be a leader of my people, I don’t have the answers, but I 
am a storyteller and I had found my story

The rate of Indigenous incarceration has been called an epidemic, a state of 
emergency, a catastrophe and a national shame. Two decades ago a royal 
commission into black deaths in custody recommended the rate of imprisonment be 
reduced – it has only got worse. Between 2000 and 2010 the number of Indigenous 
people behind bars grew by more than 50%. At the same time the number of those 
dying in custody has also increased.

 Indigenous families are in an almost constant state of grief, mourning and 
loss. Depression rates are nearly three times higher than the general 
population and Indigenous people are twice as likely to take their own lives.

 We are more likely to go blind and deaf. Indeed, the rates of hearing loss 
among Indigenous populations are the highest in the world.

 By every measurable socioeconomic indicator – unemployment, education, 
health, housing – we are the most impoverished and disadvantaged of all 
Australians. This does not happen by accident.

 Yes, billions of dollars are spent on Indigenous programs each year. But only 
a fraction of that reaches people on the ground. The money is tied up in red 
tape and layers of bureaucracy.

Eddie Mabo's legacy reminds us that this is Aboriginal land, and you are 
welcome too | Stan Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/25/eddie-mabos-legacy-reminds-us-that-this-is-aboriginal-land-and-you-are-welcome-too>
 The outcomes are atrocious. The latest closing the gap report is a litany of 
dashed hope. The Productivity Commission says the government will not meet its 
key targets. The report covers life expectancy, child mortality, education and 
employment. In almost areas there is little progress, in some cases it is 
getting worse.

 This is the legacy of Tony Abbott, the self-declared prime minister for 
Indigenous people. But, he is not alone. This failure belongs to successive 
governments, Liberal and Labor.

 We have yet to hear anything substantial from Malcolm Turnbull. The prime 
minister still hasn’t even met the only elected Indigenous body, the National 
Aboriginal Congress.

 Noel Pearson, the Cape York Indigenous leader who has had the ear of prime 
ministers, is now sounding increasingly despondent and disillusioned. His 
report, Empowered Communities: Empowered People, a manifesto for breaking 
cycles, is still awaiting a response from the government nine months after it 
was delivered.

In Australia 2015 we are still investigating deaths in custody. The case of 
the Western Australian woman Ms Dhu has raised allegations of callous neglect 
by police, the 22-year-old left writhing in pain while precious minutes ticked 
by without medical treatment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e37c23afd1ab0828d11ee69c3341adcfa25294e%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stan%20Grant%3A%20why%2C%20after%20years%20of%20foreign%20reporting%2C%20I'm%20now%20turning%20my%20focus%20on%20to%20my%20own%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stan%20Grant%3A%20why%2C%20after%20years%20of%20foreign%20reporting%2C%20I%27m%20now%20turning%20my%20focus%20on%20to%20my%20own%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstan-grant-why-after-years-of-foreign-reporting-im-now-turning-my-focus-on-to-my-own-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e37c23afd1ab0828d11ee69c3341adcfa25294e%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
 The mother of 22-year-old Yamatji woman Ms Dhu, who died in police custody in 
Port Hedland after being arrested over unpaid fines, is comforted by family 
outside the coronial inquest. Photograph: Sarah Motherwell/AAP 
Despite demonstrable public support and apparent bipartisan political 
commitment we are still nowhere when it comes to recognising Indigenous people 
in the constitution. The life of this parliament will likely pass without even 
an agreed question to put to a referendum.

Indigenous people open parliament with a welcome to country and then largely 
disappear. It has taken more than 100 years of federation for the first 
Indigenous MP – Ken Wyatt – to be appointed to the frontbench of either major 
party.

 We speak of reconciliation, recognition, ending disadvantage but platitudes 
are easy: our record is failure. We all own it and we are all diminished by it.

Black Australia is a foreign place and I feel like a foreign correspondent in 
my own land.

 Australians – the first Australians – dying young, going blind and deaf and 
locked up in prisons, dying in custody, is not a first-order priority. 
Superannuation, taxation reform, national security, climate change, the scourge 
of ice addiction, abolishing knights and dames have all rated higher on 
Turnbull’s agenda. I don’t question the importance of these issues (national 
honours aside) but we know where we stand.

 I do see change but it is far from the corridors of power. I see it each 
weekday morning at 6am in Redfern, Sydney. Here boys and girls gather in the 
dawn light to go through their paces in a rigorous boxing routine. It is part 
of a program called Clean Slate Without Prejudice. It is the brainchild of 
local Indigenous leaders and the police. One of the program’s founders, Shane 
Phillips, credits Clean Slate with cutting local crime by as much as 80% since 
it began in 2009.

 Each morning I arrive to train and watch these kids pushing themselves; 
testing their limits. They are all given breakfast and then change into their 
school uniforms – ties, blazers – to catch the bus to school. It is a 
grassroots program and it is making a difference. Sadly, progress like this is 
a light in the darkness.

 This is the story of my country; this is the story I am now drawn to tell. 
Black Australia is a foreign place and I feel like a foreign correspondent in 
my own land.

 This is the story I will now be telling for the Guardian as its Indigenous 
affairs editor. It is you – the readers – who have inspired me. It is you who 
told me you were ready for this as we grappled with the fallout from the Adam 
Goodes saga.

I don’t expect you will agree with everything I write – I’d be disappointed if 
you did. I don’t agree with everything some of my people say. There are those 
who would prefer we pursue a separate path, I believe we – all Australian 
people – share a common destiny. That faith though is sorely tested in a 
country where words like sovereignty and treaty are still not seriously in the 
agenda.

How can I feel Australian when this country has told me I don't belong? | Stan 
Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/21/how-can-i-feel-australian-when-this-country-has-told-me-i-dont-belong>
 I will also now be working for National Indigenous Television, presenting 
programs and collaborating with the talented young team breaking down the 
barriers of a still overwhelmingly white media industry.

 In early 2016 HarperCollins will publish my book Talking to My Country – a 
direct and personal meditation on race, identity and my journey through our 
country’s history. This is the journey I wish to share with you.

 I have wondered what happened to that man I met in Baghdad. I hope he has 
survived that country’s war – I suspect I will never know. I hope he still 
carries that jar of dirt from his home and the dream of returning.

 I have come home and I have found a story that was waiting here for me all 
along.

• Last week Stan Grant won a Walkley award for his columns on Indigenous 
affairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/stan-grant-wins-walkley-award-for-guardian-columns-on-indigenous-affairs>
 for the Guardian.
 