
Politicians and journalists are not alone in wondering how to handle President 
Donald Trump. American artists also face a moment of reckoning.

A-list actors and musicians poured into the 39th Kennedy Center Honors 
<http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/specialevents/honors> in Washington on 
Sunday night seemingly united in praise for Barack Obama and regret at his 
imminent departure.

They were somewhat more unsure and uneasy about whether they would return next 
year if Trump is in attendance and whether they would accept invitations to 
perform at his inauguration or at the White House.

The thorny relationship between the president-elect and the arts community has 
already been apparent in his denunciations ofAlec Baldwin’s satirical portrayal 
<http://www.newsweek.com/donald-trump-alec-baldwin-saturday-night-live-twitter-528133>
 of him on TV show Saturday Night Live and ofthe Broadway musical Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
, after its cast voiced their concerns to the vice-president-elect, Mike Pence.

With this in mind, the Kennedy Center gala was a celebration of five great 
artists – the gospel singer Mavis Staples, actorAl Pacino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino>, singer-songwriter James Taylor, 
pianist Martha Argerich and the Eagles – but also a requiem for Obama and his 
wife, Michelle, who were attending for the eighth and final time of his 
presidency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6845bf049fbb3d43f5ac618eb91ecf5624e7f349%2F0_70_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6845bf049fbb3d43f5ac618eb91ecf5624e7f349%2F0_70_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Al Pacino, who was honoured at the gala. Photograph: UPI/Barcroft Images 
Politics were kept out of the tributes, even from activist Hollywood actors 
such as Don Cheadle and Sean Penn, on a night that is all about cultural 
excellence. But last month’s electoral earthquake was nevertheless inescapable 
in a complex named after John F Kennedy and situated nearthe Watergate building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/washington-post-bids-farewell-to-office-where-it-broke-watergate>
. Speakers included Bill Clinton and one of Kennedy’s grandchildren.

“Good evening ladies and gentlemen, distinguished honorees, politicians, 
diplomats, endangered swamp dwellers,” began the host,Stephen Colbert, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/stephen-colbert> earning loud 
laughter and applause for a reference to Trump’s pledge to “drain the swamp”.


In another dig, the late-night show presenter said: “The Kennedy Center Honors 
were created in 1978 to celebrate our nation’s greatest artists and enshrine 
them here, on this wall, that again Mexico has said they will not pay for.”

But then, on a more serious note, Colbert continued: “I think we can all 
agree: for the last eight years, the White House has given us a leader who’s 
passionate, intelligent and dignified.”

The sell-out, formally attired audience rose for a 45-second ovation, the 
longest of the night, prompting Obama to stand and wave. “Sir, I don’t know why 
you stood up,” Colbert said. “I was talking about Michelle.”

That got one of the biggest laughs of the night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8bdf0363193a4992646b29003b6729a2c16e2fd%2F0_171_4064_2439%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8bdf0363193a4992646b29003b6729a2c16e2fd%2F0_171_4064_2439%2F4064.jpg>
 Kevin Spacey and Nancy Pelosi at a White House event for the award honorees. 
Photograph: Aude Guerrucci/EPA 
Colbert then pretended to read next year’s list of honorees by mistake: actors 
Scott Baio <http://www.baileybaioangelfoundation.com/> and Gary Busey and 
musician Meat Loaf. All endorsed Trump for president.

Earlier, at the White House, Obama welcomed the honorees at a reception and 
said participating in the event was“one of the perks of the job that I will 
miss” 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/12/04/remarks-president-kennedy-center-honors-reception>
.

He said: “The arts have always been part of life at the White House, because 
the arts are always central to American life. That’s why over the past eight 
years Michelle and I have invited some of the best writers, musicians, actors 
and dancers to share their gifts with the American people and to help tell the 
story of who we are.”

The feeling has generally been mutual, with artists flocking to the White 
House and embracing the Obamas. Whether Trump will extend similar invitations, 
and whether they will feel it is appropriate to accept, is one of many upcoming 
quandaries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9efd01282a73ab32acfbef31e7b5e0c58a1b50f%2F0_394_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9efd01282a73ab32acfbef31e7b5e0c58a1b50f%2F0_394_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Mavis Staples receives applause during the Kennedy Center Honors gala. 
Photograph: Chris Kleponis/AFP/Getty Images 
On Sunday Aretha Franklin, whose rendition of (You Make Me Feel Like) A 
Natural Woman at the same event a year agomoved Obama to tears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/30/president-barack-obama-cries-aretha-franklin-kennedy-center>
, was asked on the red carpet whether she would perform at Trump’s inauguration 
if invited. “That’s a good question,” she said. “That’s a very good question.”

It was also put to cellist Yo-Yo Ma, who played at Obama’s first inauguration 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CB0EwdwzjwY> in 2009. “Well, actually, I’m 
going to be travelling so much in January …” he said, implying that he would 
not be able to make it.

But he added: “I think an inauguration should always be a bipartisan thing. I 
think we have to constantly believe in the best of people.”


Ma, a past Kennedy Center honoree, said: “The thing is, we know so little 
about Donald Trump. We don’t what his policies are: maybe he’s incredibly 
arts-friendly, you know. What we hope is that everybody who is in office is 
going to think what’s best for America.”

The actor Jeff Goldblum agreed that the Kennedy Center Honors were not likely 
to feel the same next year. “I imagine it won’t be. I’ll cross all the bridges 
at the appropriate time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc296e2bca24e97b8d5909d863ecbb9dfd9f5d3d0%2F0_261_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc296e2bca24e97b8d5909d863ecbb9dfd9f5d3d0%2F0_261_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Aretha Franklin sang at Barack Obama’s inauguration. Photograph: Aude 
Guerrucci/EPA 
Fellow Hollywood star Laurence Fishburne also declined to say whether he would 
attend next year. “Yeah, I’m going to leave that one alone. It’s too early to 
put any kind of expectations on anyone at this point,” he said. “I think we 
really have to just deal with the final days of this administration and wish 
them well and, if we can, wish the new administration well and give them an 
opportunity to demonstrate what they’re going to do.”

Asked whether artists would boycott Trump at future ceremonies, the House 
minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, replied: “I hope not, no. It’s about the arts.”

During the three-hour ceremony in the opera house, the Kennedy Center 
chairman, David Rubenstein, thanked the Obamas and noted that the president was 
not required to attend the honours or host a reception. It will be for Trump to 
decide whether he wants to maintain the tradition.

There was a standing ovation for Clinton, who spoke about how Taylor’s music 
resonated in difficult times. “Our nation was reeling from the pain of 
Vietnam,” he said. “James was there to satisfy our hunger for both intimacy and 
authenticity … He has been and he still is the sweet and steady voice of our 
better angels.”

Garth Brooks, Sheryl Crow and Darius Rucker performed medleys of Taylor’s 
music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd613bd7d0b7db3cf89cdcf3f5ad481c9b67baae%2F0_471_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20out%20for%20the%20final%20Kennedy%20Center%20Honors%20gala%20of%20the%20Obama%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fstars-out-for-the-final-kennedy-center-honors-gala-of-the-obama-era%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd613bd7d0b7db3cf89cdcf3f5ad481c9b67baae%2F0_471_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 James Taylor and Eagles band member Don Henley. Photograph: Aude Guerrucci/EPA 
The tribute to Pacino <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino>, star of The 
Godfather and Scarface, included remarks by Penn and recitations of Shakespeare 
by Fishburne and Lily Rabe. Chris O’Donnell and Gabrielle Anwar re-enactedthe 
tango that Pacino danced <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F2zTd_YwTvo> with 
Anwar in Scent of a Woman, the 1992 movie that won him a long-awaited Oscar.

Kevin Spacey offered a tutorial on how to impersonate the actor, with tips 
including looking surprised and exhaling loudly. “Al seems to have a lot of 
air,” he said.

The former Beatle Ringo Starr introduced the three surviving Eagles, Don 
Henley, Joe Walsh and Timothy Schmit, as well as the lateGlenn Frey’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/19/glenn-frey> widow, Cynthia. 
“Well done, boys, and peace and love to everybody,” he said.


There was a musical montage of footage of John F Kennedy, whose centenary 
falls next year – under a Trump presidency. Kennedy’s grandson,Jack Schlossberg 
<https://twitter.com/jbkschlossberg?lang=en>, son of Caroline Kennedy 
Schlossberg, was joined by his sisters Tatiana and Rose on stage. He praised 
Obama for carrying JFK’s legacy “into the new century and for showing us all 
that politics still can be a noble profession”.

International guests included the Spanish tenor Plácido Domingo and the South 
African comedian Trevor Noah. The ceremony will be shown at 9pm on 27 December 
on CBS, whose contract to broadcast the annual event has been extended until 
2025.
 