
Star Wars awakens UK box office

Star Wars: The Force Awakens review – 'a spectacular homecoming'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
The previous weekend (11-13 December) was the lowest-grossing of the year. Now 
the UK box office has recovered in spectacular fashion thanks to the arrival of
Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>. The franchise 
reboot’s three-day weekend gross of £24.33m set a new record at UK and Ireland 
cinemas, ahead of the £23.75m achieved by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows 
– Part 2 in July 2011. Thursday takings of £9.68m pushed the opening tally to 
£34.01m – a record for a four-day debut.

In November, Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>’s three-day 
weekend debut was £19.98m, 18% behind the pace set by The Force Awakens. 
However, a more generous preview period pushed Spectre’s opening to a bigger 
£41.30m – a number grossed from nearly a whole week of play.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20special%3A%20Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20special%3A%20Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review&media=>
 Star Wars: The Force Awakens video review 
The Force Awakens’ first day of £9.68m is the biggest ever opening day in the 
UK, although it’s worth noting that it was boosted by significant takings from 
12.01am previews on Wednesday night. The film also achieved the biggest 
Saturday (£8.71m) and Sunday (£8.58m) of all time. Disney takes heart from the 
exceptionally small dip of 1.5% from Saturday to Sunday, suggesting the film is 
set to show strong legs. Over the weekend, The Force Awakens achieved a market 
share of 83%, which is the biggest ever recorded for a single title. Saturation 
play is on around 2,500 screens in the UK and Ireland, at 670 cinemas. The film 
helped push UK takings to a spectacular 512% rise on the previous frame, when a 
dearth of new releases had caused extreme stagnation in the market.

Disney has announced Monday takings of £5.83m, which is likewise a record haul 
for a Monday, beating Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban’s 2004 Bank 
Holiday Monday tally of £5.05m. The additional box office pushes The Force 
Awakens to a five-day total of £39.81m.

What happens next depends on the answers to two questions. To what degree has 
the audience for this highly anticipated film already rushed out to see it? And 
how robust will repeat business be? Anecdotally, the latter already looks set 
to be a major factor in the success of the film. However, The Force Awakens 
must surely suffer a significant drop on its second weekend of play, covering 
the 25-27 December period – after all, cinemas are closed on Christmas Day in 
the UK.

Disney reports the format splits as 54% of box office in 2D, 36% in 3D and 10% 
in Imax. In terms of admissions numbers, that number would be a bit higher in 
2D and lower in the other formats, given lower ticket prices for 2D, and 
probably also a bigger skew in child and family tickets for 2D. Disney also 
reminds us that The Force Awakens’ four-day total of £34.01m is more than the 
lifetime totals of every Transformers movie, every Spider-Man title and sleeper 
hits such as Gravity and Slumdog Millionaire.

Sisters achieves £1m ‘weekend’

Sisters review – cracking, crowdpleasing comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/10/sisters-review-crowdpleasing-cracking-comedy>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsisters-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757337974%2FKP_722231_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sisters%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsisters-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sisters%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsisters-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757337974%2FKP_722231_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Sisters video review 
Tina Fey and Amy Poehler <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> 
achieved a £1.22m debut in the UK with their new comedy Sisters. If that number 
sounds robust, especially given competition from a new Star Wars film, a look 
at the small print is required. Sisters effectively opened in UK cinemas on 12 
December, and played six days of previews in advance of the 18-20 December 
weekend, earning £734,000. The film’s actual weekend figure is a less sturdy 
£481,000, from 442 cinemas.

Existing titles collapse
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-good-dinosaur-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448557806399%2FKP_616090_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Good%20Dinosaur%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-good-dinosaur-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Good%20Dinosaur%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-good-dinosaur-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448557806399%2FKP_616090_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Holding firm against The Force Awakens … The Good Dinosaur video review 
The Force Awakens was always going to have a big impact on existing titles in 
the marketplace, taking away screens and showtimes, and sucking away audience 
attention. Spectre shed over 100 cinemas, and fell 63% in box office from the 
previous session.Bridge of Spies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridge-of-spies> lost more than 250 venues, 
and dropped by 73% in box-office.Carol <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carol> 
saw box office decline by 67%,The Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lady-in-the-van> by 76% and Black Mass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/black-mass> by 82%. Bucking the trend is 
family animationThe Good Dinosaur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/26/the-good-dinosaur-review-desperately-disappointing-and-twee>
, which fell a relatively slim 30%, and festive comedyChristmas With the Coopers
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/christmas-with-the-coopers-review-film-diane-keaton-john-goodman>
, down 45%.

The vintage perennial
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLJfZaT8ncYk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLJfZaT8ncYk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLJfZaT8ncYk&media=>
 It’s a Wonderful Life - trailer 
It’s a Wonderful Life <https://www.theguardian.com/film/it-s-a-wonderful-life> 
is back in the UK box office top 10, enjoying the fruits once again of its 
annual festive rerelease. This is the ninth successive year that the Frank 
Capra classic has been pushed back into cinemas for Christmas, achieving its 
highest chart placing since 2010. The Jimmy Stewart film added another £97,000 
at the weekend, bringing the total since its 2007 reissue to £2.04m. The title 
should continue to play well until Christmas Eve, and fade thereafter until 
next December.

The Hindi hits
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-uk-box-office-spectre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2410cc02ba1e9ff7ddf3b1b1e47653ce2e33abc5%2F0_238_3600_2162%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20gives%20UK%20box%20office%20a%20spectacular%20shot%20in%20the%20arm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-uk-box-office-spectre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20gives%20UK%20box%20office%20a%20spectacular%20shot%20in%20the%20arm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-uk-box-office-spectre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2410cc02ba1e9ff7ddf3b1b1e47653ce2e33abc5%2F0_238_3600_2162%2F3600.jpg>
 Star attraction … Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol in Dilwale 
With takings of £728,000, Dilwale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/21/dilwale-review-shah-rukh-khan-kajol-rohit-shetty>
 delivers the biggest three-day debut for a Bollywood title since Bajrangi 
Bhaijaan began with £758,000 in July.Prem Ratan Dhan Payo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/16/prem-ratan-dhan-payo-review-salman-khan-sensitive-side-on-show>
, the other notable Hindi hit of the year, recorded an opening tally of 
£912,000, but that included preview takings of £187,000 – strip them out, and 
the weekend total declines to £725,000, just below the Dilwale figure. Dilwale, 
starring Shah Rukh Khan, is described as an action crime comedy about the 
children of two competing families meeting again after a 15-year separation. 
Also landing in the top 10 is historical romance Bajirao Mastani, with debut 
takings of £298,000.

Films of the year

Spectre review: James Bond is back, stylish, camp and sexily pro-Snowden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/spectre-review-james-bond-is-back-stylish-camp-and-sexily-pro-snowden>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Fspectre-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spectre%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Fspectre-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spectre%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Fspectre-video-review&media=>
 Spectre - video review 
After a dismal 2014, our top 25 of the year (see chart below) sees Hollywood 
blockbusters bounce back in spectacular fashion. The equivalent chart exactly a 
year ago, with just over a week of the year yet to play, showed no film 
managing £35m (although bothPaddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paddington> and The Hobbit: The Battle of the 
Five Armies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hobbit-the-battle-of-the-five-armies> would 
go on to exceed that tally). Our chart for 2015 shows seven films above £35m, 
led by Spectre (£92.6m) andJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world> (£64.4m). The Force Awakens 
also passed £35m on Monday, and looks well on course to reach Spectre’s lofty 
heights.

Although the top hits are far, far ahead of the equivalent titles from 2014, 
lower down the top 25, the box-office numbers are much closer to the films 
occupying the same positions in last year’s chart. In other words, 2015 was not 
quite a rising tide lifting all boats. The year with the most number of £50m 
hits remains 2012, when Skyfall, The Dark Knight Rises, Marvel Avengers 
Assemble and The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey all passed the milestone – 
albeit doing so after the year had ended in the case of the Hobbit film. This 
year has recorded two £50m hits (Spectre and Jurassic World), although The 
Force Awakens is a dead cert to provide a third.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fin-the-heart-of-the-sea-chris-hemsworth-ron-howard-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F17%2F1450359821754%2FKP_810977_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Heart%20of%20the%20Sea%20star%20Chris%20Hemsworth%20and%20director%20Ron%20Howard%3A%20'We%20didn't%20want%20to%20do%20another%20Moby-Dick'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fin-the-heart-of-the-sea-chris-hemsworth-ron-howard-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Heart%20of%20the%20Sea%20star%20Chris%20Hemsworth%20and%20director%20Ron%20Howard%3A%20%27We%20didn%27t%20want%20to%20do%20another%20Moby-Dick%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fin-the-heart-of-the-sea-chris-hemsworth-ron-howard-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F17%2F1450359821754%2FKP_810977_crop_640x480.jpg>
 In the Heart of the Sea star Chris Hemsworth and director Ron Howard - video 
interview 
As mentioned above, UK box office is an amazing 512% up on the previous frame, 
and also 146% up on the equivalent weekend from 2014, when The Hobbit: The 
Battle of the Five Armies retained the top spot. Officially opening yesterday, 
but in fact already playing previews for three weekends now, isSnoopy and 
Charlie Brown: The Peanuts Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/snoopy-and-charlie-brown-the-peanuts-movie-review-return-of-a-lovable-loser>
. Boxing day sees the arrival of Ron Howard’s whaling adventureIn the Heart of 
the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/02/in-the-heart-of-the-sea-review-ron-howard-chris-hemsworth>
 and Will Ferrell/Mark Wahlberg comedyDaddy’s Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/daddys-home-review-will-ferrell-mark-wahlberg>
. However those films fare, The Force Awakens is certain to continue to 
dominate the session.

Top 25 films of 2015

1. Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>, £92.80m*

2. Jurassic World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>, £64.37m

3. The Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, £48.34m

4. Minions <https://www.theguardian.com/film/minions>, £47.29m

5. Inside Out <https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out>, £39.18m

6. Fast & Furious 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fast-furious-7>, £38.53m

7. Fifty Shades of Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey>
, £35.05m

8. Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, £34.01m*

9. The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games-mockingjay-part-2>, £26.67m*

10. Home <https://www.theguardian.com/film/home>, £25.38m

11. The Martian <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-martian>, £23.47m

12. The Theory of Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-theory-of-everything>, £21.52m

13. Cinderella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cinderella>, £21.31m

14. Mission: Impossible: Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mission-impossible-rogue-nation>, £21.18m

15. Big Hero 6 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/big-hero-6>, £20.68m

16. Hotel Transylvania 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hotel-transylvania-2>, £19.65m*

17. Legend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/legend-review-tom-hardy-on-double-duty-in-cartoonish-krays-biopic>
, £18.34m

18. Taken 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/taken-3>, £17.78m

19. Mad Max: Fury Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, 
£17.40m

20. Pitch Perfect 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pitch-perfect-2>, £17.39m

21. Kingsman: The Secret Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kingsman-the-secret-service>, £16.57m

22. Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>, £16.32m

23. The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-second-best-exotic-marigold-hotel>, 
£16.01m

24. Shaun the Sheep Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shaun-the-sheep-movie>, £13.75m

25. American Sniper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, £13.73m

Grosses to 20 December; * still on release

Top 10 films, 18-20 December 

1. Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, £34.01m, 670 sites 
(new)

2. Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/10/sisters-review-crowdpleasing-cracking-comedy>
, £1,215,368, 442 sites (new)

3. The Good Dinosaur <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-good-dinosaur>, 
£890,350 from 585 sites. Total: £8,087,040

4. Dilwale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/21/dilwale-review-shah-rukh-khan-kajol-rohit-shetty>
, £727,512 from 135 sites (new)

5. The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games-mockingjay-part-2>, £525,727 
from 425 sites. Total: £26,671,519

6. Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>, £297,803 from 308 
sites. Total: £92,798,732

7. Bajirao Mastani, £297,573 from 126 sites (new)

8. Christmas With the Coopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/christmas-with-the-coopers-review-film-diane-keaton-john-goodman>
, £258,162 from 353 sites. Total: £1,953,180

9. Bridge of Spies <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridge-of-spies>, 
£212,169 from 304 sites. Total: £6,144,463

10. It’s A Wonderful Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/it-s-a-wonderful-life>, £96,893 from 54 
sites. Rerelease total: £2,041,085

Other openers

Surprise: Journey to the West, £28,776 from 14 sites

Sherpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/sherpa-review-peril-in-the-shadow-of-everest>
, £4,640 from 3 sites

Thanga Magan, £1,639 from 5 sites

Thanks to Rentrak <https://twitter.com/Rentrak_UK” 
https://twitter.com/Rentrak_UK>. All figures relate to takings in UK and 
Ireland cinemas.
 