
Star Wars: The Force Awakens – six things we learned from the new trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/20/star-wars-the-force-awakens-new-trailer-six-things-we-learned>
The official trailer of JJ Abrams’s highly anticipated Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> instalment, The Force Awakens, has 
been unleashed and opens with a masked figure seen scaling the gigantic 
interior of blackened ruins. A voiceover poses the compelling question: “Who 
are you?”

Without ever completely answering that question, the trailer, which premiered 
on the sports cable network ESPN during halftime of the Monday night NFL game, 
appears to establish who the film’s three lead characters are.

First cab off the ranks in the trailer – which comes after two shorter teasers 
– is scavenger Rey from the desert world of Jakku, played by Daisy Ridley. A 
tracking shot of a faceless army of stormtroopers leads us to Finn (John 
Boyega). He is shown taking off his stormtrooper mask with the words: “I was 
raised to do one thing, but I’ve got nothing to fight for.”

Completing the trio of key protagonists is Adam Driver’s villainous Kylo Ren, 
the supposed primary evildoer of The Force Awakens. “Nothing will stand in our 
way. I will finish what you started,” says Ren to a disfigured mask, presumably 
belonging to the original Star Wars baddie Darth Vader.

Star Wars new female character 'extremely significant', says producer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/14/star-wars-new-female-character-extremely-significant-says-producer>
At two minutes and 23 seconds long, this latest trailer is the longest preview 
yet of the film. The seventh episode in the series picks up three decades after 
the events of Return of the Jedi (1983) and, as the trailer shows, features 
many of the characters from the original trilogy.

Fans of the film gathered on Monday night on a Reddit thread dedicated to Star 
Wars – ostensibly not football lovers, as they impatientlycursed the game (and 
the network) 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/StarWars/comments/3pfaqt/game_thread_new_york_giants_32_at_philadelphia/>
 while waiting for the trailer to be aired.

Director Abrams sent a message to fans via Bad Robot 
<https://twitter.com/bad_robot/status/656280420988809216>: “We cannot wait to 
share the trailer with ya tonight. I don’t care if you’re black, white, brown, 
Jawa, Wookiee, Jedi or Sith. I just hope you like it! Best, JJ.”
Bad Robot (@bad_robot) 
#TheForceAwakens <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TheForceAwakens?src=hash> #MNF 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/MNF?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/yw6XvlpJNe 
<https://t.co/yw6XvlpJNe>
 <https://twitter.com/bad_robot/status/656280420988809216> October 20, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/bad_robot/status/656280420988809216> 
Star Wars actor John Boyega hits back at 'prejudiced' fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/09/star-wars-the-force-awakens-john-boyega-responds-to-prejudiced-fans>
With every release of new marketing material, including the first teaser in 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/28/star-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-jj-abrams>
 anda second in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/star-wars-jj-abrams-the-force-awakens>
, fans have pored over the scant details and speculated over possible 
storylines. Many noted the prominent positions given to Rey and Finn inthe 
official poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/new-star-wars-the-force-awakens-film-tickets-poster-high-demand>
.

Also in the poster is a goggles-wearing character that might be Lupita 
Nyong’o’s space pirate Maz Kanata 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/the-official-star-wars-the-force-awakens-poster-is-here/>
, standing alongside several characters from the first original series: Carrie 
Fisher’s Princess Leia Organa, Harrison Ford’s Han Solo, Chewbacca (Peter 
Mayhew), R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels).

Conspicuously absent from the poster is Mark Hamill’s Luke Skywalker. Fans 
have been pointing to footage first seen inthe second teaser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/star-wars-jj-abrams-the-force-awakens>
, and again in the official trailer, of a hooded figure placing a hand on 
R2-D2, as a clue to his return.

Other characters include Domhnall Gleeson’s General Hux and Andy Serkis’s 
Supreme Leader Snoke.Footage released in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/28/star-wars-the-force-awakens-footage-shows-lightsaber-wielding-john-boyega>
 show Ren wielding a red “crucifix” lightsaber that riffs on the original,
apparently of the character’s own design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/14/director-reveals-new-details-of-star-wars-the-force-awakens>
.

Trailer reviews have so far been positive. Guardian film critic Peter Bradshaw 
predicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/28/star-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-jj-abrams>
 a “return to the verities of character and story” and a “move away from the 
inert digital gigantism of the last decade’s prequel-trilogy”.

JJ Abrams’s space opera will premiere in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/star-wars-the-force-awakens-world-premiere-los-angeles>
 on 14 December – a few days before it opens worldwide, on 17 December in the 
UK and Australia, and in the following day in the US.

Cinema websites in the UK have already crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/new-star-wars-the-force-awakens-film-tickets-poster-high-demand>
 under the weight of demand for first screenings of the film, which will have a
running time of 136 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/14/getting-the-plot-of-force-awakens-from-films-also-running-136-minutes>
.
 