
He’s been to the desert in Tatooine, the ice planet of Hoth, and had a hand in 
the destruction of two Death Stars, and now Luke Skywalker (also known as Mark 
Hamill) and some of the rest of the leading cast ofStar Wars: Episode VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars--episode-viii> have landed in 
Northern Ireland.


The first port of call for Hamill, Daisy Ridley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/daisy-ridley> (Rey) and Adam Driver (Kylo 
Ren) was Belfast international airport on Friday. From there they travelled to 
Malin Head in County Donegal, on the north-west coast.


JJ Abrams: ‘Star Wars fans are passionate and obsessive. And I’m one of them’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/30/jj-abrams-the-force-awakens-star-trek>
Ridley and Diver tried to conceal themselves from waiting photographers at the 
airport but Hamill, showing off his wild beard, waved to the cameras as he 
entered the airport terminal.


The actors will film at the beauty spot on the Atlantic coast where 
construction has been under way on what is believed to be a new version of the 
Millennium Falcon.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstar-wars-cast-arrive-in-northern-ireland-to-film-episode-viii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd236bed9e025117f22c67ede42fef9457363b650%2F0_104_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20cast%20arrive%20in%20Ireland%20to%20film%20Episode%20VIII&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstar-wars-cast-arrive-in-northern-ireland-to-film-episode-viii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20cast%20arrive%20in%20Ireland%20to%20film%20Episode%20VIII&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fstar-wars-cast-arrive-in-northern-ireland-to-film-episode-viii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd236bed9e025117f22c67ede42fef9457363b650%2F0_104_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 A set believed by fans and some media to be a new Millennium Falcon under 
construction, on Malin Head, Northern Ireland. Photograph: Clodagh 
Kilcoyne/Reuters 
Caravan park owner Ali Farren told the Belfast Telegraph on Friday that 
“there’s been a lot of blacked-out limousines and coaches in the area, so we 
have no idea who is here and you can’t get close”.


Farren who runs a family-owned bar at the beauty spot said they have painted a 
mural on the pub’s gable wall of the Jedi master Yoda. Photographs of the set 
show a construction site with a disc-like object covered over and perched on 
the headland with the Atlantic Ocean below.

Episode VIII will include scenes from a number of locations across Ireland, 
including a Jedi temple, which is being built near the Dingle peninsula in Co 
Kerry. AnotherStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> set is 
being constructed in Co Cork.


The Unesco protected island of Skellig Michael, off the Kerry coast, was used 
to shoot the final scene of Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens, when 
Luke Skywalker was finally re-discovered living like one of the real, hermit 
Irish monks that lived on the rock.
 