
Why should I go to a forest to look at stars?
In a word, darkness. In built-up areas, light pollution blots out all but the 
brightest stars – to the extent that many of us have never been able to pick 
out the sparkling ribbon of the Milky Way – whereas seriously dark skies can 
still be found above much Forestry Commission land.

The 3,440-hectare Dalby Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/dalbyforest> in 
Yorkshire, for example,has been given a top rating 
<http://robinhoodcaravanpark.co.uk/blog/star_gazing_in_the_forest.asp> by the 
UK Dark Sky Discovery Network <http://www.darkskydiscovery.org.uk/>, while 
Kielder Water and Forest Park <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/kielderforestpark> in 
Northumberlandis bidding to become England's first internationally recognised 
"dark sky park" 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/newsrele.nsf/WebPressReleases/D2D984D8F232D92880257AEC00317358>
.Alice Holt Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/aliceholt> in Surrey also has 
dark sky status.

Sorry to sound a bit dubious – but don't the trees get in the way?
Three more words: find a clearing.

Will I need a telescope?
Not if you're just starting out, although binoculars will make it easier to 
examine the moon. If you want to identify the planets and constellations, your 
best aid is a knowledgeable friend – or one of the many astronomy apps that 
will name anything you point a smartphone or tablet at.

Planning helps: the website Astronomy Central tells you what you can see from 
the UK every night 
<http://astronomycentral.co.uk/planets-to-see-in-the-sky-tonight/>. And 
remember that while the moon will make it easier for you to find your way 
around, it will also mask many stars.

Is there anything special I should be looking for?
Meteor showers! We're only a fortnight away from the Perseids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2012/aug/13/perseid-meteor-shower-your-sightings?INTCMP=SRCH>
, a prolific shower linked to the comet Swift-Tuttle which peak around 
10-13 August. The meteors come thick and fast: other highlights are the
Orionids, (21 October) 
<http://earthsky.org/astronomy-essentials/earthskys-meteor-shower-guide#orionids>
; theLeonids, (16-17 November) 
<http://earthsky.org/astronomy-essentials/earthskys-meteor-shower-guide#leonids>
; theGeminids, (13-14  December) 
<http://earthsky.org/astronomy-essentials/earthskys-meteor-shower-guide#geminids>
 and the Quadrantids, (2-3 January). The website EarthSkyhas full details of 
this year's meteor showers 
<http://earthsky.org/astronomy-essentials/earthskys-meteor-shower-guide>.

Are there any organised activities to help me see more stars?
Kielder Observatory Astronomical Society <http://www.kielderobservatory.org/> 
runs 150 events a year, ranging from "public observing" sessions that let you 
use the observatory's powerful telescopes, to "aurora nights" studying the 
northern lights.

At Dalby Forest, Scarborough and Ryedale Astronomical Society 
<http://www.scarborough-ryedale-as.org.uk> holds monthly stargazing events and 
stages a three-night"starfest" 
<http://www.scarborough-ryedale-as.org.uk/saras/starfest/starfest-2013/#sthash.uRrVplSt.DFFaXIdg.dpbs>
 every August. Elsewhere, there's a"forest night adventure" 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/INFD-98ZC84> at Rendlesham Forest in 
Suffolk <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/rendlesham> on 24 August, while on 
15 September,Alice Holt Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/aliceholt> hosts a 
"solar Sunday" <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/INFD-99GFDQ> with Farnham 
Astronomical Society <http://www.farnham-as.co.uk/>. You won't even need to 
stay up for this, as the society will be (carefully) pointing its telescope at 
the sun.

And what if I just want to go to my local wood?
Most Forestry Commission sites are accessible 24 hours a day on foot, though 
car parks and roads may be closed at night. If you arrive around dusk, there'll 
be a little light to guide you to your chosen spot. Just remember you'll also 
need to find your way back out …

Any more tips?
However hot the day has been, bring warm clothes, mosquito repellent and a 
couple of torches with fully charged batteries (in case you lose or break the 
first one). Ideally, one will have a red-tinted lens, as this won't damage your 
night vision. And if you're going anywhere isolated, tell someone about your 
route and check in with them when you get back – or better still, take a friend.

Finally, don't count on navigating by the skies. Even if you know what you're 
doing, you'll feel stupid if the moon sets earlier than you expected or clouds 
cover the pole star.

On the UFO trail

If you want to search for something really unusual in the sky – day or night – 
a trip to Rendlesham Forest in Suffolk might just inspire you. This was, after 
all, the scene of "Britain's Roswell incident", a legendary UFO sighting – and 
possible landing – in December 1980.

A number of US Air Force personnel stationed at nearby RAF Woodbridge reported 
some very curious sightings over a two- or three-day period. Alerted by 
mysterious lights in the forest, some servicemen claimed that they had seen – 
and even touched – an alien spacecraft.

The incident has sparked more public correspondence with government officials 
than any other British UFO sighting – not to mention regular pilgrimages to the 
forest by avid amateur ufologists.

In honour of this, the Forestry Commission has created a three-mile UFO trail 
for children of all ages to enjoy. Graded easy, it includes strange 
alien-looking symbols on marker posts to spot, and an unidentified message to 
decode using the Alien Trail leaflet.

Note: to avoid any disappointed children (or adults), we should just point out 
that the walk contains no actual visible evidence that aliens ever visited 
Rendlesham Forest. But that doesn't stop the conspiracy theorists believing 
there was a huge cover-up by the British and US governments.
 