
It’s been called the curse of Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>. No, not Harrison Ford’s recent 
accidents at Pinewood Studios and in the air above Los Angeles, though these 
were worrying enough. We’re talking the famous inability of cast members to 
retain the spotlight once they have walked away from the iconic space opera 
saga.

It happened to Carrie Fisher, AKA Princess Leia, whose post-Return of the Jedi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36340/return.of.the.jedi> travails were 
documented in her semi-autobiographical novel Postcards from the Edge (later an 
Oscar-nominated film). And it certainly struck Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), 
who never secured the A-list status handed to Ford despite being the original 
trilogy’s central figure. The less said about Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen 
from the later prequel trilogy, the better.

This week the Hollywood Reporter published an article 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/why-more-star-wars-actors-783949> 
reminding us thatEwan McGregor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ewanmcgregor> 
andNatalie Portman also failed to get a career bounce 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/natalie-portman-blames-star-wars-prequels-for-almost-ruining-her-career-everyone-thought-i-was-a-horrible-actress-9933636.html>
 from their Star Wars gigs. And yet studio Disney has managed to pull together 
such an impressive array ofso-hot-right-now 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV_hDyfmEw4> acting talent for The Force 
Awakens and upcoming spin-off flickRogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/13/star-wars-film-episode-8-rogue-one-what-we-know>
 that it would be a huge surprise if most of them failed to go on to even 
bigger and better things. Here are five cast members who might just buck the 
trend and use Star Wars as a genuine springboard for success.

Adam Driver
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fstar-wars-adam-driver-domhnall-gleeson-force-awakens-rogue-one-lupita-nyong-o%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427474043914%2Fb166051b-c398-482d-8ca4-0fe3cb2d8ac7-2015x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20career%20curse%3A%20can%20Adam%20Driver%20and%20Domhnall%20Gleeson%20go%20rogue%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fstar-wars-adam-driver-domhnall-gleeson-force-awakens-rogue-one-lupita-nyong-o%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20career%20curse%3A%20can%20Adam%20Driver%20and%20Domhnall%20Gleeson%20go%20rogue%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fstar-wars-adam-driver-domhnall-gleeson-force-awakens-rogue-one-lupita-nyong-o%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427474043914%2Fb166051b-c398-482d-8ca4-0fe3cb2d8ac7-2015x2040.jpeg>
 Adam Driver. Photograph: Larry Busacca/Getty Images 
Rumoured to be playing a Darth Vader-like villain, Driver is best known for 
his turn as unwieldy geek-hunk Adam Sackler in the hit HBO comedyGirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls>. It’s a startling 
multi-layered performance of remarkable intensity: part whirlwind of charisma, 
part whinging toddler in the body of a protein-shake-guzzling gym bunny. 
Whether the imposing Driver can conjure up sinister Sith venom in far shorter 
bursts of screen time remains to be seen, but you can’t fault the ambitious 
casting. It took two men to play Vader in the original trilogy:Dave Prowse 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/darth-vader-actor-david-prowse-reveals-he-has-dementia-id-love-to-be-in-star-wars-7-but-would-probably-forget-my-lines-9893401.html>
 in the suit,James Earl Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-earl-jones> making with the evil, 
velvet-lined baritone. Driver, 31, might just have the chops to succeed without 
additional aid, in which case the world really would be his Death Star.

Ben Mendelsohn
 Ben Mendelsohn. Photograph: Gary Miller/FilmMagic 
Reportedly in talks to take the lead role in Gareth Edwards’s Star Wars: Rogue 
One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/26/ben-mendelsohn-set-for-star-wars-spin-off-rogue-one>
, the Australian actor is another thesp who you simply can’t imagine being cast 
by George Lucas in the prequel films. He’s best known for playing loose-cannon 
bad guys, with the sleazy turn as a sociopathic Melbourne gangster in the 
excellentAnimal Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139012/animal-kingdom> probably his 
standout performance. It was Joel Edgerton who proved the breakout star of 
David Michod’s critically acclaimed crime drama, but the 45-year-old Mendelsohn 
fully deserves his shot at the big time. He would make a fabulous well-worn and 
curmudgeonly X-Wing pilot if Edwards’s film, as predicted, reimagines the world 
of Star Wars from the point of view of its airborne grunts.

Lupita Nyong’o
 Lupita Nyong’o. Photograph: George Pimentel/WireImage 
There are Oscar winners who fade from the limelight – just ask Dianne Wiest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/26/oscar-winner-dianne-wiest-admits-to-money-troubles>
. But Nyong’o certainly appears to be making the best of her victory in the 
best supporting actress category last year for the historical drama12 Years a 
Slave <https://www.theguardian.com/film/12-years-a-slave>. As well as The Force 
Awakens – she’s rumoured to be playing a Jedi trained by Hamill’s Skywalker – 
the Mexican-Kenyan actor will reunite with Brad Pitt for the drama Americanah, 
based onChimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s prize-winning novel about lovelorn Nigerian 
migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/15/americanah-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-review>
 and co-starring Selma’s David Oyelowo. She’s also tipped to voice the vulpine 
mother of mancub Mowgli in Disney’s forthcoming live-action remake ofThe Jungle 
Book <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-jungle-book>, a part that will see 
her joining such Hollywood luminaries as Scarlett Johansson, Idris Elba, Bill 
Murray, Christopher Walken and Ben Kingsley in the sound booths. It could, of 
course, all go wrong from here. But don’t bet on it.

Domhnall Gleeson
 Domhnall Gleeson. Photograph: Michael Buckner/Getty Images for SXSW 
Rumoured (and these really are just rumours) to be playing Luke Skywalker’s 
son in The Force Awakens, Gleeson seems more likely to be around for decades to 
come as a standout character actor or indie lead than he is - say - stepping 
into the shoes of Tom Cruise or Hugh Jackman in marquee action fare. And yet 
the son of wonderful Dublin actor Brendan made for a hugely likable Hugh Grant 
stand-in on the surprisingly good time-travelling Richard Curtis rom-comAbout 
Time <https://www.theguardian.com/film/about-time>. He was also excellent as a 
low-ranking drug-addled mobster in the comic-book adventure Dredd, returning to 
take the lead for Alex Garland in the exciting British film-maker’s highly 
rated artificial intelligence thrillerEx-Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina>. Somehow, we can’t see him 
spending the next 30 years in schlocky B-movies once Star Wars disappears into 
the rear mirror.

John Boyega
 John Boyega. Photograph: Richard Saker 
Largely known for his streetwise turn as a teenager defending his south London 
council estate against an unlikely alien invasion in the two-parts smart, 
one-part silly sci-fi rompAttack the Block 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/attack-the-block>, Peckham-born Boyega has 
also slowly been making his way in indie fare. The Guardian’s Henry Barnes 
praised the “toned precision” of his turn as a reformed LA mobster in the 
otherwise forgettableSundance 2014 hit Imperial Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/18/sundance-film-festival-review-imperial-dreams>
, and the 23-year-old has also starred with Chiwetel Ejiofor and Thandie Newton 
in the 2013 Nigerian historical dramaHalf of a Yellow Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/half-of-a-yellow-sun>. Boyega plays a 
Stormtrooper rumoured to have deserted the Imperial army in The Force Awakens, 
and has already made his feelings clear about online splutter over the casting 
of a black man in the role. If Star Wars is a success, expect him to be 
similarly forceful on the Hollywood stage for years to come.



 