
We all know the story of the end of the dinosaurs and we joke “If only they 
had a space programme.” Although Nasa has discovered most of the near-Earth 
asteroids that could render us extinct, there are a million more we haven’t yet 
seen that have the potential to devastate any one of our major metropolitan 
cities around the world.

On 30 June 1908, the date of the last major impact on Earth, a relatively 
small asteroid approximately 40 metres in size devastated about 2,000 square 
kilometres of forest in Siberia. The impact energy was at least a 100 times 
greater than the two nuclear bombs used in WWII. In 2013, just three years ago, 
another “baby” asteroid, this time only about 20 metres,exploded in the air 
near the city of Chelyabinsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/06/chelyabinsk-meteor-russia>, 
Russia, blowing out about 100,000 windows and injuring more than 1,500 people.

Every single day, 365 days a year, the Earth is hit by about 100 tons of 
fragments of asteroids and comets such as meteoroids and cosmic dust, as it has 
been for a few billion years - and occasionally these impacts are much larger.

This is why we brought together an esteemed group of planetary scientists, 
astrophysicists, astronauts, artists, academics and concerned citizens to create
Asteroid Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/13/asteroid-day-anniversary-tunguska-siberia>
, a day of education and awareness about near-Earth Objects (NEOs) in our Solar 
System. Asteroid Day is held each year on June 30, the anniversary of the
Tunguska impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2013/feb/08/tunguska-asteroid-comet-1908-siberia>
.

Brian May: Asteroid Day can help protect the planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/jun/30/brian-may-asteroid-day-can-help-protect-the-planet>
In 2015, we were joined by tens of thousands of private citizens at more than 
150 self-organised events worldwide and millions of people participated online 
to learn and think about how we could outsmart the dynamics of the solar system.


Professor Stephen Hawking recently re-emphasised our need to be vigilant: “One 
of the major threats to intelligent life in our universe is a high probability 
of an asteroid colliding with inhabited planets.”


While existing telescopes do a good job of monitoring our solar system for the 
larger asteroids, one kilometre or greater - so we don’t go the way of the 
dinosaurs - it is much harder to detect the smaller ones, like those that 
impacted Chelyabinsk and Tunguska, which are still large enough to cause 
significant destruction. In fact, the aggregate findings of all telescopes 
combined to date have found less than one percent of NEOs that could cause 
significant damage.


Asteroids <https://www.theguardian.com/science/asteroids> are leftover 
material from the origins of our solar system. NEOs orbit in the inner solar 
system, close to Earth, but are small and often dark, so that they are 
difficult to see. We need to complement our current and future land based 
telescopes with a space based asset to look for asteroids in the infrared part 
of the spectrum. According to Eric Christensen, one of our Asteroid Day science 
advisors, the study of these objects “allows us to look both backward and 
forward in time and can inform our understanding of the birth and evolution of 
the solar system.”

Asteroid impacts are the only major natural disasters we have a chance of 
preventing, unlike earthquakes, tornadoes or hurricanes. To meet our 
responsibilities in the face of such an avoidable hazard, we need the will to 
allocate the very modest resources necessary to find them years or decades in 
advance. Warning time is critical: if we can determine the asteroid’s orbit 
relative to Earth’s, and see an impact coming, we can deflect the asteroid just 
by altering its orbital speed. As Asteroid Day science advisor Don Yeomans 
says, the three most important things for asteroid defence are to “find them 
early, find them early and find them early.” There are many proposed 
technologies to do this job, some of which we have in hand, along with other 
promising techniques which we can test.

Asteroid Day has produced a seven-part film series 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G0NhCzeebjI&list=PLzbX4PGfSjCG0O-6kN8aAYTFmQtCpIvcu>
 detailing the global concern over NEOs, with an introduction by our good 
friend Neil deGrasse Tyson, director of New York’s Hayden Planetarium. The 
series celebrates asteroid experts, astronauts, scientists, business leaders 
and policymakers working in this emerging field.

Join in today at one of the hundreds of Asteroid Day events 
<http://events.asteroidday.org> being held around the world and online.

Dr Brian May <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brian-may> is a musician, 
singer, songwriter and astrophysicist, best known as the lead guitarist of the 
rock band Queen. He is a co-founder of Asteroid Day


Dr Clark Chapman is a renowned planetary scientist and co-founder and on the 
Board of Directors of B612. He is a winner of theCarl Sagan Award for Public 
Understanding of Science 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Sagan_Award_for_Public_Understanding_of_Science>
 and worked on the science teams of theMESSENGER 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MESSENGER>, Galileo 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galileo_(spacecraft)> and Near-Earth Asteroid 
Rendezvous space missions.


Dr Tom Jones chairs the Committee on Near-Earth Objects of the Association of 
Space Explorers and is a former US astronaut and planetary scientist who has 
studied asteroids forNasa <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NASA>, engineered 
intelligence-gathering systems for the CIA, and helped develop advanced mission 
concepts to explore the solar system. He flew on fourspace shuttle 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_shuttle> missions, logging a total of 53 
days in space, and his flight time included three spacewalks. His publications 
includePlanetology: Unlocking the Secrets of the Solar System.

This article was changed at 15:33 June 30 to say that Tom Jones is chair of 
the Committee on Near-Earth Objects of the Association of Space Explorers 
instead of his membership of theNasa Advisory Council 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Advisory_Committee_for_Aeronautics%23NASA_Advisory_Council>
. This change was made at the request of the author, who had supplied the 
original biographical information.
 