
The Bee Gees’ Stayin’ Alive is one of the best songs Australia has produced, 
said no one ever. But why is the song that sparked the disco inferno so 
consistently overlooked in discussions of Australian classics?


The New York Times once referred to the Bee Gees as merely “Australian-ish 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/29/opinion/29sun3.html?_r=1&%20>”, and in a 
sense, “Australian-ish” is a fitting description of the group. Like so many of 
our big musical acts over the years, the Bee Gees were immigrants. Some might 
say we hadn’t had the chance to wring all these strange public displays of 
expression out of them yet.

Claiming the Bee Gees <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bee-gees> as one of 
our own is hardly like saying the Beatles were German. Though born on the Isle 
of Man, the Gibb brothers spent many of their formative years in Brisbane and 
Sydney, going to schools with names like Humpybong. They took their name on the 
suggestion of a Brisbane disc jockey. They spent years on the local scene, and 
then in classic Australian style, upped stumps to go in search of international 
success.

By comparison, Harry Vanda and George Young of the Easybeats were drinking age 
or close enough when they migrated to our shores – andFriday On My Mind 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBJLoYd8xak> tops nearly every list there is 
of Australian classics!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI_izvAbhExY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI_izvAbhExY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI_izvAbhExY&media=>
So why have we been so loath to claim the Bee Gees as our own? Perhaps because 
writing one of the biggest dancefloor anthems of all time is such an 
un-Australian thing to do.

Few things in this world make the average white Australian male as 
uncomfortable as the thought of dancing. It’s rooted in both blokeyness and the
fear of looking like Warney <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ok4R-SMSJnM>. 

White people around the world are generally ridiculed for the embarrassment 
they bring to the dance floor; white Australian men, particularly those of the 
sober variety, tend to just avoid the place altogether. This country might have 
been so different if the First Fleet had been rammed full of smooth criminals, 
rather than the bog-standard, bread-thieving ones.


But before you reach for the Zippo fuel, there’s something you need to know 
about this song: Stayin’ Alive is not your everyday booty shaker (not that 
there’s anything wrong with that). It’s deep. And it’s grim. Deeply grim. Nick 
Cave-with-the-sleep-still-in-his-eyes grim.

Its protagonist, like the tune itself, might strut into the room, but 
underneath that ladies’ man swagger is a depressed, abused, alienated and, 
let’s face it, possibly suicidal young man for whom life is no big party.

It’s not a song about ecstasy, but about survival. He’s fighting the demons of 
a loveless childhood; battling drug withdrawal; living in a city which is 
falling apart like the lives of those around him. It’s not about the joys of 
being alive; it’s simply about staying alive. Sometimes, that’s all you can 
hope for.

It’s also a song about the redemptive power of dance. In a purposeless 
existence rooted in abuse – “I’ve been kicked around since I was born” – the 
dance floor is his therapy room.

While the outside world buries its head in the morning paper, he’s getting on 
with this mindless, bodily release he’s found. (“It’s all right, it’s OK, and 
you may look the other way. We can try to understand, The New York Times’ 
effect on man.”)

The chorus can be mistaken as a platitude about all humanity coming together 
(in solidarity, for a boogie). Yet taken with what has come before it, “Whether 
you’re a brother or whether you’re a mother, you’re stayin’ alive” might 
suggest the biggest problem he is facing is not on the mean streets of the 
city, but within the four walls of his family home.

If dancing is his therapy, the second verse shows us he has a more commonplace 
way of dealing with his issues: self-medication. “I get low and I get high, And 
if I can’t get either I really try”. Uppers, downers and disco dancing. For 
some, it sounds like a Saturday night on the town; for him, it’s a lifeline.

The song ends with something blokes find even more challenging than the 
macarena <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XiBYM6g8Tck>: admitting you have a 
problem. “Life goin’ nowhere. Somebody help me. Somebody help me, yeah.” It’s 
repeated again and again and again. Take out that Stevie Wonder-esque riff from 
beneath it and those repeated lines become deeply haunting. Especially in that 
Gibb brothers falsetto. Stoic to the end, he signs off by letting us know he’s 
staying alive.

“Stayin’ Alive was a substantial lyrical song about living in the city. It was 
full of substance. We wanted songs that would last,”Maurice Gibb told a 
documentary about the making of Saturday Night Fever 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AZ6jxglUmbw>. The Bee Gees weren’t always like 
that: just take the infectious, vacuousYou Should Be Dancing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4yAkkpbm_8E>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAZ6jxglUmbw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAZ6jxglUmbw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAZ6jxglUmbw&media=>
The movie, like the song it is inextricably linked to, “lured all kinds of 
people, including sexist hyper-macho guys, onto the dance floor,” wrote Alice 
Echols in her book Hot Stuff. But “glitterball culture” simultaneously posed a 
threat to “dance-phobic white men”, and it swiftly became an object of ridicule 
from those it rubbed the wrong way.

Disco <https://www.theguardian.com/music/disco> was, Echols argues, even more 
confronting to rock’s conservatism than punk; it was “the music of outsiders”, 
“female-centred” (note: the Gibbs’ use of falsetto) and “required that they 
[the audience]move ... There was no playing air guitar on a disco dance floor.”

It’s time we let Stayin’ Alive back into our heart, as deeply un-Australian as 
the song may seem. The issues it raises are too important to be ignored. After 
all, the most dangerous thing in the world might just be a white man who 
doesn’t dance.
 