
Steelmakers such as ArcelorMittal have become huge beneficiaries of the 
European Union's emissions trading scheme, making tens of millions of pounds 
out of free carbon permits, research shows.

Just three plants in Belgium, Spain and Romania, all controlled by Lakshmi 
Mittal <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lakshmi-mittal>, Britain's richest 
man, are sitting on 15% of the surplus permits handed out by the EU, according 
to official figures obtained by the Sandbag environmental campaign group.

"The scale of the benefits enjoyed by the steel industry make it look like the 
ETS is being used as a hidden subsidy to the sector," said Bryony Worthington, 
the founder of Sandbag.

The price of carbon has plunged over the last 12 months, partly because the 
slowdown has reduced output and emissions, but also because the EU handed out 
too many free permits to industry.

The ETS allocates certain companies allowances for the carbon they emit, and 
is supposed to force them to buy additional permits to pollute if they do not 
cut their emissions. Most of the heaviest polluters and users of carbon permits 
are power companies such asDrax <https://www.theguardian.com/business/draxgroup>
, which runs the coal-fired facility in north Yorkshire of the same name, and 
Elektrownia Belchatow of Poland.

But Worthington said the EU statistics showed steel plants such as Germany's 
Integriertes Huttenwerk Duisburg was sitting on 10.8m permits, Glocke 
Salzgitter 5.1m and Belgium's ArcelorMittal Gent 4.3m. She feared this 
demonstrated steel companies were masters of lobbying the EU to ensure they 
benefited at a time when permits can be traded at â‚¬15 (per tonne).

ArcelorMittal admitted that it remained in dialogue with policymakers about 
the future shape of the trading scheme on the basis that it could raise the 
cost of production in Europe and therefore represent a "threat" to outside 
competitors.

The steel group denied it was exploiting the ETS and was not prepared to 
confirm or deny that it was holding any particular number of surplus permits.
 