
Perhaps Scotland’s football focus this weekend should not be on Celtic or 
Rangers. Rather, it should be on the semi-professionals at East Kilbride, as 
they seek to go where the greatAjax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> 
side of 1971-72 could not. Step aside Johan Cruyff, Arie Haan and Johan 
Neeskens; step forward Kieran Gibbons, Martin McBride and Jacob Kean.

East Kilbride, who typically play in front of crowds of 150 in the Lowland 
League, equalled Ajax’s world record of 26 consecutive victories in competitive 
fixtures with a win against Vale of Leithen last Saturday. The feat was noted 
in Amsterdam; Ajax sent a message to the Scottish minnows, hailing a “Great 
job”. Twelve of these wins have come this season.

Pep Guardiola: ‘I would not be here without Johan Cruyff. He was unique’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/pep-guardiola-exclusive-interview-johan-cruyff-unique>
Now for the key part and, maybe, the denting of Ajax’s upbeat mood. National 
media outlets will flock to K-Park on Saturday afternoon to discover if East 
Kilbride, who have a sprinkling of former full-time players in their ranks, can 
reach number 27 when they play BSC Glasgow. Pre-match coverage has stretched as 
far as the Middle East.

“My phone has been ringing nonstop since Saturday but it’s great we are 
getting this coverage,” Martin Lauchlan, the East Kilbride manager, told the 
local newspaper this week. “I’ve got to thankEast Kilbride News 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/local-sport/media-go-crazy-east-kilbride-9187196>
 because they put this story out there and it’s amazing how people have 
responded to it.

“Both K-Park and myself have been taking calls every day from TV channels, 
radio stations and newspapers, so it’s been pretty hectic. But it’s something 
for everyone here to enjoy. This could be a momentous day for our football club 
and I hope the town get down to K-Park and give us their full support.”

East Kilbride, population 80,000, has never had a team in Scotland’s league 
setup but that may change. The Lowland League forms part of a recently 
introduced pyramid structure, with the champions entering a play-off system at 
the season’s end with the chance of moving into League Two. Understandably 
given their run, East Kilbride are 13 points clear at the summit of their 
league after 12 matches.

East Kilbride made headlines in the last campaign, when paired with Celtic in 
the fifth round of the Scottish Cup.Celtic won 2-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/07/east-kilbride-celtic-scottish-cup-match-report>
 in a match switched to Airdrie to accommodate a crowd of just under 8,000.
 