
Four years ago, the death of Apple co-founder Steve Jobs triggered a global 
expression of mourning of a depth and duration that Oscar-winning 
documentary-makerAlex Gibney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alex-gibney> 
found hard to explain.

Were the people who gathered at candlelit vigils at Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> stores around the world grieving 
for Jobs, or the perceived loss of a future that seemed to promise an endless 
procession of gadgets and devices each more extraordinary and innovative than 
the last?

This is the central question that underpins Gibney’s Steve Jobs: The Man in 
the Machine, a potent critique of the man and the company that, in tandem with 
Gibney’s previous work, includingTaxi to the Dark Side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/13/documentary> and Going Clear: 
Scientology and the Prison of Belief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/25/going-clear-scientology-and-the-prison-of-belief-review-horribly-compelling-study-of-a-creepy-organisation>
, seeks to penetrate well-defended citadels of belief.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjhWKxtsYrJE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjhWKxtsYrJE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjhWKxtsYrJE&media=>
But neither this, nor Danny Boyle’s Michael Fassbender-starring Steve Jobs 
biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/27/danny-boyle-steve-jobs-new-york-film-fest>
 due next month, is likely to win the approval of Jobs’ family or Apple’s 
executives, since both films dwell on the contradictions in Jobs’ character – 
the adopted child who initially denied paternity of his own daughter; the 
creator of the world’s most valuable company who considered philanthropy a 
waste of time; the Zen seeker who short-changed colleagues, and oversaw an 
executive culture of backdated stock options and tax avoidance schemes.

“Steve was so hugely successful, yet he treated so many people so badly,” 
Daniel Kottke, Jobs’ college friend and Apple employee number 12, tells the 
director. “How much of an asshole do you have to be to be successful?”

Gibney says he came to consider Jobs as a “monk without empathy”. “As the guy 
who presided over a company that came to be the most valuable on Earth, and as 
somebody who came out of the counterculture, it’s a critique of how values 
become compromised. How you can take on their surface effects – the black 
turtleneck, listening to Bob Dylan, friends with Bono – yet still pay your 
Chinese workers a pitiful amount, despoil the environment, do shady stock 
transactions, pay no tax.”

Steve Jobs: Man in the Machine first look review – Apple founder's sour side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/15/steve-jobs-man-in-the-machine-first-look-review-apple-founders-sour-side>
Gibney says Jobs’ widow Laurene Powell initially offered to help with the 
project but then backed off. He claims he later found she had sought to 
dissuade potential interviewees from participating. Apple executives are known 
to regard the media with suspicion, a tradition, the film shows, established by 
Jobs himself – and not without some justification. The publication date of
Walter Isaacson’s biography of Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/25/steve-jobs-biography-walter-isaacson-review>
 was brought forward as Jobs’ health failed; his children had to be restrained 
from confronting the author at their father’s memorial.

Apple has not commented on Gibney’s portrayal. However, following a screening 
earlier this year, software chief Eddy Cue described it as “an inaccurate and 
mean-spirited view of my friend”.

Four years on, perhaps, a new perspective on Jobs’ achievements is timely, not 
only, as Gibney says, because “governments are withering and corporations 
assuming ever more power” but also because technology is assuming an ever 
greater role in the way we communicate.

As Apple prepares to unveil a new version of its most profitable product, the 
iPhone, in San Francisco, it’s Gibney’s view that the sharp contours of Jobs’ 
personality remain set into the highly proscribed way they function.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsteve-jobs-widow-pulled-out-of-documentary-on-late-apple-chief-claims-film-maker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441383934154%2F5ba9adb3-4010-4e85-ad23-478259e58f89-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs'%20widow%20pulled%20out%20of%20documentary%20on%20late%20Apple%20chief%2C%20claims%20film-maker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsteve-jobs-widow-pulled-out-of-documentary-on-late-apple-chief-claims-film-maker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%27%20widow%20pulled%20out%20of%20documentary%20on%20late%20Apple%20chief%2C%20claims%20film-maker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsteve-jobs-widow-pulled-out-of-documentary-on-late-apple-chief-claims-film-maker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441383934154%2F5ba9adb3-4010-4e85-ad23-478259e58f89-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Alex Gibney. Photograph: Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images 
“There’s something magnificent he did in terms of making us feel more 
comfortable with our machines – they have become extensions of ourselves. Yet 
that’s the very thing that should make us cautious,” says Gibney.

“These machines connect us, but they isolate us, too. People at Apple get so 
upset if you criticise Steve. But why shouldn’t we ask tough questions about 
where we’re going with technology and how technology works for us?”

Gibney says Jobs very consciously created a story whereby he was the man who 
was guiding the universe, “but it wasn’t necessarily like that at all”.

“Jobs knew the people around him could make him great and he could make them 
rich. So he crafted a vision of him as the grand vizier because that was easier 
for everyone to appreciate and understand. He provided direction. I think 
people inside Apple thought, ‘Fine, he’s making us zillions. We’ll pump the 
bellows in the engine room while Steve goes out and tells a story about 
himself.’”

Through the film, Jobs’ character appears to evolve: the tech geek routing 
telephone calls through international networks and exchanges, the 80s Tom 
Cruise clone, the 90s cult leader, and finally the weakening prophet who seemed 
to diminish even as Apple grew more dominant.

“He was a narcissist, no question about that,” says Gibney, “but I think he 
wisely perceived that all of us are narcissists in some ways. One of the 
reasons these products are so attractive to us is that they are a reflection of 
who we are. That was his genius.”

Gibney believes the expression of grief that accompanied Jobs’ death was of 
followers cut adrift. Jobs’ sense of self-certainty (“Make great products and 
fuck everything else”) was compelling.

In his absence, the company has been forced to backtrack on several occasions. 
There was the issue of third-party apps, automatically placing U2’s new album 
on iTunes, the recent battle between Apple and record labels over streaming 
payments. In film editing, Apple’s Final Cut Pro was once the industry 
standard. But, according to Gibney, Apple dumbed it down, made it more rigid, 
and film-makers deserted it.

If David is now Goliath, are we still interested in the stories Goliath has to 
tell?

“Apple sells you freedom, but the mechanism of its design is extremely rigid,” 
says Gibney. “‘I know better than you what you really want’ – that came from 
Steve. Apple is not sacred. At some point, if Apple continues to go that way, 
people will desert them, too.”

• Steve Jobs: The Man in the Machine is released in the US on 4 September.
 