

Sting strums his stuff. Photograph: Scott Gries/Getty Images

In the immediate wake of Q magazine's All Must Have Prizes 
<http://music.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,2186350,00.html> fest the 
always-worth-reading Blender website has kept the spirit of gift-giving alive 
by pronouncingSting the worst lyricist in rock 
<http://www.blender.com/guide/articles.aspx?ID=2886>. Humourless hack though he 
undoubtedly is, I feel this a little hard on the former Mr Sumner. Po-faced 
pseudery such as theinfamous Nabokov line 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXU8kCrRHJY> don't help his case but rock has 
produced many worse lyricists. Given the spontaneous, egomaniacal, just plain 
dumb nature of rock, it's almost surprising it doesn't produce more.

So what happens when rock lyricists attack? Well, many songwriters are 
autodidacts - which is a polite way of saying they're colossally thick. So 
they'll often use words they don't fully understand. Alanis Morissette wrote 
Ironic, a song detailing a number of quirky, inconvenient and frustrating 
things suffixed with the question "Isn't it ironic? Don't you think?" "Well, no 
not really," was the people's response, notably Ed Byrne who got anentire 
stand-up routine <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nT1TVSTkAXg> out of 
Morissette's howlers.

Then there's the logic gone awry lyric. "There's a cat among the pigeons - 
there's a pain in my chest"sang Matt Goss 
<http://lyrics.rare-lyrics.com/B/Bros/Cat-Among-The-Pigeons.html> in a fine 
example of the lyrical non-sequitur. I don't have the statistics in front of me 
but I'm fairly certain pigeon-related cardiac episodes are extremely rare, so 
Mr Goss needs to stop his nonsense. And as for"I would swallow my pride/I would 
choke on the Rhines/But the lack thereof would leave me empty inside" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o2EE511FWsQ> from Envy 6's Collins, Fagenson 
and Siebels - I honestly don't know where to begin.

Also popular among winging-it songwriters is the forced rhyme. Paul Weller 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/music/2007/09/paul_weller.html> is a well-known 
egalitarian and when he wrote Walls Come Tumbling Down he was determined that 
each individual word had a right to rhyme with another and to hell with what 
The Man with his rulebook said. So coupling "those who have and who have not" 
with "dangle jobs like the donkey's car-rot" was, in Weller's mind at least, 
affirmative action for unfashionable non-rhyming syllables. Margaret Thatcher 
tumbled from power a mere five years later. Coincidence? I think not.

A few months ago, we started a very popular thread on rock's worst lyrics 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/music/2007/05/whats_the_worst_song_lyric_eve.html>
 but who are the worst lyricists? Who are the consistently awful blowhards, 
try-hards, know-nothings and pseuds? Bonus points for anybody who can tell me 
whatInstiction <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juYdKAzqA74> means.
 