
Did you miss Thursday’s super soaraway stock market? OK, it was a local affair 
that wasn’t obvious in the headline figures – theFTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 index advanced a trifling 60 
points, or 1%. But look what happened to some very large companies. Anglo 
American up 20%, Glencore 16% higher, BHP Billiton 11% dearer, even the Shell 
colossus advanced 6%. These are huge moves. What happened?

The short answer is that the market suspects the US Federal Reserve is having 
second thoughts aboutincreases in interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/federal-reserve-interest-rates-unchanged-global-markets-recession>
. Nor is the idea wildly speculative. William Dudley, a top Fed official, said 
on Wednesday that monetary conditions had tightened sinceDecember’s 
quarter-point rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/16/federal-reserve-us-interest-rate-rise-fed-funds-janet-yellen>
 and rate setters would have to take note. Further strengthening in the dollar, 
added Dudley, could have “significant consequences” for the health of the US 
economy. Translation: the Fed probably won’t raise in March.

Cue a selloff in the dollar after its spectacular rise in the past six months. 
And, since a weaker US currency is generally good for commodity prices, cue a 
rise in the share prices of miners and oil producers. At current depressed 
levels, these companies’ earnings are ultra-sensitive to even small 
improvements in the prices of copper, iron ore, oil and so on.

One good day for natural resource stocks doesn’t make a trend, however. There 
are two reasons for caution. First, we have seen similar rallies in commodity 
prices fizzle out many times in the past couple of years. At $35 a barrel, oil 
is only where it was at the beginning of the week and, at that price, nobody is 
making much money. ConocoPhillips underlined the depth of the downturn by 
cutting its dividend for the first time in a quarter of a century.

Second, a U-turn by the Fed on interest rates would hardly be unqualified good 
news. Yes, public displays of central bank dovishness –as seen at the Bank of 
England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/bank-of-england-votes-9-0-to-keep-interest-rates-on-hold>
, following Japan and the European Central Bank – can raise investors’ spirits 
for a while. But if the US economy is so fragile and unproductive that it can’t 
bear another rate rise, that’s outright bearish for everybody.

Three offer doesn’t add up to much 

How super. Three has pledged to freeze mobile phone prices for five years if 
it is allowed to buy O2 in the UK. Canning Fok, the co-managing director of 
parent company CK Hutchison and chairman of Three UK, made this supposedly 
generous offer ina letter to the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/49b8a68e-c9c2-11e5-a8ef-ea66e967dd44.html#axzz3yuKOOmTL>
. He is clearly rattled by the mounting opposition –led by UK regulator Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/01/ofcom-chief-warns-on-o2-and-three-merger>
 – to his £10.5bn deal.

But the price promise isn’t remotely generous, a fact that is obvious as soon 
as you realise that Fok expressed it in terms of voice minutes, texts and 
megabytes. The price of such telephonic items invariably falls, year after 
year, as the technology advances.

Look, for example, at Vodafone’s third quarter figures on Thursday. In Europe, 
the company’s revenues were broadly flat but its European customers’ data usage 
increased by roughly two-thirds. In other words, the price per megabyte 
plunged, which should surprise nobody. The long-term trends in this industry 
are established and, on a like-for-like basis, all-you-can-eat data packages 
should continue to become cheaper for consumers if competition is working well.

Independent analysts at New Street Research 
<http://www.newstreetresearch.com/x/default.html> called Fok’s promise “empty”. 
They’re right. Fok might as well have promised that the wind will continue to 
blow post-merger.

Three’s limp idea of a price “guarantee” underlines how much UK consumers 
could lose if the European commission gives a thumbs up to this plainly 
anti-competitive takeover. Ofcom boss Sharon White should keep up the good 
fight.

Going gets tough for AstraZeneca bonuses

Earnings guidance and remuneration are separate issues, says Pascal Soriot, 
the chief executive of AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/astrazeneca-warns-of-declining-profits>
. Well, yes, but what happens if your annual bonus depends, in part, on meeting 
a target for earnings that becomes harder to achieve because you’ve just spent 
$10bn (£6.9bn) on businesses that have no earnings?

AstraZeneca’s biotech bets for the future may or may not prove to be good 
business. We’ll have to wait half a decade to find out. In the meantime, should 
the company’s pay committee, when judging annual bonuses, adjust for the 
short-term dilution to earnings?

It is allowed to do so, but awards might smell like policymaking on the hoof 
unless the arithmetic is 100% clear. In AstraZeneca’s case, it would surely be 
better to scrap annual bonuses altogether. After all, the only target that 
really matters is Soriot’s ambition to improve annual revenues from $25bn to 
$45bn by 2023.
 