
Some 10,000 years ago a woman in the last stages of pregnancy met a terrible 
death, trussed like a captive animal and dumped into shallow water at the edge 
of a Kenyan lagoon. She died with at least 27 members of her tribe, all equally 
brutally murdered, in the earliest evidence of warfare between stone age 
hunter-gatherers.

 The fossilised remains of the victims, still lying where they fell, preserved 
in the sediment of a marshy pool that dried up thousands of years ago, were 
found by a team of scientists from Cambridge University.

The evidence of their deaths was graphic and unmistakable: the remains, which 
include at least eight women and six children, show skulls smashed in, 
skeletons shot through or stabbed with stone arrows and blades, and in four 
cases, hands almost certainly bound.
Location of Lake Turkana 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/lake_turkana-zip/giv-27167EF5QWnK8KO98>
The discovery, published on Wednesday in the journal Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/index.html>, was made in 2012 at Nataruk, a site 
30km fromLake Turkana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/13/ethiopia-gibe-iii-dam-kenya>
 in northern Kenya’s Rift Valley, and is the earliest securely dated evidence 
of violent confrontation between nomadic hunter-gatherer groups.

Were we happier in the stone age?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/05/were-we-happier-in-the-stone-age>
“The deaths at Nataruk are testimony to the antiquity of inter-group violence 
and war,” said Marta Mirazón Lahr, from the Leverhulme Centre for Human 
Evolutionary Studies at Cambridge, who led the study.

“These human remains record the intentional killing of a small band of 
foragers with no deliberate burial, and provide unique evidence that warfare 
was part of the repertoire of inter-group relations among some prehistoric 
hunter-gatherers.”

The fragmentary remains of the children, all under six except for oneteenager, 
were found with the women’s skeletons.

Most skeletons had severe skull fractures including extreme blunt force 
injuries to cheek and facial bones, broken hands, knees and ribs, arrow marks 
in the neck and, in the case of two men, arrow tips still lodged in their 
skulls and chests.

The pregnant woman was found crouched, with both forearms and ankles crossed 
and probably originally bound; her skeleton was first spotted from her 
fractured knees protruding above the soil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fstone-age-massacre-offers-earliest-evidence-human-warfare-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d356d4ad285bc221231f4bd8277fc014a53b930%2F0_248_3168_1901%2F3168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stone-age%20massacre%20offers%20earliest%20evidence%20of%20human%20warfare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fstone-age-massacre-offers-earliest-evidence-human-warfare-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stone-age%20massacre%20offers%20earliest%20evidence%20of%20human%20warfare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fstone-age-massacre-offers-earliest-evidence-human-warfare-kenya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d356d4ad285bc221231f4bd8277fc014a53b930%2F0_248_3168_1901%2F3168.jpg>
 Marta Mirazón Lahr, the study leader, and Justus Edung at the excavation site. 
Photograph: Robert Foley 
The site was dated to the fertile period after the last ice age, following 
radio carbon and other dating tests carried out on the bones, and the shell and 
sediment found with them.

The area is now scrub, but 10,000 years ago was fertile lakeshore, with ample 
food from fishing, game from nearby forest and woodland, and fresh drinking 
water – a highly desirable place to settle, disastrously so for this group.


“The Nataruk massacre may have resulted from an attempt to seize resources – 
territory, women, children, food stored in pots – whose value was similar to 
those of later food-producing agricultural societies among whom violent attacks 
on settlements became part of life,” said Lahr.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fstone-age-massacre-offers-earliest-evidence-human-warfare-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49890a36eedeffe97d2cc0358588effb71a22dac%2F12_0_1309_1765%2F1309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stone-age%20massacre%20offers%20earliest%20evidence%20of%20human%20warfare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fstone-age-massacre-offers-earliest-evidence-human-warfare-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stone-age%20massacre%20offers%20earliest%20evidence%20of%20human%20warfare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fstone-age-massacre-offers-earliest-evidence-human-warfare-kenya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49890a36eedeffe97d2cc0358588effb71a22dac%2F12_0_1309_1765%2F1309.jpg>
 A woman’s skeleton with fractures. The position of the hands suggests her 
wrists may have been bound. Photograph: Marta Mirazón Lahr 
One man had a fragment of blade made from obsidian – a black volcanic stone 
that can be flaked to razor sharpness – still stuck in his skull. The injury 
apparently had not killed him, because the right side of his face and head had 
been smashed in with a blunt instrument, probably a wooden club. His knees were 
also shattered, causing him to topple face down into the water. Another male 
took two skull-crushing blows, one above the right eye, the other at the left 
side of the skull.

Lahr’s conclusions are grim – the extreme violence used was typical rather 
than a brutal exception. She argued: “Nataruk may simply be evidence of a 
standard antagonistic response to an encounter between two social groups at 
that time.”

The study’s co-author, Prof Robert Foley, is marginally more optimistic about 
the human condition: “I’ve no doubt it is in our biology to be aggressive and 
lethal, just as it is to be deeply caring and loving. A lot of what we 
understand about human evolutionary biology suggests these are two sides of the 
same coin.”
 