
A major tennis tournament will inevitably get critics talking about grunting. 
With theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2012/jan/26/australian-open-2012-australian-open>
 in full swing, the critics areshouting out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/24/maria-sharapova-annoying-grunt-agnieszka-radwanska>
 once more. As a tennis fan, it's not something that has ever really bothered 
me. The constant debating of it in the press, however, does. I make a noise 
when I play tennis; not when I strike the ball, but when I see it limp into the 
net, and I then loudly declare myself a twat. I'm sure I would make a noise if 
I had a strong groundstroke, but my forehand is about as powerful as Michael 
Gove'ssmize <http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=smize>.

The fury around grunting only really crops up on the women's side of the game. 
The Women's Tennis Association (WTA) is looking into "reducing excessive 
grunting 
<http://www.tennis.com/articles/templates/news.aspx?articleid=16033&zoneid=25>" 
by teaching players not to do it at a young age. No such action has been 
considered by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) as, apparently, no 
one gives a fig about Rafa Nadal wheezing his classic "HUH-Uhhhhhhhhhh" through 
every heavy-hitting rally he plays, or our own Andrew Murray sounding like he's 
struggling through a particularly exhausting orgasm that he never quite reaches.

If anyone still believes the men's grunting isn't distracting, I urge you to 
watch the match point of this week'sMurray v Llodra game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/21/andy-murray-michael-llodra?newsfeed=true>
 (watch it anyway, it's brilliant) where Llodra does an impression of Murray's 
grunt before losing that match to an excellent lob. The noise is obviously on 
his mind enough to mock him for it.

I can only assume the reason women are criticised for it has something to do 
with frustration: spectators have the aural experience of a terrific bang 
without the physical part to accompany it. The higher pitch of women's grunts 
unlocks that angry response more than the bassy woofs of the men.

Complaints have come from spectators, enough even for the BBC to develop a 
noise reduction tool so that armchair Wimbledon fans can nod off comfortably 
when waiting to find out if they're going to be cheering British Andy or 
slagging off Scottish Murray without the risk of a woman playing in the 
preceeding match waking them up. Complaints have also come from players.
Agnieszka Radwanska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/24/kim-clijsters-caroline-wozniacki>
 recently said that her opponent's grunts were "too loud" after she was beaten 
by the screeching Belarussian Victoria Azarenka.

When Maria Sharapova, a top-flight shrieker, was asked for a response, she 
neatly zinged her by asking "isn't she back in Poland already?" highlighting 
the fact that players complain when they're losing and rarely when they're 
winning. As Martina Hingispointed out 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/26/sports/tennis/womens-tennis-tries-to-get-the-grunting-under-control.html>
, "If you keep winning, you don't think about it. The moment you're losing, 
it's probably more distracting."

These players don't just start grunting at some point in their career, or even 
during a match. It's a physical response that they've developed with their 
game. Have you tried adding a grunt to improve your game? I did once, and I 
ended up having to apologise to the playgroup next to the court I was on as I 
called myself a twat considerably more than usual. Sharapova makes this point 
more clearly: "You've watched me grow up, you've watched me play tennis. I've 
been the same over the course of my career." It's not a tactic, it's a style. 
Like Nadal's extreme western grip, or Roger Federer's inability to be gracious 
in defeat.

Personally I find the squeaking of trainers on hard courts really annoying, so 
I'm demanding the ATP look into teaching young players to play barefoot. Or, I 
could, just, you know, turn the volume down.
 