
Storm Desmond <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-desmond> has caused 
an estimated £500m of damage across Cumbria – almost double the cost of the 
floods that hit parts of the county six years ago.

Experts at PricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> (PwC), which made 
the calculation, also warned that the bill could rise further if the rain keeps 
falling.

“If the storm continues, the damage – and therefore the costs – could be 
significantly worse. Any additional rainfall, even 1 to 2cm, could cause flash 
flooding in rain-affected areas as the ground is already saturated with water,” 
said Mohammad Khan, general insurance leader at PwC in the UK.


In 2009 when Cumbria was hit by flooding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/nov/21/cumbria-floods-more-rain-barker>
, the insurance industry paid out £175m of claims, with the total cost reaching 
£275m. This time, PwC calculated insurers could face bills of up to £325m, and 
other uninsured damage, such as to roads, would push the cost to £500m. The 
2005 floods in Carlisle cost insurers £272m.

Barrie Cornes, insurance analyst at Panmure Gordon, agreed that insurers were 
braced for a larger bill. His estimate for claims was between £250m and £300m. 
The industry body, the Association of British Insurers, said it was too early 
to estimate the cost for the insurance industry.

More than 5,000 households are estimated to have been affected by the floods 
and it is not yet clear how many of them will put in claims as the cost of 
insurance has risen since the last floods.

Rob Johnston, chief executive of the Cumbria Chamber of Commerce, said some 
smaller businesses were not insured because of the increased cost since the 
area was hit last time. He estimated that 4,000 out of the 25,000 businesses in 
the area were in some way feeling the impact of the floods.

Johnston called for £10m from central government to help businesses in trouble 
and to also help relocate them within the area to places where they can avoid 
being flooded next time.

“The real concern we’ve got is around future investment,” he said. “Clearly 
the majority of Cumbria is open for business ... We want to get a strong 
message out: if you’re coming on holiday, contact the organisation and check 
they are open [rather than cancel].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstorm-desmond-damage-cumbria-estimated-500m%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5bd8d4b2d4c4834d83d85313f25aea354d27d6c%2F0_27_4095_2457%2F4095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Storm%20Desmond%20damage%20across%20Cumbria%20estimated%20at%20%C2%A3500m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstorm-desmond-damage-cumbria-estimated-500m%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Storm%20Desmond%20damage%20across%20Cumbria%20estimated%20at%20%C2%A3500m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fstorm-desmond-damage-cumbria-estimated-500m%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5bd8d4b2d4c4834d83d85313f25aea354d27d6c%2F0_27_4095_2457%2F4095.jpg>
 During 2009 in Cumbria, the insurance industry paid out £175m of claims due to 
flooding. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
The government said it would give temporary relief on business and council tax 
for homes and businesses, a move welcomed by employers’ body the CBI. “This is 
a helpful intervention from the government for families and businesses forced 
out of their properties by Storm Desmond,” said Damian Waters, CBI North West 
director. But, he said: “These floods underline once again why we must continue 
to invest in our flood defences and review existing preparations for potential 
events like this in the future.”


Among the major employers affected is the McVitie’s factory in Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/carlisle>, which employs 640 people. United 
Biscuits, owner of McVitie’s, said the factory was shut on Saturday evening and 
would remain so “until further notice”.

“All our employees are safe and the factory secured,” a spokesperson for 
McVitie’s said. “The local water levels are now starting to subside and once we 
have clear access, we will be able to update further on a planned timetable for 
the clean-up operation and subsequent resumption of production and fulfilment 
of orders.

“The company greatly appreciates the positive attitude and enthusiastic offers 
of help from the local employees and their colleagues across United Biscuits to 
resume business as usual.”


Paper manufacturer James Cropper issued a statement to the stock exchange to 
say that its facility at Burneside in Cumbria, beside the river Kent, had 
incurred damage to warehousing, facilities and materials. Discussions with its 
insurer were underway, it said.

Consumers will be fearful that their insurance premiums will rise even further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/06/flood-hit-homeowners-face-higher-insurance-bills-after-storm-desmond>
, although the introduction of the government-backed Flood Re in April should 
limit any rises. Flood Re is a way by which the cost of flood risk of insurers 
is reduced.


Eamonn Flanagan, insurance analyst at Shore Capital, said: “If Flood Re wasn’t 
around, there would be a material impact on premiums” in affected areas.

Direct Line and Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> are 
the insurers that are most affected by the floods, with Direct Line potentially 
paying out £45m, while Aviva’s bill could amount to £35m, based on their market 
share, Flanagan estimated.

He said: “The industry will take it in its stride. £250m is a big loss but 
it’s not really going to register. This year, as a whole, has been very good 
for the industry.”

It was a different matter for the homes and local businesses – the hotels, 
garages and hairdressers’ – that have been flooded just before Christmas, 
Flanagan said. “For the individuals it’s tragic, so close to Christmas.”
 