
The severe storm season in the US has started to build up over the last week, 
with some southern states being hit by strong winds, hail and tornadoes on 
Sunday.Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> was one of the 
worst-affected states, with hailstones the size of baseballs being reported in 
Montgomery County in the south-west. The hail caused damage to two prisons in 
the state, with more than 100 windows and skylights broken. Numerous funnel 
clouds and tornadoes were reported, with three confirmed by the National 
Weather Service, all bringing winds of up to 110mph.

The same storm system brought severe flooding to parts of Louisiana, Texas and 
Mississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/12/louisiana-mississippi-flash-floods-rain-deaths>
, with nearly 61cm (2ft) of rain falling in some spots. At least four deaths 
have been attributed to the flooding, with nearly 5,000 homes damaged in 
Louisiana alone. The Sabine River, which runs along part of the Texas-Louisiana 
border, reached a record flood level of 10.7m (35ft). This smashed the previous 
record by more than a meter.

Record global temperatures are shocking â€” and yet we don't respond seriously
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/record-global-temperatures-are-shocking-and-yet-we-dont-respond-seriously>
Meanwhile, a swelteringly hot summer in Australia has extended into early 
autumn, with abnormally high temperatures continuing into March. Although the 
extreme temperatures have largely passed, they are still well above average.
Temperatures in Sydney 
<http://theconversation.com/sydney-so-hot-right-now-whats-behind-the-citys-record-run-of-warm-weather-55756>
 have exceeded 26c for 39 consecutive days, smashing the previous record of 19 
days. Nights have provided little relief, with temperatures at 20c or above for 
25 consecutive nights. The heat has triggered severe storms, with power cuts 
affecting 5,000 homes and businesses in Sydney. There was even a tornado 
reported north of the city.
 