
Austrian director Philipp Preuss 
<https://www.schaubuehne.de/de/personen/philipp-preuss.html/ID_Taetigkeit=13>’s 
new stage adaptation of Albert Camus’ 1942 classicL’Étranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/14/camus-letranger-stranger-than-fiction-alice-kaplan>
 (The Stranger) takes place entirely inside a three-walled cage made of upright 
LED tubes: a static stage set that proves surprisingly adaptable. When the 
inscrutable protagonist Meursault attends his mother’s funeral, the light 
flickers, like a sunset filtered through trees. After his imprisonment for the 
murder of an Arab man in French Algiers, the white shards form the bars of his 
cell.

Albert Camus will always be the outsider – and I'm proud of that, says the 
writer's daughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/23/albert-camus-outsider-catherine-camus>
In the novel’s pivotal murder scene, as Meursault walks down the beach toward 
the scene of his crime, with “the cymbals of the sun clashing on my skull”, the 
stage manager whacks up the lights until the audience have to shield their eyes 
– not a bad metaphor for a text that, in spite of its widely agreed upon 
brilliance, many these days find hard to approach head on.

France’s relationship with Camus’s first novel remains complicated. Edward Said
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/26/guardianobituaries.highereducation>
 said the book was “informed by an incapacitated colonial sensibility”. 
Recently theatre-makers have found it easier to access the material in a 
roundabout way, via Algerian writer Kamel Daoud’s The Meursault Investigation, 
a feted production of which is currently at Munich’sKammerspiele 
<https://www.muenchner-kammerspiele.de/en/staging/der-fall-meursault> theatre.

Preuss’s production, at Berlin’s Schaubühne, has more hope in the enduring 
relevance of Camus’s absurdist tale. “Existentialism has become a visual cliche 
– chain-smoking gloomsters wearing black polo necks,” the director says. “But 
there’s something very contemporary about Camus’s rejection of ideology. 
Ironically in France, because of the political associations The Stranger 
attracted after the 1961 Paris massacre [the bloody crackdown by French police 
on an Algerian anti-war protest], the text that first tried to articulate a 
post-ideological age was one that struggled to do so.”

Current political debate in Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>
 may be enough to top up the 90-minute play’s pertinency, the director 
suggests. “What interests me is what otherness or strangeness means in our 
society. Do people from the Arab world have to remain strangers in order to 
turn us into who we are? In contemporary German-language theatre, the instinct 
is to bring refugees on to the stage, and while I don’t believe that instinct 
is wrong as such, I do wonder if it is a way to ensure their otherness, as ‘the 
refugees’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstranger-albert-camus-outsider-berlin-schaubuhne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e453ef5e9b3e543509dcd9052c291df112f51b1%2F0_67_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranger%20things%3A%20Albert%20Camus'%20enigmatic%20outsider%20hits%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstranger-albert-camus-outsider-berlin-schaubuhne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranger%20things%3A%20Albert%20Camus%27%20enigmatic%20outsider%20hits%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstranger-albert-camus-outsider-berlin-schaubuhne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e453ef5e9b3e543509dcd9052c291df112f51b1%2F0_67_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 ‘Existentialism has become a visual cliche’ … Philipp Preuss. Photograph: 
Schaubühne Theatre/Volker Herold 
Theatres in Hamburg, Mannheim and Hanover have, since the start of Europe’s 
refugee crisis, hosted performances that involved asylum-seekers telling their 
stories on stage. Nobel prize winner Elfriede Jelinek’s play Die 
Schutzbefohlenen (The Supplicants), which premiered at Vienna’s Burgtheater in 
March 2015, featured a Greek chorus made up of refugees who had arrived inEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> at Lampedusa.

Preuss’s interpretation tries to locate Camus’s stranger not on the margins of 
society but at the centre of the self. Meursault is played by three actors in 
grey linen suits, Bernardo Arias Porras, Iris Becher and Felix Römer, who share 
his lines – a nod to the novelist’s gnomic remark that there were really three 
Meursaults, “two men (including myself) and a woman” 
<https://books.google.de/books?id=QGUpDQAAQBAJ&pg=PA174&lpg=PA174&dq=camus+the+stranger+three+people+woman+two+men&source=bl&ots=Z_2zFgFwGx&sig=UYtTy7D2-SGAW4FHwqO_gyVoNrY&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiYzNGv8rfQAhWBmhQKHVtvDiAQ6AEILzAD#v=onepage&q=camus%20the%20stranger%20three%20people%20woman%20two%20men&f=false>
.

The three remain the only actors on the stage throughout, morphing also into 
Meursault’s dead mother, his lover, his victim, his lawyer, his judge and a dog 
snoozing in the sunshine. A smoke machine impersonates a cigarette, water in 
plastic bottles denotes the sea, red wine or the blood gushing out of a dead 
man’s bullet wounds.

The text’s original chronology is cut up and repackaged. “Mother died today. 
Maybe yesterday; I can’t be sure,” one of the mostenigmatic opening lines 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/lost-in-translation-what-the-first-line-of-the-stranger-should-be>
 in 20th-century fiction, is now slipped in a quarter of the way through. The 
play opens instead with Meursault explaining his lawyer’s defence strategy, 
which each actor then gets a go at ripping to pieces in a soliloquy, stating 
simply that the victim was not shot in self-defence, but with five intentional 
bullets: “Short raps on the door of misfortune.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstranger-albert-camus-outsider-berlin-schaubuhne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc63e08fcff45aa3668ec6d06dbe45fe9d8ef6238%2F0_149_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranger%20things%3A%20Albert%20Camus'%20enigmatic%20outsider%20hits%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstranger-albert-camus-outsider-berlin-schaubuhne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranger%20things%3A%20Albert%20Camus%27%20enigmatic%20outsider%20hits%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fstranger-albert-camus-outsider-berlin-schaubuhne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc63e08fcff45aa3668ec6d06dbe45fe9d8ef6238%2F0_149_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
 Three Meursaults … l to r, Felix Römer, Bernardo Arias Porras and Iris Becher 
in The Stranger. Photograph: Thomas Aurin 
In Camus’s novel, what bewilders and eventually scandalises the courtroom is 
Meursault’s calmness in reaction to his mother’s death and his own pending 
fate. In Preuss’s production, that eerie torpor gives way to a nervous 
skittishness, which feels like it has less to do with design than with the 
default mode of contemporary German theatre.

Trapped in their static LED cage, Preuss’s three Meursaults have to work hard 
to landscape the text with their voices, with Meursault announcing his decision 
to “open his heart to the benign indifference of the universe” by screaming at 
the visiting priest at the top of his lungs. It may be fitting that in our 
post-factual age, Camus’s post-ideological alienation announces itself with 
rage rather than quiet dispassion. But as the stranger’s detachment becomes the 
standard mode, it also loses its enigma.

 * The Stranger (Der Fremde) is in rep at the Schaubühne, Berlin 
<https://www.schaubuehne.de/de/produktionen/der-fremde.html/m=319>, until 8 
January.
 