
Visitors to a new William Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/william-blake> show opening in Oxford will 
learn much about a “strange and marvellous creature”, not least that the 
possibly 5ft 4in artist must have had considerable strength to have operated 
the heavy oak wooden press which took up so much of his small London studio.

“It’s a hefty great thing,” said the writer and Blake fan Philip Pullman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman> admiringly. “It must have 
been a real struggle to use.”

Pullman, president of the Blake Society, was speaking at the opening of a new 
exhibition at the Ashmolean museum 
<http://www.ashmolean.org/exhibitions/williamblake/> in Oxford which 
reconstructs the studio Blake had at No 13 Hercules Buildings in Hercules Road, 
Lambeth.

“It is absolutely fascinating to see,” said Pullman. “You get a real sense of 
how big the room was – or how small it was.”

The three-storey house was demolished to barely a whimper in 1918 and the 
ground floor studio has been reconstructed thanks to the chance discovery of 
floor plans by the show’s curator, Michael Phillips.

Phillips said he made inquiries at the Guildhall library and, remarkably, a 
librarian discovered a surveyor’s original plans for Hercules Buildings. It 
showed that there were two ground floor rooms, one 10ft by 9ft which would have 
been Blake’s painting room and one 14ft by 11ft where he would have done his 
printing.

The press would have needed a lot of physical strength but Phillips said there 
was evidence that Blake had it. He said Blake once looked out of his Lambeth 
window and saw that a local circus manager had chained a boy to a log. Blake is 
said to have stormed out and lifted the boy until he was freed from his chains.

On another occasion at his cottage in West Sussex, Blake had a set-to with a 
soldier who had been stationed nearby because of fears of a French invasion. 
Phillips said: “There was a confrontation and Blake took the man from behind 
under the armpits, lifted him and walked him all the way up the road to where 
he was billeted, and plonked him down. And then he was tried for sedition.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fstrange-marvellous-william-blake-studio-recreated-ashmolean-oxford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417627881937%2F9c71e8fd-b358-47a1-8f45-c86523edc538-1325x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strange%20and%20marvellous%3A%20William%20Blake%E2%80%99s%20studio%20recreated%20in%20Oxford%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fstrange-marvellous-william-blake-studio-recreated-ashmolean-oxford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strange%20and%20marvellous%3A%20William%20Blake%E2%80%99s%20studio%20recreated%20in%20Oxford%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fstrange-marvellous-william-blake-studio-recreated-ashmolean-oxford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417627881937%2F9c71e8fd-b358-47a1-8f45-c86523edc538-1325x2040.jpeg>
 A sketch of Hercules Buildings. Photograph: Doug Simpson 
The exhibition traces Blake’s apprenticeship as an engraver, his maturity in 
the 1790s when he was at the height of his powers as an artist and poet, and 
his final years when he inspired and guided a younger generation of artists 
such as Samuel Palmer, George Richmond and Edward Calvert.

More than 90 works are featured, with some very Blakean subjects and titles: 
The Approach of Doom, The House of Death and Head of a Damned Soul, to name a 
few.

Reconstructing the studio brings Blake closer to us, the Ashmolean’s senior 
curator of European art, Colin Harrison, said. He said the point of the show 
was not to demystify Blake. “He will always be a strange and marvellous 
creature.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fstrange-marvellous-william-blake-studio-recreated-ashmolean-oxford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417626593025%2Fe3df870a-de96-44e0-8d5e-01981f550951-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strange%20and%20marvellous%3A%20William%20Blake%E2%80%99s%20studio%20recreated%20in%20Oxford%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fstrange-marvellous-william-blake-studio-recreated-ashmolean-oxford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strange%20and%20marvellous%3A%20William%20Blake%E2%80%99s%20studio%20recreated%20in%20Oxford%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fstrange-marvellous-william-blake-studio-recreated-ashmolean-oxford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417626593025%2Fe3df870a-de96-44e0-8d5e-01981f550951-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Detail from Los howl’d. Photograph: British Museum 
Harrison said: “The whole emphasis is on how Blake made his imagery, and we do 
learn a great deal on the technical side and we see just how original he was.”

Blake remains a fascinating figure who inspires fierce loyalty. “He was a man 
of utter, complete artistic and moral integrity,” said Pullman. “It’s an 
inspiration to see someone who worked so long and so hard and with such a firm 
purpose, for so little reward.”

Pullman, who is currently writing a follow up to His Dark Materials, said he 
first came across Blake via Allan Ginsberg – another Blakean. “I was 
overwhelmed when I first read him.”

The exhibition in Oxford comes as the Blake Society continues to raise money 
in itsattempt to buy Blake’s former cottage <http://thebigblakeproject.org.uk/> 
at Felpham, West Sussex – the place where he wrote his most famous poem, 
Jerusalem – and convert it into a public centre to celebrate Blake and continue 
his legacy.

The project is unlikely to raise the entire amount, unless a Blakean 
millionaire comes forward at the last minute, but Pullman said the hope was 
that the society gets a mortgage on the property.

• William Blake: Apprentice & Master 
<http://www.ashmolean.org/exhibitions/williamblake/> is at the Ashmolean, 4 
December-1 March
 