
The first time you ring your boss and say you cannot come to work because you 
are trapped on a (sub)tropical island, it is amusing.

The second time, it is kind of OK, ha ha, the jokes about Gilligan are a 
little less exuberant.

The third time it feels like a career death by weather.

Arriving on Lord Howe Island, a 10km-long volcanic remnant about 600km off the 
coast of New South Wales, my mission was to write about spending 48 hours 
there. Instead I spent 168.

It’s a stunning place, like something from a picture book, with waters 
actually the colour of turquoise – not the clear blue some writers lazily refer 
to as turquoise – and rolling green hills.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2af1db170546f0f0d52e7ed6e3bd419eacdc3e8d%2F0_28_3166_1899%2F3166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2af1db170546f0f0d52e7ed6e3bd419eacdc3e8d%2F0_28_3166_1899%2F3166.jpg>
 Bridie Jabour at Kim’s Lookout on day two of her 168 hours on Lord Howe. 
Photograph: MQ for the Guardian 
Other than its beauty, there are two things that strike you about the island 
when you arrive – there is nil phone reception and only patchy Wi-Fi. I was not 
mentally prepared for how cut off the island is communications-wise, but for my 
gen X travelling companion, MQ as I shall call him, this was an integral part 
of the paradise. I found myself occasionally flipping desperately through Kim 
Kardashian’s book, Selfish, as if it was an analogue Instagram.

The second thing you notice is the friendliness of the locals. The island has 
a population of about 350 and, though I assume it would have the normal small 
town feuds and petty grievances, everyone seems genuinely happy, cheerfully 
saying hello to every person that passes.

It is like some sort of Guardian utopia: there are a limited number of cars 
and the speed limit is 25kmh so pedestrians and cyclists – the primary road 
users(!) – are safe.

“I like your hair,” a woman yells out on the makeshift main street on my first 
afternoon on the island.

“I like your pants,” another woman says the next day.

“Nice jumper!” I hear several times on the third day.

I pay $4 for the local paper, the Lord Howe Island Signal – 38 pages of 
printed A4 paper bound together, with the front page pointing to the eulogy of 
a 90-year-old man written by a man with the same name.

Originally from a country town myself, this small community is the Shane Warne 
on Tinder of friendliness.

Day one


We check into our bungalow at Earl’s Anchorage <http://www.earlsanchorage.com/>
, near the main street, Anderson Road. There you’ll find the Anchorage 
restaurant, a post office, a general store and a food co-op looking out across 
the lagoon to the two biggest mountains on Lord Howe – Gowing and Lidgbird.

Our bungalow ($430 a night in the low season, $950 in high) is roomy with a 
self-catering kitchen, separate bedroom, shower and living/dining area with 
plenty of windows to enjoy your subtropical surroundings – mainly palm trees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1143bbf1e98a058e5c5d1ecdee367432e5c8a30c%2F0_18_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1143bbf1e98a058e5c5d1ecdee367432e5c8a30c%2F0_18_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 The espresso creamacotta at Arajilla Lodge. Photograph: Bridie Jabour for the 
Guardian 
We dine at Arajilla Retreat <http://www.arajilla.com.au/>, driven there by 
Anchorage staff. Staff at various restaurants and resorts will ferry you to 
your destinations at night and, if you get stuck, you can always hitchhike 
(official island advice).

At Arajilla I have, no word of a lie, the best kingfish I have eaten in my 
life. We find out it was caught that morning. Entrees are sweet potato and 
coconut soup and for dessert there’s a triple chocolate torte with salted 
caramel burnt fig, vincotto spheres and espresso creamacotta. The creamacotta 
comes in a hollowed-out eggshell!

Day two


We ride our bikes to Old Settlement beach, which we are told in summer is full 
of turtles. We are not here in summer though, we are here in the first days of 
winter, so the beach is empty but still hypnotisingly blue.

We trek to Ned’s beach where fish swim so close to the shore to be fed you 
wonder how they do not beach themselves. There is an honesty system for 
snorkels, wetsuits and paddleboards, meaning you put $10 in a box and help 
yourself. There are about 50 fish close to shore. I’m surprised to discover 
that I’m scared of big groups of medium-sized fish. I squeal my way through the 
throng, scared that they, I don’t know, are going to nibble me? Or I will 
squash and kill them?


I manage to paddle out a few metres, myself and the fish unharmed. The waters 
are calm and if you make it past the rocks – which are not dangerous – you will 
find yourself hovering over red and green coral with fish to match.

Before the hike we picked up ham and salad rolls from the Anchorage 
restaurant. We sit on the beach taking in the views, thinking how nice life is. 
It is the point of the long weekend where empty promises to yourself start 
being made; I’ll stop eating dessert and drinking red wine when I get back to 
the mainland; I’ll exercise five times a week; I’ll write 1,000 words a week 
that are not work-related.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeea7b583b5fc683e3baf42ff2ae63d596534d3a%2F0_0_3213_1895%2F3213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeea7b583b5fc683e3baf42ff2ae63d596534d3a%2F0_0_3213_1895%2F3213.jpg>
 Ned’s Beach, where hordes of fish can be fed from the shore. Photograph: 
Bridie Jabour for the Guardian 
Dinner that night is at Capella Lodge <http://lordhowe.com/>, the island’s 
luxury resort. Its swankiest room has a plunge pool, an outdoor bath, views 
across the lagoon and to the mountains from the bed and the option for on-deck 
dining and costs $1,300 a night for each person.

The costs of all the rooms at Capella include breakfast, lunch, dinner and 
drinks and the menu changes daily according to the ingredients the chef has at 
hand.

Before dinner we sit in on a presentation by the naturalist Ian Hutton, which 
leads to MQ and I rechristening Lord Howe as Wuss Island. We learn that there 
are no natural predators here. This means many birds do not fly as they can get 
all their food from the ground. Even some plants on the island that have thorns 
on the mainland do not have thorns on Wuss Island because there is nothing here 
to attack them.


The island is home to providence petrels, which will come straight to your 
feet and basically pose for a selfie because they have no cause to be afraid. 
This also explains the many fish at Ned’s accustomed to humans. There are no 
snakes on the island and, while there are more than 100 spiders, none are 
lethal. From this moment on MQ and I point to the walking birds and the 
impotent spiders we spot on our hikes and yell “WUSS ISLAND!” as we pass.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5409ec53372f4396c953f3edd84d540ba5e12c86%2F0_0_3178_1945%2F3178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5409ec53372f4396c953f3edd84d540ba5e12c86%2F0_0_3178_1945%2F3178.jpg>
 The view from Kim’s Lookout. Photograph: Bridie Jabour for the Guardian 
It’s not a proper paradise, though. The island does have one blight, in the 
form of 70,000 rats. On a 10km-long island. There could be as many as 120,0000. 
The island has rid itself of goats and cats and other introduced species to 
watch plants flower and native animals thrive but the proposal to exterminate 
rats has been contentious. I am baffled that people could be opposed to getting 
rid of SEVENTY THOUSAND RATS.

Hutton shakes his head warily. “It’s a social argument, not a scientific one,” 
he says. The locals opposed have a distrust of authority, especially when it is 
people (ie government officials) coming from the mainland to tell them what 
should be done.

After the Wuss Island revelations we dine on medium rare steak (perfect) and 
kingfish with pigfish as the entree. It is raw and the best entree I eat on the 
island.

Day three 

There are dark clouds on the horizon, both in reality and metaphorically – but 
mostly in reality. We ride our bikes down toEnvironmental Tours 
<http://www.lordhoweislandtours.com/>, where a glass-bottomed boat cruises out 
on the lagoon to tour different reefs.

I drift over coral in electric blue, green, pink and red. Two Galápagos sharks 
cruise beneath me and fish of every colour and size come within swiping 
distance. One has what looks like horns on its head which make its expression 
seem a bit sad.


The winds are rising and the dark clouds are nearing but we’re told the boat 
will make it out and back before it gets too bad. This should have been the 
first clue to my extended stay but I am blissfully oblivious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8f3951c9543054f99d46955b676cd817aeea5aa%2F0_0_3078_1848%2F3078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8f3951c9543054f99d46955b676cd817aeea5aa%2F0_0_3078_1848%2F3078.jpg>
 The lagoon where boats take visitors out to snorkel. Photograph: Bridie Jabour 
for the Guardian 
Day four


It’s been a lovely long weekend, MQ and I agree. But we are ready to go home. 
Our own bed, and work, and phone reception awaits.

I spend the morning at the museum <http://www.lhimuseum.com/>, which is only 
about three rooms but, as it was built off the back of donations and the 
passion of the Clean Up Australia founder, Ian Kiernan, it is worth spending at 
least an hour there.

Now it is definitely time to go home. Except it isn’t. We receive a phone call 
telling us our plane, the one flight out a day, has been cancelled because of 
the wind. It happens occasionally on the island, which is why visitors are 
advised to buy travel insurance – despite it being a domestic trip from 
Australia. I cannot emphasise enough that you should get travel insurance.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20b4bfeaadb5b4d008fdd9bdc83f63c950c6a64e%2F0_46_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20b4bfeaadb5b4d008fdd9bdc83f63c950c6a64e%2F0_46_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Bridie Jabour and MQ try to climb Intermediate Hill. Photograph: Bridie Jabour 
for the Guardian 
MQ and I shrug it off. It’s windy but the rain has stopped so we decide to 
brave Intermediate Hill, where a new lookout has been built with 360-degree 
views of the island. We walk the few kilometres to the hill and begin our 
ascent. The start of the track forks into two paths but I do not notice and 
steam ahead. We walk along some fairly steep tracks, looking down over cliffs 
to the clear ocean below. We were told it would take about an hour to get to 
the lookout and back and, after 45 minutes of trekking I begin to get slightly 
concerned. Then I hear the squarking. It’s like a magpie, but slightly more 
hysterical. Or angrier. MQ and I laugh it off and continue on.

The squarking becomes louder, almost as though it is coming straight for us. 
We turn around and see a brown long-beaked squarking bird coming straight for 
us. I scream and hit the ground while MQ searches for something to ward it off. 
The bird turns around and comes straight for us again. “WE’RE MEANT TO BE ON 
WUSS ISLAND,” I yell, stumbling and covering my head and waving my arms at the 
same time to ward it off. The damn thing turns on us again. “PROTECT ME!!!,” I 
scream, diving to the ground and pulling MQ over me for cover, in what is 
surely in the top three of my most dignified moments. By this time I am off the 
track and perilously close to slipping over a cliff, which sounds dramatic but 
there is lots of scrub below to break my fall and bones before I would end up 
in the water. MQ gallantly pushes me ahead on the track while I keep screaming 
and we escape from the violent brown bird.

At the end of the walk I see a sign I missed. The track is closed because of 
“danger”.

Once we’re off the mountain we’re both too exhausted to walk back and for the 
first, and perhaps last, time in my life I hitchhike. A man picks us up in his 
ute. He’s on his way to milk the cows and tells us he is sixth generation on 
the island.

I ask him about the rats. “It’s a load of bull,” he says. “They say they’re 
killing the wildlife but there is more birds and wildlife on this island than 
there ever was when I was a kid. They want to poison them but what else is the 
poison going to do?”

Day five

This day is notable for being the first time I connect to internet properly on 
my phone and am able to receive iMessages. It’s been 96 hours! I brace myself 
for the flood, estimating 56 will come through. Seven arrive. Four are from my 
father.

I ring my editor again to tell her I am still stranded. I am missing the 
internet and conversations with people who aren’t MQ so much that I keep her on 
the phone as long as possible. Like most people, she shows little sympathy for 
my plight, laughing about how horrible it must be for me to be trapped on the 
island. Despite her understanding and extremely reasonable nature I still have 
low-level anxiety about the whole thing. I hate not having control over where 
and when I’m going.

Day six

Another day, another 9.20am phone call to say we will not be flying today. MQ 
and I ride our bikes furiously to Old Settlement beach to trek to Mount Eliza. 
Along the way we invent creative ways to kill each other while trapped and make 
a pact that if one of us gets a flight out they are allowed to go without the 
other with no reproach and the other one will make friends with a volleyball.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10cbe17803d7361826cad7b4d442de9a74ded41%2F0_0_3108_1881%2F3108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10cbe17803d7361826cad7b4d442de9a74ded41%2F0_0_3108_1881%2F3108.jpg>
 Old Settlement beach. Photograph: Bridie Jabour for the Guardian 
The path up the mountain gets steep, and narrow, with fewer steps and sharp 
ascents up gravel. I scramble through a bush and reach to a rock then turn 
around. I am awed. We look out over another mountain, we look out over ocean, 
we look down to what I would like to say is a secret beach but I’m sure all the 
locals know about it – reachable only by climbing up and down a mountain then 
bush bashing for a bit.

The summit is only a few metres ahead but this view is so good I sit down and 
appreciate it. MQ sits with me and I think about asking for my sandwich. Then I 
scream and almost fall off the mountain. A rat! A rat has come sniffing to 
check me out. It scurries away as quickly as I scream and descend.

It’s after that notice something missing in the rainforest-like landscape: 
undergrowth. In a rainforest the seeds fall off the trees and new plants grow 
and, as long as humans aren’t trampling all over it, there is a green, leafy 
undergrowth around the taller trees. Here the rats are eating all the seeds, 
which means the forest is a series of tall ferns on barren ground. It’s a sad 
sight once you realise what you’re looking at.

Dinner that night is at Pandanus, <http://pandanuslordhowe.com/> the best 
value for money I find on the island. I have also heard good things about the 
bowls club but it was booked out by the time we called at 6pm to inquire about 
dinner.

At Pandanus, beer is $6 and that night the kitchen is serving up Asian fusion 
cuisine. King prawns, grilled yakitori chicken and more kingfish, with 
chocolate mudcake for dessert. The servings are generous and everything is 
loaded with flavour without seeming as though the chef is trying to show off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe520e44435b611fc4d4c57f4c1b97032698a0c36%2F0_0_1883_2603%2F1883.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stranded%20on%20a%20subtropical%20island%3A%20my%20168%20hours%20on%20Lord%20Howe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fstranded-on-a-subtropical-island-my-168-hours-on-lord-howe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe520e44435b611fc4d4c57f4c1b97032698a0c36%2F0_0_1883_2603%2F1883.jpg>
 Pan-seared local kingfish with slow-roasted roma tomatoes, baby beetroots and 
semi-dried tomato and macadamia pesto garden herbs, caper and dill butter at 
Arajilla Lodge. Photograph: Bridie Jabour for the Guardian 
The island’s restaurants all serve fish that is caught off the island, mostly 
on that day. My advice: order the kingfish wherever you go, wherever you are. 
It is so good it will be ruined for you once back on the mainland (which dear 
reader, I did eventually get back to).

Day seven

The skies have cleared, the wind is gone, and it’s actually a gorgeous day to 
spend on the island. But we have a flight back to Sydney, maybe partly due to 
the once-every-four-years prayer I said out loud the night before.

And now my hard-won tips for holidaying on Lord Howe:

I feel practically a local, and thus able to pass along what I learned:

 * Breakfast at the Anchorage restaurant is delicious but alternatively you 
can buy bread made fresh on the premises and eat each morning in your room. The 
co-op just across the road sells homemade peanut butter in small portions so 
you don’t have to buy an entire jar for three days of toast. The co-op also 
sells small cups of oil for 85 cents if you choose to cook at your 
accommodation.

 * The general store in the “main” street has most of the things you need but 
be careful not to spend $70 on two cheeses, a bottle of red and a six-pack of 
beer as I did on a particularly taxing day when I didn’t take note of the 
prices. Expect to pay a little more for a few things; you are on an island, 
after all. Joy’s Shop a couple of streets over has more variety than the 
general store and will have almost anything you need. The pricing isn’t 
oppressive, we paid $14 for enough steak for the both of us for one night when 
we cooked at the bungalow.

 * I didn’t go to the bottle shop, but there is one.

 * You can withdraw money on the island at various places and most places take 
cards, but I still advise taking some cash – at least $120. 
 * Make sure you give your mum and dad (or other loved ones) the address of 
where you are staying and phone number because, while you will get Wi-Fi at 
different spots on the island, you will get zero phone reception. 
 * The island is child-friendly, with everything from bikes to hikes catering 
for the kids. The beaches are hemmed in by lagoons so you don’t have to worry 
about rips, or sharks – unless you are like me and think it is wise to always 
be a bit worried about sharks. The island is actually all-ages friendly, I was 
one of the youngest visitors to the island (at 27 and one week old) and saw 
people of decades on the hikes and dining out.

 * Getting trapped on the island is not an everyday event and if, unlike me, 
you check the general weather patterns around the time of your planned visit 
you should be able to avoid it. It is a pretty stellar reason not to be able to 
show at work though.  