
New Strictly Come Dancing judge Alesha Dixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/sep/22/alesha-dixon-strictly-come-dancing>
 is to front a "personal" documentary examining the emotional and practical 
implications of children who don't know their fathers.

Dixon, who has recently hit the headlines after being criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/sep/21/alesha-dixon-strictly-come-dancing>
 for her performances on Strictly as the replacement for Arlene Phillips, will 
turn documentary maker for theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>3 
film, which will be made by production company Flame TV.

The programme, to be called Who's the Daddy?, will feature Dixon – whose 
parents split up when she was four years old – talking to children and experts 
and exploring the repercussions of growing up without a father.

"The idea came purely from Alesha," said producer and director Christina 
Nutter. "It is something that she feels strongly about. Her dad left her mum 
when she was four years old and she has grown up in a single-parent family, 
although she still sees her father. She feels strongly for children who don't 
know who their dads are."

The series will also examine the serious implications for children who don't 
know their fathers, including the potential to form sexual relationships with 
half-brothers and -sisters they don't know about and the consequences of not 
knowing their own medical background. Dixon will also be seen helping one young 
person in their hunt to track down their biological father.

Barbara Altounyan, director of programmes for Flame TV, said: "This is a 
personal journey for Alesha, who is determined to get the nation thinking about 
the subject of absent fathers in the UK and to view the issue from the child's 
perspective."

Fiona Campbell, executive producer for BBC3, added: "This documentary is an 
excellent example of what current affairs delivers to BBC3 – hard-hitting 
subject-matter presented in an engaging and entertaining way. Alesha plays an 
extremely strong role, especially when she is speaking to young people about 
the impact on their lives of not knowing their fathers."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk, email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020-3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020-3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 