
With seven years of practice, the BBC has its Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> routine off 
pat: a few steps from a soap actor, a twirl or two from a pop star, some fancy 
footwork from a sportsman and a dramatic entrance from the political clown.

And this year's Strictly lineup, revealed on Tuesday, does not put a foot 
wrong.Edwina Currie <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edwina-currie> takes the 
former Tory battleaxe role, filled last year by Ann Widdecombe.

Fellow contestants for the BBC1 show, which starts on Saturday, include Jason 
Donovan <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jason-donovan>, Lulu and Rory 
Bremner.

Also appearing will be sportsmen Robbie Savage and Audley Harrison, plus 
lawyer and sequin-loverNancy Dell'Olio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/nancy-dell-olio>, who came to public 
attention as the former partner of Sven-Göran Eriksson.

Russell Grant will line up too, becoming Strictly's first ever dancing 
astrologer. Viewers should presumably prepare themselves for an onslaught of 
jokes about predictable results.

Currie is no stranger to reality TV – she appeared on Channel 4's Celebrity 
Wife Swap, where she furiously waited hand and foot on an underpants-clad John 
McCririck.

Donovan, a singer and former Neighbours actor, finished third in I'm a 
Celebrity Get Me Out of Here in 2006. A second ex-Neighbours star, Holly 
Valance, will also take the floor.

Anita Dobson, who memorably played Angie in EastEnders, will be hoping to 
emulate Pamela Stephenson Connolly, who last year broke the rule that Strictly 
audienceswould never back an older woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/dec/21/pamela-stephenson-connolly-oldie-power>
 and finished third.

Viewers do tend to give sports stars an easier ride, regardless of their 
competence when it comes to performing – Joe Calzaghe lasted until week five in 
2009 despite dancing that judge Len Goodman said "only a mother could love". 
Footballer Savage and boxer Harrison can also look to cricketer Darren Gough, 
the 2005 winner, for inspiration.

TV presenters Daniel Lobb and Alex Jones, from Daybreak and The One Show, are 
also competing. The dancing competition has traditionally proved kind to 
familiar faces from news and magazine programmes – Natasha Kaplinsky (2004) and 
Chris Hollins (2009) both won the title while working forBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Breakfast.

The youngest contestants will be Chelsee Healey, 23, who plays Janeece Bryant 
in BBC1 series Waterloo Road, and Harry Judd, 25, the drummer with the band 
McFly.

Bruce Forsyth and Tess Daly return as hosts while judge Alesha Dixon is back 
for a third series with Len Goodman, Craig Revel Horwood and Bruno Tonioli.

Strictly fills the Saturday night pre-Doctor Who slot, avoiding a clash with 
The X Factor on ITV1 which, despite new judges, has had a strong start in the 
ratings.
 