
Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> looks set to 
go down The X Factor route by "sexing up" its judging panel by replacing Arlene 
Phillips with Alesha Dixon.

According to today's Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/strictly_come_dancing/2487299/Arlene-Phillips-sacked-from-Strictly-Come-Dancing.html>
, the BBC1 dance show wants to appeal to more younger viewers and feels its 
judging panel is too old. By bringing in Dixon, who won the show in 2007, it 
would hope to emulate last year's hugely successful move by The X Factor when 
it drafted in Girls Aloud singer Cheryl Cole.

It is understood that no deal has yet been done, although the idea is being 
seriously considered. ABBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> spokesman 
said: "We can't confirm anything about the new series of Strictly yet but we 
are always looking at ways to maximise viewers' enjoyment of our shows."

Dixon herself was asked about the story when she appeared on Sky News today to 
promote tennis – no, I'm not sure why either – but she batted it away by 
saying: "There is always speculation."

But Dixon added: "Once you are a part of Strictly Come Dancing, you are part 
of the family and I do feel like that. It was a great platform for me."

When told by Sky News presenter Eamonn Holmes that she would bring the "Cheryl 
factor" to the show, she replied: "If you say so."

There has been speculation about the Strictly judging lineup for some time, 
with rumours last year that one of the judges could be axed for cost-cutting 
reasons.

If Phillips was replaced by Dixon, it would almost certainly be cheaper for 
the BBC, which is under pressure to rein in costs across the board, 
particularly what it pays talent.

The last series of The X Factor also began to pull away from Strictly in the 
ratings, following the addition of Cole, although the BBC1 show's figures were 
still up on 2007.

While The X Factor has traditionally had more younger viewers, Strictly has 
tended to pull in an older audience. The Strictly judging panel is made up of 
65-year-old Len Goodman, 53-year-old Bruno Tonioli and Craig Revel Horwood, 44. 
Phillips herself is 66 while the show's host, Bruce Forsyth is 81. Dixon, by 
comparison, is 30.

Meanwhile, The X Factor isn't standing still either. It is due to move its 
results show to a Sunday – as Strictly already has – in a bid to capitalise on 
the singing talent show's popularity.

However, the judging lineup looks like staying the same, with Dannii Minogue 
remaining as a judge,as first predicted by MediaGuardian.co.uk back in March 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/5548464/The-Complete-MPs-Expenses-Files-is-free-inside-the-Telegraph-this-Saturday.html>
.
 