
New Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> judge Alesha 
Dixon has hit back at her critics, saying it is "nonsense" she is not qualified 
to sit on the reality show's panel, while she also revealed she had not spoken 
to Arlene Phillips since replacing her.

The BBC axed 66-year-old Phillips in favour of Dixon, 30, earlier this year, 
sparking accusations of ageism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
. Following the first two launch editions of Strictly Come Dancing at the 
weekend,users of the show's internet message boards also criticised Dixon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/sep/21/alesha-dixon-strictly-come-dancing>
- who won the show in 2007 - as not being qualified to sit on the panel due to 
her inexperience.

But in an interview with the new Radio Times, published today, Dixon said: 
"It's nonsense to say that I'm not qualified to judge the dancers. I spent six 
years singing with [girl band] Mis-Teeq, and another four as a solo artist 
where I had to pick my own dancers and audition them.

"So I'm not new to this. Also, having competed on the show, I'll be the only 
judge who understands what the celebrity dancers are going through. As a 
contestant, you're on a physical and emotional journey. Unless you've walked in 
those shoes, you'll never know how demanding it is."

She added that whatever criticism she received, she would not step down from 
the show. "Whatever unkind things have been said about me, I'm now at a place 
in my life where I'm comfortable in my own skin," she said. "I just go out to 
be myself. Since all the controversy kicked off, I'd been wanting to get the 
show up and running and sink my teeth into it. So, let's get it on."

Dixon also revealed that the charges of ageism against the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> surprised her and that she had not 
spoken to Phillips since she replaced her.

"It was all a shock to me, especially how quickly everyone jumped on the 
ageism argument," she said. "Maybe people wanted to start a catfight. But I 
didn't see it as an argument between Arlene and me. We were just caught in the 
middle.

"I haven't even spoken to her about it. Why would I? Was I wounded by some of 
the comments? Sure. Some of them were very stereotypical and judgmental. When I 
read that I only won in 2007 because I was half-naked, I did take that 
seriously. That's not someone offering a considered opinion, that's someone 
being a bitch."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 