
The grip of the tractor on the human mind is peculiar but real. I can never 
shop at Morrisons in Idle without thinking of 'Tractors' – the enormous
International Harvester 
<http://www.myyorkshire.org/playback-video.asp?journeyid=119&resourceid=245>
plant which took over fromJowett Cars  <http://jowett.org/>and was humming away 
when I was on theTelegraph & Argus <http://www.thetelegraphandargus.co.uk>.

Pateley Bridge <http://www.pateley-bridge.com/>'s toyshop is always an 
enjoyable sight as well.Guardian readers concerned about children playing 
endlessly with 'war toys' will be revived by its contents. The healthy children 
of upperNidderdale <http://www.nidderdale.co.uk/> clearly prefer model farm 
machines, combine harvesters, seed drillers and of course tractors by the yard.

And now we have National Tractor Weekend 
<http://www.newbyhallandgardens.com/?p=1018>, which prompts this post, 
following an email from Newby Hall which cautiously describes the coming event 
as 'a weekend with a difference'. If you have tractor fans in your family or 
salon of buddies, real-life versions of David and Bert inThe Archers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/mbarchers/html/NF2693940?thread=7763841>, this is the 
outing for them. It's on 9 and 10 June, rthe first of which is the UK's second
National Tractor Day. 
<http://ontelly.co.uk/programme/the-chris-evans-breakfast-show/monday-national-tractor-day-1/>

Newby is always excellent value anyway – lovely place, ace tearoom and a great 
history including an ancestor of the resident Compton family who was 
unfortunatelymurdered by brigands in Greece 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/Ourchurches/Completelistofchurches/Church-of-Christ-the-Consoler-SkeltoncumNewby-North-Yorkshire/>
. For the past five years, theYorkshire Vintage Association 
<http://theyva.com/index.html> has held its annual rally there, and now that 
exhibits have topped 1000, this has become the National Tractor Weekend.

Even those immune to internal combustion and traction engines should be 
intrigued by some of the ingenious machinery on show. For example, there's the 
1920sHart-Parr 'Bootstrap' 
<http://www.smokstak.com/forum/showthread.php?t=19133>, a rig operated by a 
tractor which lifts itself into the air using its own power. There will also be 
three rareFowler Gyrotillers 
<http://www.machinery.uk.com/interestingpics/gyrotiller.htm>, huge 
caterpillar-tracked machines which carried out deep cultivation on difficult 
land.
 A 1910 Hart-Parr, from the company which coined the word 'tractor', from 
'traction' and 'power'. 
One of them is the biggest ever made, and it will galumph around alongside 
hundreds of other veteran machines, while sideshows offer rides, tractor races 
and demonstrations of mechanical tree trunk-sawing, threshing, baling, milling 
and manufacture of reed mats. The weekend is highlighting five makes which 
eventually came together in the AmericanWhite Motor Corp 
<http://ech.cwru.edu/ech-cgi/article.pl?id=WMC2>. One of them is Hart-Parr 
which claims responsiblity – remember this for trivial pursuits and pub quizzes 
– foradding the word 'tractor' 
<http://inventors.about.com/od/tstartinventions/a/tractors.htm> to the English 
language.

Final proof of tractor power. One of my London colleagues who kindly loaded 
the pictures accompanying this post on to the bigGuardian's system, told me:

My brother owns several of these vintage tractors, so these events are very 
familiar to me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2OKteNoZu1E%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2OKteNoZu1E%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2OKteNoZu1E%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Please make your own tractor-related confessions below. Meanwhile, here's a 
cheery little clip from YouTube of a Bootstrap doing its special thing.
 