
A new form of therapy has for the first time been shown to improve the 
symptoms and behaviour of autistic children, offering a potential breakthrough 
in care for millions of families.

Six years after parents were trained to better understand and interact with 
their preschool children, researchers found that the therapy had moderated the 
behaviour of those who had been severely autistic, unresponsive or unable to 
speak.

I’ve gone from refrigerator mother to super parent | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/28/ive-gone-from-refrigerator-mother-to-super-parent>
A child who might have run around a supermarket squealing, heedless of their 
parent, putting objects in their mouth and pushing past shoppers to try to 
press the buttons at checkout, might instead wait in the queue and even help 
load the trolley, the research found.

The success of the preschool autism communication trial (Pact) has surprised 
even the researchers who designed it. There are no drugs to treat the 
condition, which typically sets in around the age of two, and many families 
have tried intensive training of their children by therapists, with mixed 
results. Pact instead trained the parents to help their children.

Prof Jonathan Green at the University of Manchester, who led the study 
published in the Lancet medical journal 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)31229-6/fulltext>
, said they had not found the cure for autism, but he and his team believed it 
had great potential and hoped it would be widely adopted.

Schoolgirls with autism share experiences in young adult novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/21/m-in-the-middle-girls-autism-publish-novel-limpsfield-grange>
“The advantage of this approach over a direct therapist-child intervention is 
that it has potential to affect the everyday life of the child,” he said. “Our 
findings are encouraging, as they represent an improvement in the core symptoms 
ofautism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> previously thought very 
resistant to change.

“This is not a cure, in the sense that the children who demonstrated 
improvements will still show remaining symptoms to a variable extent, but it 
does suggest that working with parents to interact with their children in this 
way can lead to improvements in symptoms over the long term.”

The trial involved 152 children aged two to four. The families visited a 
clinic twice a week for six months, where parents were videoed with their 
children and a box of toys. Autistic children might not interact with their 
parents at all, but when eventually a child did offer a toy or made a noise 
that could be interpreted as a request, the incident was rerun on video and the 
parent encouraged to respond. If the child offered a toy, the parent 
reciprocated. If the child said a word, the parent repeated it and added 
something. The practice was repeated at home every day.

The therapy continued with the parents for the next six months with less 
intensity. At the end of the first year, the researchers could see the children 
had improved, but the most dramatic development was seen at the follow-up six 
years later. At the start of the trial, 50% of those in the control group who 
did not get the therapy and 55% of those who did were assessed as severely 
autistic. The children in the intervention group, though, got better. The 
proportion assessed as severe in the control group was 63% by the end of six 
years, compared with 46% in the intervention group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fautisc-children-therapy-method-potential-breakthrough-care-preschool-autism-communication-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc56c9a2b39167ee27661de0fb4bbe39f3e4cb71d%2F0_1496_4044_2427%2F4044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Study%20offers%20potential%20breakthrough%20in%20care%20of%20children%20with%20autism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fautisc-children-therapy-method-potential-breakthrough-care-preschool-autism-communication-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Study%20offers%20potential%20breakthrough%20in%20care%20of%20children%20with%20autism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fautisc-children-therapy-method-potential-breakthrough-care-preschool-autism-communication-trial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc56c9a2b39167ee27661de0fb4bbe39f3e4cb71d%2F0_1496_4044_2427%2F4044.jpg>
 Uta Frith, emeritus professor of cognitive development at UCL, said called the 
study ‘a remarkably positive story’. Photograph: Antonio Zazueta Olmos/Antonio 
Olmos 
Other experts applauded the work. “I can see why these researchers are 
excited,” said Dorothy Bishop, professor of developmental neuropsychology at 
the University of Oxford. “These results at follow-up are pretty consistent in 
showing the benefit of this early intervention for autism across a range of 
measures. My impression is that this is an intervention that reduces the 
severity of autistic symptoms, rather than curing autism. Nevertheless, for 
parents of children with autism, even a modest reduction would be worthwhile.”

Dr Max Davie, of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, said it offered “a hugely 
cheering message for families”, while Uta Frith, emeritus professor of 
cognitive development at University College London, called it “a remarkably 
positive story, because the intervention itself was neither intensive nor 
invasive”.

The absence of any hope, as well as the very sudden regression in children’s 
behaviour, led many parents to believe in the discredited theory of Andrew 
Wakefield that theMMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> (measles, mumps 
and rubella) vaccine was the cause of autism.

“Parents commonly tell us that they fight for a diagnosis but when they 
finally get it the cupboard is bare, with little information or tailored 
support available to them,” said Dr James Cusack, director of science at the 
charity Autistica. “Too often, parents fall victim to the false claims of 
charlatans who prey on desperate families. These results look promising for the 
many thousands of parents who want to find early interventions for their 
children based on solid science.”

The researchers said children’s communication with their parents was improved 
at the end of the six years. The parents said there were also improvements in 
relations with other children, in social communication and in repetitive 
behaviours. But there was no change in child anxiety, challenging behaviours or 
depression in the autistic children and they would still need a lot of support 
while growing up.

About 1% of children and young people are affected by autistic spectrum 
disorder, which ranges from mild to severe. The lifetime costs to the UK, which 
include health, social care and education costs as well as productivity losses, 
are estimated at £1m to £1.5m per child and between $1.4m and $2.4m in the 
United States.
 