
As you move into the private rented sector for the first time, there are many 
things to get your head around to ensure you’re in a safe, secure tenancy.

Whether you’ve chosen to live with your mates, strangers or on your own, it 
can feel daunting to take on the responsibility of renting – especially when 
you don’t know what your rights are.

But fear not. The National Union of Students (NUS) has launched a new website 
<http://readytorent.nus.org.uk/> full of resources, advice and information to 
help students understand their rights and the policies that affect them.

Here are 10 things to consider when moving into your new accommodation:

1) What’s in the contract?

Tenancy contracts tend to be long, confusing and full of legal jargon. It’s 
tempting to just skip to the end and sign it, especially if you’re in a hurry 
to move. However, your contract is a legally binding document and it’s where 
you can mandate your landlord (who should be named in the contract) to do 
certain things – like fix broken appliances – and vice versa. Make time to have 
your contract read over by someone who knows their stuff; this can be 
invaluable in making sure there are no loopholes. Your university, college or 
students’ union may offer this as a service.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzqBJEQ0k4hE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzqBJEQ0k4hE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzqBJEQ0k4hE&media=>
2) What’s the state of your new home?

When you first move in, your landlord should provide you with a detailed 
inventory of the property. This should cover each room and all of the furniture 
and fittings, stating what condition they are in. If you didn’t get one, do 
your own and send it to the agent or landlord. If you get an inventory but you 
aren’t happy with it, challenge it straight away and include evidence of your 
claims: always take photographs and send a copy to the agent or landlord (make 
sure you keep a copy too).

3) Where is your deposit going?

Before you move in, you’ll be required to pay a security deposit. This is 
usually six weeks’ rent, withheld until the end of your contract in case there 
are any overdue payments or damage to the property. Make sure your estate agent 
or landlord has put your deposit in a protected scheme and shown you evidence – 
this is a legal requirement. If your landlord has deducted excessively high 
charges at the end of your tenancy, you also have the right to challenge them.

4) How much are you paying in fees?

The law on letting agents’ fees differs across the UK. In England and Wales, 
they must tell you about the fees they charge upfront on their website and in 
their offices, but in Northern Ireland this is not required – although you can 
always ask. Fees can differ hugely, so you may want to factor in these costs 
when choosing which agent to go with. In Scotland, it is against the law for 
agents to charge fees.

5) Have you insured your valuables? 

It’s worth protecting yourself in case the worst happens, so invest in content 
insurance for your room and ensure that your phone, laptop, camera and other 
pieces of expensive equipment are covered. It is very rare that landlords will 
offer an insurance scheme.

Hidden homeless: the students ashamed to admit they’ve nowhere to sleep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/21/homeless-students-nowhere-sleep-london-emergency-accommodation>
6) Is your landlord accredited? 

There are landlords who have multiple properties specifically to let to 
students – but some of them are known for ripping them off. Many local 
authorities and students’ unions run best practice schemes that include 
landlords who have signed up to a code of conduct, so check online. Your 
students’ union may also operate its own not-for-profit lettings agent, which 
only uses vetted landlords.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYXqRwZMxu4k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYXqRwZMxu4k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYXqRwZMxu4k&media=>
7) Will you be disturbed?

Your landlord must give you at least 24 hours’ notice before they access the 
property, and you have no obligation to let them in if they haven’t given you 
proper notice.

8) Have you seen the Energy Performance Certificate?

This should have been shown to you before you signed your tenancy agreement, 
to give you an indication of how energy efficient your home is. This can have a 
big impact on the cost of your energy bills.

Eight golden rules for living in student halls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/16/eight-golden-rules-for-living-in-student-halls>
9) Do you know the rules on eviction?

Once you have signed your tenancy agreement, the landlord cannot evict you 
without going to court and following a clear set of procedures. Similarly, your 
landlord cannot raise your rent if you have signed a fixed-term contract that 
states a set amount for set period.

10) Have you joined a tenants’ union or activist network?

Local areas often have organised groups of private tenants who work together 
to campaign on issues, offer advice and support, and act as a representative 
body. Find out if there is a tenants’ union, association or similar group and 
join it. The larger your network, the savvier you are and the more likely you 
can work with others to resist – from rent hikes to local bin collections.
Generation Rent <http://www.generationrent.org/> has a list of some groups.

You can find more advice on the Ready to Rent website 
<http://readytorent.nus.org.uk/>.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 