
Full-time: Sudan claim a draw that was the least they deserved. They were the 
more coherent and committed team but two dreadful defensive mistakes gifted 
goals toAngola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola>, who then 
committed one themselves to allow Sudan back into it. Entertaining enough fare 
and both team are still in contention for a place in the next round.

90 min: Four more minutes. Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sudan> 
continue to push for their first win in the tournament in over 40 years.

87 min: A smart effort by Manucho! He spooted the keeper way off his line so 
tried to beat him from half-way. But the ball dropped down inches over the bar. 
That's the striker's first miss of the tournament.

85 min: More wretched Angolan defending allows a corner to run to Munwia, who 
wasn't expecting it and therefore let it bounce off him and out of play: if 
he'd been more he'd have had a free shot on goal from six yards.

84 min: Mateus attempts a token shot from distance, giving Sudan a goal kick.

82 min: Sudan are really applying severe pressure now, their methodical 
passing continuing to stretch Angola, who are defending with increasing urgency.

79 min: Sudan could win this! They break fast from an Angolan corner and have 
three attackers against three defenders, but the shot is weak.

77 min: Bizarre decision by Carlos, who kicks a weak Bashir shot behind for a 
corner when he could easily have picked it up.

GOAL! Angola 2-2 Sudan (Bashir 73') Yet again Sudan equalise from out of the 
blue, helped by abysmal Angolan defending. There were four defenders in the box 
around Bashir but they get in a muddle and Vunguidica presents the ball to the 
striker, who swipes it gratefully into the net!

71 min: Mateus breaks up a Sudan attack at the edge of his area and launches a 
counter, which fizzles out, like this match seems to be doing.

67 min: Djalma's feeling so confident he thinks he can lamp a freekick into 
the top corner from 35 yards. He can't, at least not this time.

65 min: Sudan change: off comes their captain, Hitham, on trots Abdali.

63 min: Angola continue to look comfortable, Sudan failing to regain the 
momenum they had in the first half.

59 min: Angola goalkeeper Carlos Fernandes boots the ball straight out of play 
... and then goes down clutching his hamstring. On troop the medics to help him 
stretch. A few seconds later he appears to have made a miraculous recovery. So 
there you have it: Angolan physios - the new horse placenta.

57 min: Airosa charges forward from right-back for the first time. He may not 
bother again after that wayward cross.

54 min: This time Angola appear to be of a mind not to let their lead slip, 
and their is more intensity to their pressing. It took Sudan 36 years to score 
a g oal in this tournament, and now they need another one straight away ...

GOAL! Angola 2-1 Sudan (Manucho, pen, 52') Three shots in this tournament for 
Manucho, and three goals. The keeper went the right away by the striker's low 
spotkick hurtled under his outstretched arm. Two moments of extreme sloppiness 
have gifted Angola their goals, undoing otherwise tidy play by Sudan.

50 min: PENALTY! Djalam makes up for his bad freekick by winning a penalty, 
with some assitance from Nazar, whose attempt to tackle was thoroughly 
incompetent.

49 min: Djalma sends a miserable freekick into the wall, to the despair of his 
many team-mates who were awaiting a cross in the middle.

46 min: Second half in motion. And within seconds Sudan have won themselves a 
corner, proving they remain more in tune with proceedings than the somewhat 
sluggish Angolans. Tahir's corner amount to nothing, however.

Half-time: Angola sagged after storming into an early lead, and Sudan got back 
into the game. Despite enjoying decent bouts of possession, however, they never 
looked dangerous until Bashir met a deep cross into the box with a fine header. 
Either side could go on to win from here.

42 min: Djalma fouls Eltaib, giving SUdan another freekick near the box. The 
angle is too acute for a shot but a dangerous cross should certainly follow. It 
does. But Angola defend it well.

40 min: Sudan waste a freekick in a dangerous position. "I've only been in 
Khartoum for three months now so I'm hardly an expert, but I can say from my 
experience that that jaunty little number, the Sudanese National Anthem, seems 
to start with an instrumental version, and they only sing the words when the 
second verse starts," trills Richard Woods. "Maybe they only played it once?" 
How many times do they have to play it before they get to the second verse?

37 min: Angola have shaked off the lethargy that helped Sudan to get back into 
this game and they're vigorously trying to regain the lead, making this a 
pleasant, open game. They carved Sudan open in fine style just now, with Djalma 
eventually clipping the ball over the goalkeeper. But Mustafa had positioned 
himself sensibly to effect a clearance.

33 min: Admirable trickiness from Djalma in the Sudanese box, followed by a 
tame shot that poses no problem for Akram.

GOAL! Angolas 1-1 Sudan (Bashir 31') That, like Faith No More, came from out 
of nowhere <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n16hgOn1lVI>! Sudan's first goal in 
these finals since 1976 was a fine header, Bashir jumping between the two 
slightly negligent centrebacks to bop the ball into the net after a searching 
deep cross from the right.

29 min: The match is getting fairly bogged down in the middle. On the occasion 
when Sudan do pick a way through, they do not get enough players forward to 
properly trouble a well-organised Angolan defence. By contrasat, when Angola go 
forward they always look like getting a shooting chance, though more becaue of 
the brittleness of the Sudanese defence than their own creative ingenuity.

25 min: Nice move by Angola - emulating some of Sudan's decent recent passing 
- but it all petered out when Flavio failed to control the ball, letting it run 
of play near the corner flag. You're all very interested in this, aren't you?

23 min: A long punt into the Angolan box is met by the head of Eldin, who 
can't direct it on target.

20 min: Sudan are starting to make a match of this, with some nifty triangular 
passing in midfield enabling them to make inroads towards the Angolan box.

17 min: Sudan threaten for the first time and it's a fine left-footed strike 
from distance by Tahir. Carlos parries.

15 min:  Munwia is already on a yellow .. but that didn't stop him charging 
two-footed on Mateus just now like a man taking a running jump down a slide. 
Fortunately for him, his opponent managed to dodge and the ref decided not to 
take any action.

13 min: Rum skills by Flavio to twist and turn past three defenders before 
looking for a give-and-go exchange with Djlama. He gave, he went, but Djalma 
didn't give it back.

9 min: No sign of Sudan getting into this game or causing Angola as many 
problems as they did Ivory Coast at the weekend. They're looking decidedly 
third-rate at the moment.

6 min: Munwia booked for a reckless tackle, and he concedes a freekick in a 
dangerous position to boot. Gilberto curls it into the centre, Munwia puts it 
out for a corner. "What's your opinion of Manucho?" quizzes Kenny James. "I was 
in Africa for the AFCON 2008 and was impressed with his strong performances, 
especially his keen eye for goal in that tournament. I was interested to see 
how his skills would transfer to the Premier League where Manchester United had 
secured his scrawl. As it was he never really took off with them or whilst on 
his loan at Hull. The indefatigable Wikipedia tells me his time at Valladolid 
has been equally barren." My opinion is pretty much the same as yours: I 
thought he'd make more of an impact in England than he did. His touch is not 
top class but I figured he had ample strength, speed, intelligence and 
finishing prowess to still be dangerous. As for this tournament, that's now two 
shots and two goals for him.

GOAL! Angola 1-0 Sudan (Manucho 4') Appalling defending is ruthlessly punished 
by the former Manchester United man. Eldin got caught in possession outside his 
own box and no one could recover in time to stop Manuho from blasting past to 
goalkeeper and into the net via the post. Sudan haven't scored in any of their 
last matches in this tournament: they need to do something about that now.

1 min: The match is on, thanks to a textbook kick-off by Sudan.

3.59pm: 700 Angolan fans are in the ground, along with as prinkling of Malabo 
locals. All 700 seem to have a trumpet.

3.54pm: Here are the national anthems and, truly, the Sudanese don't seem to 
have a songster among them. Then again, why should they? It seems unfair to 
force footballers to sing in front of international cameras. Is Beyonc√© ordered 
to do a few keepie-uppies before her concerts? Do Metallica have to showcase 
their corner-taking abilities before being allowed to rock out?

3.44pm: Did you catch any of yesterday's games? Zambia and Libya put on some 
great entertainment on a marshy pitch but that was nothing compared to the 
absolute gold-bottomed classic served up by Senegal and the surprising hosts, 
Equatorial Guinea: sensational twists, superb defending amid constant 
attacking, great saves, wild misses, an inexplicable red card and a stupendous 
stoppage-time winning goal against one of the favourites by a team competing in 
the tournament for the first time! If Angola and Sudan can deliver anything 
like that today, we'll be laughing.

3.24pm: That nice Jonathan Wilson has just tweeted the teams so here, have a 
gander:

Angola: Carlos Fernandes; Airosa, Massunguna, Zuela, Miguel; Macanga; Djalma, 
Gilberto, Mateus; Manucho, Flavio

Sudan: Akram; Balla, Saif Eldin, Nagm Eldin, Muawia; Ala Eldin, Hitham; Tahir, 
Mudather, Nazar; Bashir

Paul will be here from 3.50pm. Until then, have a look at Jonathan Wilson's 
latest blog.

The radio coverage was two or three seconds ahead of the television coverage, 
something that first became apparent 58 minutes into Equatorial Guinea's game 
against Senegal. Roars could be heard across the city, followed by a great 
groan of disappointment. On the screen I was watching in Banapa, the district 
of Malabo around the city's stadium, the winger Randy was still loping into the 
right side of the box at the stadium at Bata on the mainland. As two defenders 
went to close him down, he squared towards Fidjeu.

It should have been a clear shot on goal, with the keeper scrabbling across 
from his near post ‚Äì not a tap-in, but a chance you would expect him to take. 
The ball, though, stopped in heavy surface water on its way to Fidjeu, allowing 
Kader Mangane to get across and clear. It was the first incident in the game to 
prompt anything like excitement from the home support; until then it had been a 
case of clinging on as Senegal wasted chance after chance. They should have had 
a penalty when John Doe tripped Issiar Dia (the most likely explanation for 
Khalid Abdulrahman's decision being to spare the world a raft of Sound of 
Music-related puns had he awarded a penalty for a foul by Doe on Dia ‚Ä¶), Danilo 
tipped over a Papiss Demba Ciss√© lob volley, Demba Ba dragged a Dia cut-back 
badly wide and then placed a free header from a corner the wrong side of the 
post ‚Ä¶

On it went, chance after chance squandered, until slowly you began to see the 
confidence drain almost physically from Senegal, as though they came to believe 
they would never score. And as they became increasingly desperate, they began 
to become ragged. Four minutes after the water had thwarted Ekanga, Kily, the 
adventurous right-back, got forward and crossed perfectly for Randy to head in. 
The roars were extraordinary, and tinged with a sense of disbelief.

To continue reading click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jan/26/equatorial-guinea-africa-cup-of-nations>
.
 