
Sudanese security forces gang-raped women in hospital, shot and burned 
civilians alive, and committed other appalling acts of torture during two 
military campaigns inDarfur <https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur>, Human 
Rights Watch (HRW) said on Wednesday, urging international peacekeepers to do 
more to stop the atrocities.

In a new report <http://www.hrw.org/node/280756/> – the latest detailing 
repeated horrors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/11/mass-rape-darfur-sudan-human-rights-watch>
 in Darfur – HRW quoted women who were gang-raped, and defectors from the 
government’sRapid Support Forces  
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/12/14/sudan-soldiers-militias-killing-raping-civilians>
(RSF), one of whom described his commanders as “men without mercy”.

The RSF, which is under the command of the Sudanese national intelligence and 
security services, carried out its first counterinsurgency campaign, Operation 
Decisive Summer, in south and north Darfur between late February and early May 
last year, HRW said. A second campaign was launched around Jebel Marra between 
January this year and the start of the rainy season in June.

Darfur peacekeeping force to be cut back amid accusations of incompetence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/11/darfur-peacekeeping-force-cut-back-accusations-incompetence>
As well as murdering and torturing villagers, RSF destroyed wells, food stores 
and infrastructure, HRW said. The attacks around Jebel Marra in mountainous 
central Darfur have forced about 130,000 people to seek shelter in remote, 
desolate areas, where they risk death from hunger and lack of medical care.

A January attack on Golo was “emblematic of RSF atrocities”, the report said: 
scores of women were raped in the town’s hospital, other women were raped in 
front of community members, while some who resisted were killed.

“They [the soldiers] separated women and men. They raped some women and they 
made the men carry stones from place to place as punishment … Some [of the 
women] were raped in the hospital … I saw seven raped with my own eyes,” a 
42-year-old woman told the report’sauthors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vt8ifoWZPX8&feature=youtu.be>.

HRW interviewed 151 victims and witnesses, who had fled to Chad and South Sudan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, as well as contacting people in 
Darfur by telephone. Among those it spoke to were 21 people who had been in 
Golo when it was attacked.


“They killed my father. My father was defending us so that we would not be 
raped and he was beaten to death … After they killed my father, they raped the 
three of us. Me and my two sisters … After they raped us they stole 
everything,” said a young woman from Golo.


A 26-year-old teacher, identified by the pseudonym Hassan, told how two 
Sudanese Antonov aircraft bombed his village near Golo before a government 
militia attacked. The soldiers tortured him, beat his grandmother, and raped 
his three sisters.

“They took them one by one out of the house [to another hut]. After they raped 
them, they burned them [alive]. I could hear the screaming. I could see the 
fire,” he said.

Sudan briefing: Darfur's deep descent into chaos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/05/darfur-chaos-tribal-clashes-sudan-fighting-government-rebel-troops>
The systematic use of rape was underscored in the testimony of one Sudanese 
army defector, describing the orders he received after capturing a town.


“The commander told us that these are rebels or rebel supporters and the women 
are their harem. You go there and you rape them and kill them,” he told HRW.

Another RSF defector described how he killed a woman after trying to rape her.

“Personally I did attempt to rape one of the women and she hit me. And I lost 
my composure and I shot her … She is dead … I am deeply sorry. But you must 
understand that this was not my endeavour, I was under the command of men with 
no mercy. I wish I could turn back the time,” said the 19-year-old.

HRW said the hybrid African Union-UN peacekeeping mission, Unamid 
<http://unamid.unmissions.org/>, was “hamstrung in its performance and in the 
implementation of its core mandate to protect civilians”. It urged the force, 
which was set up in 2007, to demand access to Jebel Marra.


Omar al-Bashir, the Sudanese president, has already been indicted by the 
international criminal court (ICC) forgenocide, war crimes and crimes against 
humanity in Darfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/south-africa-to-fight-omar-al-bashirs-arrest-warrant-sudan>
, and two arrest warrants have been issued for him. However, the unpopular 
court has little support in Africa, where politicians accuse it of only 
targeting the continent’s leaders.


In June, Bashir flew to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/south-africa-to-fight-omar-al-bashirs-arrest-warrant-sudan>
 to take part in an African Union summit. He was allowed to leave the country 
in defiance of a court order that he must remain, and despite calls from the 
UN, the EU and the US that he be detained.

Last Friday, the ICC said 
<http://www.icc-cpi.int/iccdocs/doc/doc2044798.pdf#search=south%20africa> it 
had given South Africa until 5 October to explain why it did not arrest Bashir 
at that time.


As many as 300,000 people have died 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=39044#.VfAbRs7d79I> in the Darfur 
conflict since 2003 while roughly 2.7 million have been displaced, according to 
the UN.

HRW said the RSF is reportedly better equipped than other paramilitary and 
militia groups. When the RSF was deployed to Darfur in February last year, it 
reportedly consisted of between 5,000 and 6,000 troops with 600-750 vehicles. 
The force is believed to have grown since then, and receives support in the air 
and on the ground from the Sudanese Armed Forces and other government-backed 
militia, including the notoriousJanjaweed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/16/sudan.julianborger>.

“The RSF has killed, raped and tortured civilians in scores of villages in an 
organised, deliberate, and systematic way,” said Daniel Bekele, HRW’sAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> director. He called on the Sudanese 
government to disarm the force and investigate and prosecute commanders and 
officials.

HRW warned that action was needed before another brutal campaign was started. 


“The security council and the African Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> have been sitting on their 
hands while Sudanese government forces have carried out two campaigns targeting 
Darfur’s civilians,” Bekele said. “They need to ensure that civilians get 
adequate protection before a third campaign gets under way.”
 