
Suffragette, the highly anticipated drama about the fight for equal voting 
rights for British women in the first part of the last century, is to world 
premiere at the Telluride film festival this weekend. The film, which stars 
Carey Mulligan and Helena Bonham Carter, withMeryl Streep as Emmeline Pankhurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/19/meryl-streep-emmeline-pankhurst-suffragette>
, will have its first screening on 4 September as part of this year’s four-day 
event in Colorado.

Mulligan won’t be attending as the screening coincides with the due date of 
her first child, but Streep will present the movie alongside writer Abi Morgan 
(who scripted The Iron Lady) and director Sarah Gavron. Speaking to the 
Guardian, the festival executive director, Julie Huntsinger, said the story was 
an “incredibly important one” that “very few Americans – even really savvy 
feminists – are that familiar with”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs&media=>
The premiere is one of a number of high-profile first looks at the event, 
which is sandwiched between the Venice and Toronto film festivals, and has a 
reputation for debuting key Oscar titles.Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/27/danny-boyle-steve-jobs-new-york-film-fest>
, the Danny Boyle-directed biopic starringMichael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender>, screens for the first 
time, followed by a tribute to its director. Scripted by Aaron Sorkin, the 
movie focuses on three key Apple product launches and co-stars Seth Rogen and 
Kate Winslet as company seniors Steve Wozniak and Joanna Hoffman. “It’s 
transcendent,” reported Huntsinger. “I couldn’t believe how it made me feel.”

Telluride will also screen Room, Lenny Abrahamson’s adaptation of the Emma 
Donoghue bestseller about a woman (played by Brie Larson) locked for years in a 
room with her child. The film moves to Toronto the following week. It also gets 
a five-day head start on the Venice screening of Anomalisa, Charlie Kaufman’s
Kickstarter-funded 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/anomalisa/charlie-kaufmans-anomalisa>, 
stop-motion love story, which he co-directs with Duke Johnson. Despite being 
animated, the movie appears grounded in familiar Kaufman territory: it’s about 
a depressed man’s midlife crisis, and has been awarded an R rating for“strong 
sexual content, graphic nudity and language”. It contains, according to 
Huntsinger, “the most awkward sex scene in the history of cinema”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK0JcCBHu1pg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK0JcCBHu1pg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK0JcCBHu1pg&media=>
Founded in 1974, Telluride is now run by Huntsinger with festival co-creator 
Tom Luddy, and is known for its commitment to world and archive cinema, its 
restricted number of passholders and its relatively relaxed atmosphere. Other 
programme highlights include screenings of Cannes hitsSon of Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/may/20/son-of-saul-auschwitz-1944-video-trailer>
,Rams <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3296658/> and Carol 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2402927/> – preceded by a tribute to Rooney Mara, 
the film’s lead actor – as well as a strand of programming from guest director,
Rachel Kushner 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/festivals/rachel-kushner-set-as-telluride-film-fest-guest-director-1201463439/>
. Two hot-potato documentaries also premiere:Winter on Fire 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4908644/>, about the crisis in Ukraine, and Time 
to Choose <http://www.timetochoose.com/>, in which Charles Ferguson examines 
the shifting attitude of big business towards sustainable energy solutions. 
There is also a spot for Sydney Pollack’s swansong: a study of Aretha Franklin, 
Amazing Grace.

Bitter Lake – review: Adam Curtis’s beautiful, gripping film unravels a story 
of violence, bloodshed and bitter ironies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/26/bitter-lake-review-adam-curtis-afghanistan>
The festival also pays tribute to British documentary-maker Adam Curtis, with 
screenings of his latest film,Bitter Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jan/29/bitter-lake-brilliant-portrayal-wests-criminal-arrogance-afghanistan>
, about the relationship between Afghanistan and the west, as well as 2002’sThe 
Century of the Self <http://topdocumentaryfilms.com/the-century-of-the-self/>, 
which traced the influence of Sigmund Freud andEdward Bernays 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/08/16/specials/bernays-obit.html> on the 
power of governments and corporations to exercise mind control. “It shocks me 
when people don’t know who [Curtis] is,” said Huntsinger. “But then he is 
telling them something very hard to avoid: that all their fairytales are 
bullshit.”

Curtis will be quizzed on stage by Geoff Dyer and by Laurie Anderson, whose 
film essay about her dog, Lolabelle 
<http://www.labiennale.org/en/cinema/72nd-festival/line-up/off-sel/venezia72/heart-of-a-dog.html>
, is also screening. A 24-hour showcase of the best of the BBC’s arts series
Arena 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/3L50jQp6rhlCC9HVz5pLcyS/arena-at-40>, 
which turned 40 this year, will be broadcast on the town’s regional TV station.

 * The Telluride film festival <http://www.telluridefilmfestival.org/> runs 
from 4-8 September.
 