
The publicity campaign for the upcoming film Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/suffragette-review-historical-drama-tub-thumps-hard-despite-having-your-vote>
, which stars Meryl Streep as the British feministEmmeline Pankhurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/27/emmeline-pankhurst-freedom-or-death-introduction>
, saw Streep and three of the film’s other actorsposing in T-shirts for Time 
Out with the Pankhurst quote: “I’d rather be a rebel than a slave.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/meryl-streep-backlash-suffragette-t-shirt-slogan>
 I’m sure she and all the other white women in the film would. Although no 
doubt the writer Abi Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan> took 
great pains to be historically accurate when telling the story of the white 
feminists who fought to get votes for women in the early 20th century, here in 
2015 feminists of colour are still trying to get our particular story into the 
collective consciousness. If it’s correct, that’s an added bonus.
Fariha Róisín (@fariharoisin) 
so many words, such little patience pic.twitter.com/xU8e4DARYp 
<http://t.co/xU8e4DARYp>
 <https://twitter.com/fariharoisin/status/651076046054367232> October 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/fariharoisin/status/651076046054367232> 
However compelled one is to whitewash a historical narrative – or to choose 
narratives that are majority white to convert into Hollywood films – if the 
marketing involves a bunch of famous white women wearing a T-shirt that evokes 
slavery, there’s going to be a problem. Because representation matters – in 
every medium, across every outlet, every single day. We are not fighting for 
the choice to tell stories dominated by white people, because clearly that 
choice is not in question. The white-lensed default is normative. We get it: in 
Britain, in America, the world over.

Suffragette review: historical drama tub-thumps hard despite having your vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/suffragette-review-historical-drama-tub-thumps-hard-despite-having-your-vote>
Women of colour are always the ones to carry this fact, internalise it. How 
does it not occur to white women – starting with the smart ones starring in 
this film – that their alabaster skin, clean white T-shirt and their “Rah, rah! 
I won’t be a slave!” message doesn’t burrow straight into the gut of women of 
colour who have suffered erasure from this feminist history and conversation 
since, well, the 1900s?

Meryl Streep and co-stars attract backlash over Suffragette T-shirt slogan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/meryl-streep-backlash-suffragette-t-shirt-slogan>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444301821716%2FKP_524078_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffragette%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffragette%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444301821716%2FKP_524078_crop_640x480.jpg>
All year on various media platforms we have been talking about this very 
issue, from Girl Meets World 13-year-old starRowan Blanchard’s poignant essay 
on the need for intersectional feminism 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/688977/girl-meets-world-star-rowan-blanchard-13-may-blow-you-away-with-her-powerful-views-on-feminism>
, tothe widely played out disconnect between Roxane Gay and Erica Jong at the  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/07/roxane-gay-erica-jong-feminism-racism-culture-decatur-book-festival>
Decatur Book Festival in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/07/roxane-gay-erica-jong-feminism-racism-culture-decatur-book-festival>
, where Jong suggested no one would know who Sojourner Truth was if not for 
Gloria Steinem. In addition to Blanchard’s piece, there have been a string of 
very smart thinkpieces on intersectionality, a term coined by black scholar
Kimberle Crenshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/23/in-defence-of-intersectionality>
 in the 1980s that is currently having a moment, but has also been a lived 
reality for women of colour for many decades.

That said, this particular film and its campaign is less about 
intersectionality in one movement and more about the impact of erasure full 
stop.We know that the history books have failed us. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/05/mcgraw-hill-textbook-slaves-workers-texas>
 We know that for years we have given lip service to the notion that looking at 
where we’ve been will tell us where we are now, or where we are going in the 
future. But there is no conversation or accountability in the translation, as 
honourable an art form as film is, if all people see is the whiteness and the 
word “slave”. Few people will see this campaign, run home and Google Pankhurst 
to find out how or whether black women were integral to her fight – and those 
who will, in a desperate but familiar effort to find some evidence of our 
existence in this story, are black women and women of colour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsuffragette-film-publicity-campaign-erasure-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51050c95b5ef0e4e6036de1970e54b7b271d28a5%2F0_432_5971_3584%2F5971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffragette's%20publicity%20campaign%20and%20the%20politics%20of%20erasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsuffragette-film-publicity-campaign-erasure-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffragette%27s%20publicity%20campaign%20and%20the%20politics%20of%20erasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsuffragette-film-publicity-campaign-erasure-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51050c95b5ef0e4e6036de1970e54b7b271d28a5%2F0_432_5971_3584%2F5971.jpg>
 The film Suffragette charts the fight for women’s suffrage in Britain in the 
early 20th century. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Researching we will, more often than not, come up dry. No evidence. Only a 
T-shirt, strident and boastful, hip and simple, that cuts right to the chase: 
we don’t see you. We don’t see you as rebels, and we don’t even see you as 
slaves. We see the term slave as user-friendly, synonymous with the worst 
possible alternative in any given dynamic, regardless of the humans who endured 
its very real existence.
 