
It is rare that a book makes me cry. The only other time I can recall tears 
rolling in response to the written word was when I was 12 years old reading
Memoirs of a Geisha 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099497028/memoirs-of-a-geisha>
. This time I was 21 and on a family holiday in Amalfi. The culprit?The Time 
Traveler's Wife 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099464464/the-time-travelers-wife>
 by Audrey Niffenegger.

It was August 2007, the year I finished my English degree. I remember feeling 
deliciously liberated, delving into a book that didn't appear on a reading list 
or require Spark notes to understand. I savoured every page.

Everyone knows the old adage "don't judge a book by its cover", but there was 
something so intriguing in the melancholic greeny-blue hue of the paperback my 
mother had packed that year. As we lounged on the beach and I tried to enjoy 
the book I had brought with me (Sophie's World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781858815305/sophies-world-a-novel-about-the-history-of-philosophy>
, which to this day I still haven't been able to finish) and watched jealously 
as, hour by hour, mum remained glued to the book with the little girl's feet on 
its cover. My mother is not an avid reader, so for her to be so enthralled I 
knew it had to be pretty special.

What made this book even more enjoyable was the fact that, after my mum had 
turned the final page, I had to fight my sister to read it next. She'd whizzed 
through the short offering she had brought along (I think it wasFreakonomics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/businessandfinance/9780141019017/freakonomics-a-rogue-economist-explores-the-hidden-side-of-everything>
) and was looking for something juicier to get her teeth into. But I got there 
first, skulking off victorious to lie back on a sun lounger and indulge.

The intoxicating Amalfi summer heat was the perfect backdrop to the intense 
love story between Henry and Clare.The Time Traveler's Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-time-travelers-wife> is an undeniably 
sexy book, so full of love and longing that I felt almost embarrassed reading 
about such a private relationship in such a public setting.

As I read about Henry's desire for his future wife and his lifelong commitment 
to her, I was touched by the tenderness with which Niffeneger wove the 
protagonists' lives together. I'd just come out of a rather messy three-year 
relationship and for the first time in a while, started to consider the 
prospect that love could be redeeming. But, as anyone who has read this novel 
knows, The Time Traveler's Wife is more than just a simple romance. It is a 
book that ingeniously merges science fiction with romance and fantasy, and 
flirts with your senses; it flits between decades, seasoning the story with 
nostalgic scenes from the 1990s as it goes. Although it can occasionally be 
confusing when Henry pops up in different places at different times, the 
characterisation more than makes up for momentary bewilderment.

As for the bit that made me cry? I wouldn't want to spoil it for you.
 