
If you’re an academic who loves conservative interpretations of copyright law, 
the MPAA might be willing to pay you enough to go see The Avengers about 1,500 
times (not in 3D, though).


In an effort to “fill gaps in knowledge and contribute to a greater 
understanding of challenges facing the content industry”, the Motion Picture 
Association of America isavailable to fund academic research 
<http://www.mpaaresearchgrants.org/> to the tune of $20,000 per successful 
proposal, according to guidelines released recently by the movie industry 
lobbying group.

An email from the Sony WikiLeaks hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/16/wikileaks-documents-sony-hacking-school>
, quoted bycopyright news site TorrentFreak 
<http://torrentfreak.com/mpaa-funds-pro-copyright-scholars-to-influence-politics-150425/>
, had a fairly direct statement about the conference’s purpose from Sony global 
general counsel Steven B Fabrizio: “[T]he MPAA is launching a global research 
grant program both to solicit pro-copyright academic research papers and to 
identify pro-copyright scholars who we can cultivate for further public 
advocacy.”

Among the topics the group is interested in seeing academic research about: 
“Copyright and Economic Development”, “Growth of Creative Industries”, “Digital 
Content”, and “Notice and Takedown Regimes”, each of which is accompanied on 
the MPAA site by a short description of how the organization would prefer to 
see those topics attacked. They’re the same topics the MPAA solicited for the 
program last year.

Under “Notice and Takedown Regimes”, the MPAA said that it seeks “empirical 
analyses of how notice and takedown procedures operate under the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act in the US, or comparable systems in other parts of the 
world, including recommendations for increased effectiveness”.

Howard Gantman, a spokesman for the MPAA, told the Guardian that while the 
group approves the projects, it doesn’t exert any influence over the findings 
of the scholars who receive its $20,000 grants. The MPAA sees itself as 
fighting fire with fire. “There are similar grant programs run by some of our 
harshest critics,” Gantman said.

Lobbying groups commissioning academic papers isn’t a new practice by any 
means; Google put togetheran entire conference at George Mason University 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-google-is-transforming-power-and-politicsgoogle-once-disdainful-of-lobbying-now-a-master-of-washington-influence/2014/04/12/51648b92-b4d3-11e3-8cb6-284052554d74_story.html>
 three years ago. But it is comparatively unusual to see a public call for 
papers from a non-academic institution with such a large and specific sum 
attached to it – and with the stated promise of help publishing the papers from 
the organization itself.

“The MPAA Global Research IP Program will post the report on its website and 
make best efforts to encourage publication in a scholarly journal,” reads the 
site, “and distribute it both to the academic and public policy community 
interested in issues related to intellectual property.”

The deadline for applications is in August.
 