
When supermodel Alek Wek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/nov/04/fashion.features1> 
returned to South Sudan last week to markthe first anniversary of independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/08/south-sudan-first-anniversary-independence>
, she was confronted with a painful reminder of her past.

Wek, 35, fled the south of what was then Sudan in 1991 during the civil war. 
She flew out of her hometown of Wau on a Hercules plane, pretending to be the 
daughter of a neighbour. It was the first leg of an incredible journey that led 
to her becoming thefirst African model on the cover of Elle magazine in 1997 
<http://fashionbombdaily.com/2009/02/02/fun-black-fashion-fact-alek-wek-on-november-1997-elle-magazine/>
.

Visiting her former home with the UN refugee agency (UNHCR), her first trip 
since independence, Wek said she found optimism and signs of hope in Juba, but 
outside the capital people in the refugee camps were struggling just as her 
family had in the 1980s.

During those early years of the 1983-2005 war, Wek fled into the bush to 
escape fighting around Wau.

Her family used the sun to navigate, and ate whatever they could find. They 
spent six months in one village, and at one point were barricaded in their huts 
for three days when the bombing and shooting became too fierce.

Wek, a member of the US committee for refugees' advisory council 
<http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home>, said visiting the Yusuf Batil 
camp in Upper Nile state, where 35,000 refugees from Sudan have sought shelter 
from fighting between government forces and rebels in Blue Nile state, had been 
difficult.

"It brought memories back just hearing the stories from the refugees … and 
them eating grass because there was literally nothing along the way," she said 
on a quiet veranda at the Norfolk Hotel in Nairobi, after returning fromSouth 
Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>.

"It choked me up because I remembered walking through the bush … and eating 
whatever we found along the way, and my mom knowing what greens were poisonous 
and which ones were not."

But as well as the hardship she saw signs of the new nation's potential – 
personified by her "very bright" London-raised nephew who has returned to set 
up a business.

"He was raised in England, he can barely speak Dinka 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dinka_language> … but he can understand it. He 
moved back in December. He worked as a telecommunications consultant so he 
opened that business in Juba."

For the country to succeed, the violence will have to end. Although a peace 
deal was signed in 2005 to end the civil war between southern rebels and the 
government of the mainly Muslim, Arabic-speaking north,peace has proved elusive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/08/south-sudan-anniversary-un>.

Wek, a member of the Dinka tribe, understands the despair of having to leave 
home in haste on a fraught journey to an uncertain future. Her father died 
before she leftSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> because of 
complications from a hip injury, exacerbated by walking through the bush at the 
start of the civil war.

"Having witnessed it first-hand, and at a very young age, even if I put it at 
the back of my mind, it is still there. I've heard stories like, 'I'm going to 
die anyway, I might as well die, why should I even try?' That really resonated, 
not knowing what tomorrow is."

South Sudan is ill-equipped to deal with the thousands of vulnerable people 
crossing its borders. Jubashut down oil production in January in a row with the 
Sudan capital Khartoum over transit fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jul/09/south-sudan-economic-disaster-independence>
, starving the fragile economy. President Salva Kiir's administration has also 
been accused of serious corruption.

Wek also heard stories of resilience, from women who reminded her of her 
mother, who raised nine children (Wek is the seventh) during years of civil war 
and displacement across eastAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Naomi, 83, who had returned to South Sudan from the north and whose three sons 
died during the war, touched a chord.

"She ended up raising not just the rest of the children but also her 
grandchildren. And she's so fragile … it got me so choked up and so grateful," 
said Wek. It was the same selflessness displayed by her mother.

"Whenever I feel I am going through my own 'little' challenging moment, I just 
think about my mom."
 