
The US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> is 
poised on Friday to decide whether to take on the case of a 76-year-old 
disabled army veteran handed a sentence of life in prison without parole for 
growing marijuana in his back yard to alleviate his own health problems.

If the court does not review the case, Lee Carroll Brooker is destined to die 
behind bars even though judges in his nativeAlabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> have declared this was not an 
appropriate punishment.

Brooker is arguing that such a hefty sanction for marijuana possession 
violates the eighth amendment to the US constitution because it amounts to 
cruel and unusual punishment.

He has been subjected to strict sentencing mandatory minimum laws in Alabama 
because the cannabis offense involves a certain weight of the drug and comes on 
top of convictions for armed robbery more than 30 years ago in Florida when 
Brooker held up a series of liquor stores, his trial lawyer John Steensland 
said on Wednesday.

Brooker was arrested in 2011 when police visited his address in Cottonwood, 
southern Alabama, on an unrelated matter and found that he was growing 
marijuana behind the house.

The police seized 34 plants. They were sent for forensic analysis and weighed 
in their entirety, including the stalks, which are not used in cannabis 
consumption.

The plants weighed a total of 2.85lb, which placed the haul above the 
threshold of possessing 2.2lb of the drug that, in conjunction with certain 
prior felony convictions, triggers the use of life without parole as the 
mandatory sentence under Alabama law.

“The actual usable amount of marijuana from the contraband was a fraction of 
the 2.85 lbs and clearly under the threshold of 2.2 lbs,” according to court 
documents filed in Brooker’s case.

“The evidence clearly indicated that Brooker was simply growing said marijuana 
plans for his own personal use in an effort to self-medicate,” the document 
added.

But in announcing the state supreme court’s decision, Alabama’s chief justice, 
Roy Moore,issued 
<http://www.al.com/news/index.ssf/2015/09/roy_moore_life_sentence_for_dr.html> 
a lengthy explanation pointing out that the original trial judge, Larry 
Anderson, had said: “If the court could sentence you to a term that is less 
than life without parole, I would. However, the law is very specific … there is 
no discretion.”

And Moore himself added that Brooker’s sentence was “excessive and 
unjustified” and urged the Alabama legislature to “revisit the statutory 
sentencing scheme” for the state.

Brooker’s attorney Steensland said: “The judges’ hands were tied.”

Now his former client is taking his case to the US supreme court, and is being 
represented by Bryan Stevenson, executive director of the Montgomery-based 
advocacy group Equal Justice Initiative.

Marijuana for medical use is now legal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/07/drug-enforcement-administration-marijuana-classification-medical-research>
 in 23 states and the District of Columbia.

 In addition, the Pennsylvania legislature on Wednesday sent a bill legalizing 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/politics/20160414_Medical_marijuana_to_be_legal_in_Pa_.html>
 medical marijuana to the state governor to sign.

Last September, Roy Moore, the chief justice of Alabama, said sentencing laws 
needed to bechanged 
<http://wiat.com/2015/09/11/moore-al-should-revisit-sentencing-structure/> in 
the state in light of Brooker’s plight, after the state’s supreme court 
reluctantly refused to overturn an appeal to the man’s sentence.

Moore said there were “grave flaws” in Alabama’s sentencing system when a 
person could be sentenced to life without parole for a non-violent drug offense.

Steensland submitted material during his client’s trial and sentencing 
proceedings that showed he was in the US army for nine years after joining up 
at the age of 17 and was frequently posted abroad, coming under enemy fire on 
tours in Lebanon and the Dominican Republic.

He rose to the rank of sergeant in the 82nd airborne division and was awarded 
the combat infantryman badge for participating in active ground combat, 
according to court documents.

“It’s a brutal case, egregious. He was using marijuana for his own use for 
lingering troubles with his personal health, some related to his military 
service. We had hoped for a more reasonable settlement, but the judges at trial 
and appeal had their hands tied,” Steensland said.

The attorney said there was no evidence and had been no claims that Brooker 
had ever tried to sell the drug. He said his crimes in Florida as a much 
younger man were linked to a time in his life when he drank heavily instead of 
seeking medical treatment for physical and mental ailments.

“It doesn’t excuse any of this but it puts it in some perspective. He robbed 
some liquor stores and no one was hurt. It’s serious but he served time for 
that. When I represented him I found him to be a nice man,” he said.

Families Against Mandatory Minimums (Famm), a Washington DC-based lobbying and 
advocacy group, has filed a friend of the court brief with Scotus on Brooker’s 
behalf.

“It is hard to understand how, in a civilized society, the law can tolerate 
that a 76-year-old decorated, disabled combat veteran is sentenced to die in 
prison for growing marijuana in his backyard for personal use,” the brief 
states.

Famm’s brief adds that the way mandatory minimum laws shift discretion in 
sentencing away from the “independent judiciary … can lead to arbitrary, 
capricious and unfair sentences”.

Mary Price, Famm general counsel, said that if Scotus decided to take 
Brooker’s case, and ultimately ruled in his favour, it would send a message 
“far and wide” that mandatory minimum sentences “can be so arbitrary and so 
inhumane that they offend the US constitution”.
 