
New York bombing: police name suspect

New York police have released the name and picture of a man they want to talk 
to in connection withan explosion in New York on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/new-york-bombing-no-international-terrorism-link-governor-cuomo>
: 28-year-oldAhmad Khan Rahami 
<https://twitter.com/JPeterDonald/status/777830341558042624>. Separately, and 
after another explosion in Elizabeth, New Jersey, New York governor Andrew 
Cuomo said “evidence might suggest a foreign connection” to the bombings. 
Overnight, one device detonated and four others were found in a backpackoutside 
a station in New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-both-devices-used-pressure-cooker-and-phone-reports>
. The device exploded at 12.30am as a bomb squad was attempting to disarm it. 
Earlier, investigators said the FBI had obtained surveillance footage of a man 
with backpack near where devices were placed in the Chelsea neighborhood of 
Manhattan on Saturday. On Sunday night, FBI agents in Brooklyn stopped “a 
vehicle of interest in the investigation”, according to a spokeswoman. The 
agency said the Manhattan device contained the residue of Tannerite, an 
explosive often used for target practice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Jersey%20and%20New%20York%20explosions%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Jersey%20and%20New%20York%20explosions%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video&media=>
New Jersey and New York explosions: what we know so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/19/new-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video>
Cuomo says ‘possible foreign connection’ to Manhattan blast – live updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/19/us-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates>

Half of all US guns owned by just 3% of owners

Americans own an estimated 265m firearms but 130m belong to just 3% of US 
adults – super-owners who have an average of 17 guns each. The summary of a 
Harvard/Northeasternsurvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/19/gun-ownership-survey-gender-video>
, obtained exclusively by the Guardian andthe Trace <https://www.thetrace.org/>
, estimates that America’s gun stock increased by 70m since 1994, while the 
percentage of Americans who own guns fells from 25% to 22%. The study also 
found that the proportion of female gun owners is increasing. “There’s a 
disconnect between that and the decreasing rates of lethal violence in this 
country. It isn’t a response to actuarial reality,” said Matthew Miller, a 
Northeastern University and Harvard School of Public Health professor and one 
of the authors of the study.

Half of all guns in the US are owned by 3% of Americans, data shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/us-gun-ownership-survey>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgun-ownership-survey-gender-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20changing%20portrait%20of%20gun%20ownership%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgun-ownership-survey-gender-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20changing%20portrait%20of%20gun%20ownership%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgun-ownership-survey-gender-video&media=>
The changing portrait of gun ownership in America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/19/gun-ownership-survey-gender-video>
Minnesota Somali leaders condemn stabbing

The Somali American community in St Cloud, Minnesota, condemned a mass 
stabbing attack at a mall over the weekend. Police had not yet named the 
suspect, who wounded nine people at the Crossroads Center mall before being 
shot dead by an off-duty police officer in an attack that is being investigated 
as a “potential act of terrorism”. The suspect is believed to have been student 
Dahir Adan, whose father identified him to a local newspaper. An Islamic 
State-run news agency claimed the man was a “soldier of the Islamic State”. 
None of the nine injured people suffered life-threatening injuries.

Minnesota Somali leaders condemn stabbing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/minnesota-stabbing-somali-americans-suspect-name>

Why are millions of trees dying across America?

A quiet crisis is playing out in US forests, as huge numbers of trees succumb 
to drought, disease, insects and wildfire – much of it driven by climate 
change. “It’s heartbreaking,” said JB Friday, a forest ecologist at the 
University of Hawaii. “This is the biggest threat to our native forests that 
any of us have seen. If this spreads across the whole island, it could collapse 
the whole native ecosystem.” Lisa Keith, researcher in plant pathology at the 
US Department of Agriculture, said that when she analyzed the problem “right 
away Dutch elm disease popped into my head”. But this was unlike anything she, 
or anyone else, had ever dealt with.

An American tragedy: why are millions of trees dying across the country? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/19/tree-death-california-hawaii-sudden-oak>

Prison abuse survivor jailed again – as a witness

Brandy Buckmaster, a witness ordered incarcerated by public prosecutor until 
trial, has spoken exclusively to the Guardian. The only reason the 41-year-old 
woman is locked up is because she is a “material witness” in the state’s case 
against Brian Balzer, a guard who she says sexually abused her behind bars, and 
prosecutors are afraid she won’t show up to testify. Buckmaster has therefore 
been confined for more than a month to a correctional institution much like the 
site of her past sexual trauma. Balzer, meanwhile, is out on bail. “I feel like 
I’m being punished for what he did to me,” she said in a recent jailhouse 
interview, tears streaming down her face. “I get traumatized every day.”

‘Traumatized every day’: prison abuse survivor jailed again – as a witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/oregon-prison-abuse-victim-brandy-buckmaster-incarcerated>

Obama speaks out on race and sexism in election

Barack Obama said on Saturday night he will take it as a “personal insult” if 
the African American community fails to turn out and vote in the presidential 
election. “I will consider it a personal insult, an insult to my legacy, if 
this community lets down its guard and fails to activate itself in this 
election,” Obama said. “You want to give me a good send-off, go vote.” He also 
warned about bias against powerful women. “There’s a reason why we haven’t had 
a woman president,” Obama said at the fundraiser for Hillary Clinton. “We as a 
society still grapple with what it means to see powerful women and it still 
troubles us in a lot of ways, unfairly.” On Saturday, Michelle Obamacampaigned 
for Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/michelle-obamas-last-trick-as-the-closer-help-elect-hillary-clinton>
.

Obama: it will be ‘personal insult’ if African Americans do not vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/obama-congressional-black-caucus-speech-clinton>

Dolphins sit out anthem

Three Miami Dolphins players – Arian Foster, Kenny Stills and Michael Thomas – 
knelt during the national anthem before their NFL game on Sunday, days after a 
local police union attacked such protests and threatened to stop protection for 
Dolphins players. The players were following the lead of the San Francisco 
49ers’ Colin Kaepernick, the first NFL player to sit out the Star-Spangled 
Banner in protest at racial inequality in the US.

Dolphins sit out anthem after police union says they have forfeited free speech
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/miami-dolphins-players-protest-police-union-nfl>

Turkey blocks US resettlement of Syrian refugees


More than 1,000 Syrian refugees in Turkey have been blocked from resettlement 
in the US and other countries because they have university qualifications. The 
refugees were approved for resettlement by US officials before being blocked by 
Turkish authorities, a move that will further complicate a much-hyped United 
Nations summit on resettlement that gets underway inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> today. Countries such as Turkey, 
which hosts more refugees than any other, are keen for western partners to 
share the burden but are unwilling to let countries like the US cherry-pick the 
most educated refugees. “We believe that the most vulnerable need to be helped 
before others,” a senior Turkish official told the Guardian.

Turkey blocks Syrian refugees from US – for having degrees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/turkey-syrian-refugees-resettlement-blocked-us-degrees>

Game of Thrones breaks Emmys record

The sixth season of the HBO series won 12 awards in Los Angeles, becoming the 
most garlanded show in history, breaking a record set by the sitcom Frasier 
with a total haul of 38. The People v OJ Simpson also shone, having had 22 
nominations. Actors Sterling K Brown, Sarah Paulson and Courtney B Vance picked 
up individual honors for their performances as Christopher Darden, Marcia Clark 
and Johnnie Cochran. Jeffrey Tambor, winner of best actor in a comedy series 
for Transparent, called on industry to hire more transgender actors.

Emmys 2016: Game of Thrones breaks record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/18/game-of-thrones-emmy-awards-2016-breaks-record-best-drama>

In case you missed it …

Beers, babes and burgers are just some of the subjects Walter Robinson paints. 
He is interested in desire and paints things people like to buy: jars of 
Vaseline, striped shirts and doughnuts. He immortalizes images of catalogue 
models – throwaway material signifying consumerist utopia. He did spin 
paintings before Damien Hirst; nurses before Richard Prince. Now he’s the 
subject of a major Manhattan retrospective.

 Walter Robinson: ‘I’m just a stupid painter. We’re like dumb horses’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/17/walter-robinson-artist-paintings-interview>
 