
Was it a comedy? Was it a tragedy? A historical romp or an existential drama? 
Nobody, it seems, could quite explain Roy Andersson’s bizarre pictureA Pigeon 
Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence>
 when it landed last week at the 71st Venice film festival, although many felt 
they were in the presence of an eccentric new masterpiece. Fortunately the 
festival jury are in agreement - rushing to crown Andersson’s film with the 
prestigious Golden Lion award.
 A scene from A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence Photograph: PR 
Billed as “the final part of a trilogy about being a human being,” Pigeon 
follows on from the Swedish director’s earlier art-house films Songs From the 
Second Floor and You, the Living. In attempting to pin down the film’s curious 
pedigree, critcs have compared it to everything from Ingmar Bergman to Laurel 
and Hardy.

Andersson’s movie plays out as a series of 39 absurdist comic vignettes, 
trailing a pair of forlorn traveling salesmen around modern-day Gothenberg. At 
intervals, however, the tale flashes back to a 1940s saloon and to Sweden’s 
18th-century invasion of Russia. Arriving unannounced at a greasy-spoon cafe, 
an outraged King Charles XII orders that the male diners be drafted and the 
women thrown out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fa-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429880630402%2FKP_196460_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Pigeon%20Sat%20on%20a%20Branch%20Reflecting%20on%20Existence%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fa-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Pigeon%20Sat%20on%20a%20Branch%20Reflecting%20on%20Existence%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fa-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429880630402%2FKP_196460_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence 
While Pigeon soared, Birdman crashed. Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu’s ambitious 
backstage melodrama won rave reviews when it opened the festival, and yet goes 
home empty handed. The three other American pictures in competition - 99 Homes, 
Manglehorn, Good Kill - also failed to pick up prizes, reflecting what critics 
have identified as a general shift away from US produce at this year’s event.
Elsewhere, Joshua Oppenheimer’s The Look of Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-look-of-silence>, a harrowing documentary 
on the Indonesian genocide, picked up the grand prix. Veteran Russian 
film-maker Andrei Konchalovsky won the best director silver lion for The 
Postman’s White Nights, his semi-improvised portrait of a remote lakeside 
village, while Kaan Mujdeci’s Turkish dogfight saga won the special jury prize. 
The acting honours were split between Alba Rohrwacher and Adam Driver for their 
collaboration as a married couple in crisis in the domestic drama Hungry Hearts.
Outside the screening rooms, there were lightning flashes and ominous rumbles. 
Critics claimed this year’s festival provided further evidence that Venice is 
increasingly lagging behind its rivals Cannes and Toronto, with a line-up that 
contained few major American titles. However, festival director Alberto Barbera 
retorted that the event should play a different role - championing ambitious 
and innovative work from around the world. In the case of Andersson’s 
extraordinary Pigeon, he managed to snare what was possibly the strangest and 
most beautiful beast sighted at a festival in years.

Read reviews of the winners

A Pigeon
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/02/a-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-review-roy-andersson-venice-film-festival>
The Look of Silence
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/27/the-look-of-silence-review-act-of-killing-venice-film-festival>
Hungry Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/01/hungry-hearts-review-venice-adam-driver>
 