
The French film Amelie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amelie> has seen off 
competition from two major Hollywood releases this weekend and entered the UK 
box office chart at number five. The film, about a young Parisian woman who 
does good deeds for her friends and family, has taken Â£559,000 since its 
release on Friday - leaving the Sylvester Stallone thriller Driven and the 
Angelina Jolie/Antonio Banderes romance Original Sin trailing outside the top 
10. This makes it the biggest French-language opening in British cinema history.

According to Screen Daily, Amelie received the second widest release ever for 
a foreign language film, second only to Ang Lee's Crouching Tiger, Hidden 
Dragon. After its phenomenal success in France, UK Distributors decided not to 
treat it like a foreign language film and trailered it alongside mainstream 
titles like Planet of the Apes and Moulin Rouge.

"Crouching Tiger set the standard and many people were convinced it was just a 
one-off," said David Kosse, the managine director of Momentum Pictures, which 
handled Amelie. "[But] we've believed that a great film could work in the UK, 
no matter what language it's in."

The film, which stars unknown actress Audrey Tautou as Amelie, was directed by 
Jean Pierre Jeunet, best known for Delicatessen and City of the Lost Children. 
It received mixed reviews from British Critics. Whereas Empire Magazine and 
Total Film gave it the full five stars and declared it an instant classic, 
there were a few descanting voices who believed it was too sickly sweet to be 
taken seriously and complaining that the Paris Jeunet portrayed was a sanitised 
version of the city.

Our own Peter Bradshaw warned cinemagoers: "You will need a very sweet tooth 
to take it. In fact, you may need a tooth of pure sucrose, not to mention gums 
of marzipan and a jawbone of sherbet."
 