
If my first few days of SXSW 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/musicblog/2013/mar/14/sxsw-music-iggy-pop-haim-the-dream>
 were characterised by a slight unease about the endless corporate sponsorship, 
that seems to have washed away on the gentle tides of free mojitos and BBQ 
sauce. I've also reassessed my view that this is a free festival open to 
anyone. Even at 3pm, there are queues snaking round the block to see Peace, the 
B-Town buzz band who seem to be playing about nine times a day in Austin. A few 
months ago their live show was sloppy and indulgent, with trippy wig-outs 
taking precedence over the big melodies of their record. Now, at the Vans 
showcase, they're blasting huge indie choruses with the professionalism of a 
stadium outfit. The progress they've made in performance, however, is matched 
by a further deterioration of their sense of style. Lead singer Harrison has 
taken to wearing highwaisted, circus trousers with a maroon fur coat.

Perhaps they share a stylist with Charli XCX, who is outside at the same venue 
jiving around on stage in some baggy pyjamas and neon yellow sports bra. Her 
spritely pop has come on a bit since she tried to become the poster girl for 
Witch House in 2010, but it still feels a bit second division compared with 
recent blog-pop releases fromSky Ferreira 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/feb/25/sky-ferreira-everything-embarrassing>
 and Chloe Howl. After her, it's Disclosure, who manage a stunning sunset show 
full of big garage beats. It's an unusual set up, with vocals being played from 
a backing track while the lads fill in the beats with drum pads and analogue 
synths, but they make it work. You can't help thinking about how good they're 
going to be playing to 100 times as many people at the summer festivals.

Most of the week is dominated by turns from big names in hip-hop. Kendrick 
Lamar <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/21/kendrick-lamar-review>'s 
show at Stubb's is one of the hottest tickets of the festival but for all the 
hype, it feels a little directionless, relying on a basic DJ and MC set-up that 
feels a bit hollow for an artist so focused on big atmospheric production. 
Still, he's got the best songs of pretty much anyone at the festival, and when 
he turns the crowd into a foul-mouthed gospel chorus for Bitch Don't Kill My 
Vibe it's hard to find fault. More impressive is Earl Sweatshirt's late-night 
show in some kind of Mountain Dew-sponsored back garden. With members of Odd 
Future and heavy clouds of smoke flanking the stage, he switches between cheeky 
bon mots about John Cusack and aggressive tirades about having sex with 
strangers while smoking.

There's tonnes more I saw: Angel Haze spitting "odes to dickheads" at the 
Perez Hilton party, Swedish singer MO providing some genuine competition to 
Grimes in the bonkers dance stakes andChvrches 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/mar/01/chvrches-live-review-ica-churches> 
telling the crowd to think twice about buying Converse while playing the, er, 
Converse stage. But two performances stand way, way out.

The first is Solange at Fader Fort. Her live band are jaw-droppingly slick, 
perfectly tailored and musically in sync with west-coast 70s soul and 2013 
cutting-edge production. Solange is a consumate popstar, never simply running 
through the set. In every song she engages in impressive vocal acrobatics with 
her backing singers and some slinky synchronised choreography with her 
guitarist Dev Hynes. The crowd screams for a good minute and a half between 
songs, reserving their biggest cheer for her understated cover of Dirty 
Projectors' Stillness in the Move â€“ a song she has reworked as an Erykah Badu 
neo-soul slow jam. Solange doesn't have a big arsenal of hits yet, but as a 
live pop performer she is peerless.

The other is the Boiler Room party on the final night. The British promoters 
are used to putting on tiny, exclusive shows in east London cupboard venues, so 
they could have been out of their depth holding a closing night bash at a huge 
warehouse on the outskirts of town. Their decision massively pays off when 
Californian hip-hop trioDeath Grips 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/08/death-grips-review> arrive in the 
middle of the venue for what is the most abrasive live performance this writer 
has ever seen. Vocalist MC Ride's flow is more gutteral deranged hollering than 
what you might call "rap". He's underscored by piercing Trap hi-hats, two giant 
inflatable ecstasy pills being suckerpunched across the venue and a panoramic 
projection of digital distortion on every wall. It leaves me awestruck.

SXSW is like stepping into music's future. Part of that is seeing the 
uncomfortable truth that record labels and DIY aesthetic are going to slowly be 
replaced by sport-style sponsorship. But it does also prove there are still 
acts that can excel beyond expectation to make music that feels like it comes 
from somewhere entirely new. The trip toTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> was worth it just for Solange and 
Death Grips, although all those brisket buns certainly didn't harm things.
 