
"I heard T-Model's first album, Pee-Wee Get My Gun, when I was about 18 and 
immediately loved it. It was so stripped down and raw, I almost couldn't 
believe it was real. I loved the propulsive, hypnotic thing that happens when 
you're making the most out of the most minimal instrumentation. I went to see 
him play at a little club called the Euclid Tavern in Cleveland and I was 
floored. He was playing a Peavey heavy metal guitar with lots of distortion, 
and the drummer, Spam, was obviously mentally ill. Hewould put his stick in his 
mouth and shake his head back and forth like a dog with a bone. Just outta 
control!

"That was my introduction to T-Model Ford. It had a big influence on me, and I 
thought I could have fun doing this kind of music. Later, a friend and I went 
down to Greenville, Mississippi, to find T-Model Ford. It seems crazy to drive 
24 hours to try to find someone you don't even know, but I did it. I don't know 
what I was thinking. Greenville is pretty fucked up. Really bad drug problems, 
weird, a rough spot to say the least. When you hearabout T-Model being a 
violent guy you know where it comes from 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2003/nov/16/popandrock2>. Where he's from his 
story is common: abused by his father, not going to school, family not around.

"This big white Lincoln pulled up with a dangerous-looking plywood trailer, 
with 'Boss of the Blues' painted on the side in black spray paint. It's 
T-Model. I walked over and said I'd been looking for him, and he told me to 
follow him. We get to an opening with two trailer homes and a little BBQ and a 
few people outside. I brought out my guitar and we plugged into the same amp 
and T-Model likes what he hears, understands that I know his music and I'm 
following him. He knew exactly what he was doing. Old guys don't play those 
unnecessary licks any more, they've figured out you don't need anything fancy, 
you just do the right shit over and over again. It's almost like outsider art. 
All he has to do is be himself, and that will always be pure.

"We jammed all afternoon and played a juke joint that night, then slept on his 
floor. He was nothing but nice â€“ all smiles. There's nothing like T-Model's 
smile, and boy, he'll use it! He'll find the prettiest girl in the audience and 
just smile all night.

I think about him every once in a while when I'm onstage, especially when I'm 
having a shitty gig. When he sat behind his guitar it didn't matter that he was 
only getting $5 for a four-hour set, he was just happy to be able to play." 
It's helpful to remember that.

Key recording: She Ain't None of Your'n (Fat Possum, 2000)
 