
The Roi des Belges began its life last summer in a barn in rural Sussex. A 
marriage of Plymouth steel and magenta-stained timber, it's a strange little 
vessel dignified by its nods toHeart of Darkness 
<http://www.shmoop.com/heart-of-darkness/photo-roi-des-belges.html>, Roi des 
Belges being the name of the boatJoseph Conrad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/dec/01/classics.josephconrad> took up the 
Congo in 1889. It would take five months, a police escort and a crane to bring 
it to where it stands now: on the roof of London's Queen Elizabeth Hall by the 
Thames.

As a structure, it is a giddy and beautiful thing with broad windows offering 
views along the river. While its presence is in part aesthetic, its purpose is 
also practical: devised byLiving Architecture 
<http://www.living-architecture.co.uk/> and the arts organisation Artangel 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/>, and given the additional name A Room for London 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/>, the boat will, for much of its 12-month 
rooftop residency, operate asa very special one-room hotel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/jan/15/room-for-london-architecture-review>
.

However, for a number of days each month as part of the Cultural Olympiad, it 
will also host a series of events. There will be resident writers and thinkers, 
a sprinkling of uncategorisable performances (including Orson Welles's unfilmed
screenplay <http://www.wellesnet.com/?p=1173> for Heart of Darkness and David 
Byrne talking about bicycles 
<http://www.davidbyrne.com/art/books/bicycle_diaries/>) and a monthly musical 
event.

A year ago, Michael Morris, co-director of Artangel, invited me for a glass of 
wine. It wasn't such a curious invitation. Michael and I often email each other 
about shared musical interests:Edward Sharpe & the Magnetic Zeros 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DHEOF_rcND8>, the Low Anthem 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q8EqN5VI31Y&feature=fvst>, Lou Reed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/nov/08/lou-reed-lester-bangs-interview>. 
But this time, Michael had a specific proposal: would I help to curateSounds 
From a Room <http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/sounds-from-a-room>, 12 miniature 
concerts to be held in the ship?

I agreed, of course, and we met several times thereafter, attending gigs of 
potential performers, brainstorming possible artists, and deciding that, owing 
to the size of the boat, we could really only invite solo acts or duos. It grew 
increasingly tricky. I took to scrawling down names in my notebook as and when 
they hit me – standing on the Victoria Line struck by the idea of James Blake, 
Tunng orKate Rusby <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MZkjrgS_lKY>, ; suddenly 
wondering aboutGold Panda <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Su1wK7iCQfQ> while 
baking a clementine cake.

There were logistical problems, of course. How does one track down Chuck 
Berry? If we sweet-talk Jerry Lee Lewis into doing it, can we winch a piano up? 
And of course there were disappointments, delays, illnesses and endless emails 
as we attempted to tally touring schedules, album launches, holidays. I now 
know more about amps, acoustics and the specific requirements for looping 
violins than I ever thought possible. Perhaps the hardest part was simply 
explaining precisely what the project was and that, no, we had not taken leave 
of our senses. "It's a boat?" they would say. "On a roof?" And then a pause. 
"Where will the audience be?"

Crucial to the whole idea is the notion that these should not be regular gigs. 
The space is meant to be a place of creative contemplation: high above the 
river and the busy thoroughfare, it is a strangely tranquil spot, and we hoped 
that this might influence visiting writers and musicians. For the musical 
strand, players will board the boat the day before their performance, giving 
them time to acclimatise and consider their performance. They can use the space 
any way they please, playing in the belly of the ship, in the library, or on 
the viewing deck. .

Wildbirds and Peacedrums <http://wildbirdsandpeacedrums.com/> have expressed a 
desire to play the boat itself, like an instrument;Imogen Heap 
<http://imogenheap.com/> will write and perform a new song during her stay; 
quite whatAmadou and Mariam <http://www.amadou-mariam.com/> or the cellist 
Natalie Clein <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pP40xj6GQHA> will do remains to 
be seen.

Inside the boat itself, there will be no audience: just a couple of camera 
operators, perhaps a handful of the artists' friends. The shows will instead be 
streamed live – free – via theRoom for London website 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk>, as well as the Guardian's music site 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music>. And there will be a large-screen streaming 
of each event inside theQueen Elizabeth Hall 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/venues/queen-elizabeth-hall>.

We have decided to announce the lineup in three-month bursts. So in March, we 
have the magnificentLaurie Anderson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vzYu88jIDYs>
; and in February, the German composerHeiner Goebbels 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/apr/30/heiner-goebbels-london-premiere>, 
who will deliver a musical response to Conrad's river journal, accompanied by 
the Senegalese griots Sira and Boubacar Djebate on voice and kora, the French 
musician Xavier Garcia on electronics, and the actor Andre Wilms (we relaxed 
our two-person rule for this one). The January act appears this Saturday: the 
multi-instrumentalistAndrew Bird <http://www.andrewbird.net/>, one of my 
favourite musicians, who's promising whistling, loops and a mysterious spinning 
horn – the first of many sounds from our very special room.

• See Andrew Bird perform live from the ship on 28 January at 
guardian.co.uk/music <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music>
 