
You wait ages for a bus-based theological advertising campaign, and then two 
come along at once. But I think it's time for a third. If Blaise Pascal were in 
charge, the ad would read something like:

There might be a God after all. Maybe you should factor that in.

The original atheist bus campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising> 
irritated detractors in its own camp for the word probably: "There's probably 
no God, so stop worrying and enjoy your life." It was, said the hardliners with 
open contempt, anagnostic bus campaign.

Then came the Christian counterstrike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/feb/05/religion-christianity-christian-bus-ads>
. The Christians want to put together an ad saying: "There definitely is a God. 
So join the Christian party and enjoy your life." Commenters on Cif – 
presumably of the Godless persuasion – complained that the central claim of the 
ad contravened ASA guidelines by being impossible to substantiate.

It strikes me that my man Blaise "Sums" Pascal has been overlooked in all 
this. "Sums" memorably commented that, as a gambler, if you didn't know whether 
or not there is a God, you might as well behave as if there were. Winnings: 
eternal life, infinite bliss etc. Stakes: forgoing a bit of bad behaviour. 
Odds: immaterial. It's like a twopenny lottery ticket to win the world – you 
can spare those two pennies.

Pascal's advice on the bus front, I think, would be the following. Given what 
we know about the stakes, it's worth putting a punt on the existence of God. 
That would involve not winding him up by giving money to the atheist bus 
campaign (nobody likes being told they don't exist, even the omnipotent). 
Better to state openly that you believe at least in the possibility of him/her 
(down in the comments will do) and to perform some act of charity, not 
necessarily bus-related, as an earnest of good faith.

Here's a link to ActionAid <http://www.actionaid.org/>, who feed the starving 
and heal the sick and that sort of thing. Or you can stick stuff to the side of 
a bus if you prefer.
 