
I’m allergic to panel discussions – and I’m sure I’m not the only one. If I 
never have to listen again to someone making a speech under the guise of asking 
a question, it’ll be too soon. I’ve been to “creativity conferences” that are 
about people doing exciting creative things, but the format for the 
conversations about those exciting things are dull and formulaic. I’ve been to 
theatre conferences that are the same. I have never been able to understand 
why, as artists who carefully craft every moment of our creative work, we don’t 
always give the same amount of care to talking about them.

So when I was asked to put together the Belfast event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-conversation-belfast-an-adventure-with-the-audience-19062426230>
 in the A Nation’s Theatre conversation series, presented by Battersea Arts 
Centre and the Guardian, I had to find a way to walk that particular walk. 
Rather than simply moaning.


Three years ago, I had a massive personal revelation. My company, Replay 
<http://www.replaytheatreco.org/>, started on a journey that was to change my 
theatre-making forever. We began to create theatre adventures for children and 
young people with profound and multiple learning difficulties. During one of 
the many creative consultation sessions on the way to producing our showBliss 
<http://www.replaytheatreco.org/projects/project-single.php?v=17>, pupils 
involved revealed to me that theatre is very simply and profoundly about one 
human connecting with another human. Everything I’ve made since has been about 
generating the optimum conditions for that connection, with the audience right 
at its heart.


Theatres should be the new town squares, not monasteries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/19/a-nations-theatre-shopfront-belgrade-no-boundaries>
For the Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> conversation, we 
decided to experiment with a different form to see if we might create those 
conditions. If we were going to talk about theatre that was connected, 
intimate, different and audience-focused, surely it made sense that the 
conversation about it would be similarly connected, intimate and different?


The event was created by Replay and the MAC in Belfast 
<http://www.themaclive.com/>, featuring the work of TheatreofplucK 
<http://www.theatreofpluck.com/> and Shannon Yee 
<https://shannonyee.wordpress.com/>. During the day, audience members could 
choose to attend one of three deeply audience-centric experiences, which took 
place variously in apool 
<http://www.replaytheatreco.org/projects/project-single.php?v=38>, a bed 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/reviews/2015/reassembled-slightly-askew/> and a 
cupboard 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/stage/review-trouble-a-rock-and-a-hard-place-1.2433351>
. They came together for a group experience in the evening, set up to look like 
a panel discussion – and then a show that is usuallystaged by surprise in 
classrooms <http://www.replaytheatreco.org/projects/project-single.php?v=40> 
happened. By surprise.

A further digression: a good few years ago, I was privileged to attend the 
very firstDevoted & Disgruntled <http://www.devotedanddisgruntled.com/> 
conversation about the future of theatre. I spent the first 15 minutes thinking 
it was the worst idea ever and the other three hours thinking it was one of the 
best. Working on a similar principle to theOpen Space Technology 
<http://openspaceworld.org/wp2/explore/> that D&D is based on (that the best 
conversations at conferences happen during the breaks), I reasoned that the 
very best conversations about the arts are argued out over food and drink. Not 
sitting in rows on hard chairs in a room with striplighting.

So we sat around candlelit, banquet-style tables and ate tapas and talked. And 
talked. Lots of the talk was about theatre. But just as much was about how we 
talk about it.

We asked people to write something brief about their experience of the 
conversation before they left. The word that kept coming up was connection. The 
final question they were asked to respond to was: “What is the kind of 
adventure you want to have as a theatre audience member?” Somebody tweeted: 
“Should theatre always be an adventure?” And that’s the joy of good 
conversations. They change the questions as well as the answers.

 * A Nation’s Theatre debates are run in conjunction with Guardian Live. To 
find out aboutupcoming events <https://membership.theguardian.com/events>, sign 
up toGuardian Members <https://membership.theguardian.com/welcome>.
 