
Shall we get a Chinese takeaway? Fish and chips? What about some Italian food? 
Would you all like pizza? It's 1983 and this is a rare treat as, like most 
suburban British families, we rarely eat out. We've just moved to Glasgow and, 
as there is no oven or fridge, we have to look to the outside world for food.

We cruise around the sludgy January streets in a metallic green Morris Marina 
until we come across an illuminated plastic sign that reads "Romy's" in an 
extravagant script. "PIZZA" is exclaimed in a more powerful capital bold below. 
As we drive back, the car is filled with the smell of hot grease, newspaper and 
vinegar, mingling with the vinyl aroma of the beige seats. The alien scenery of 
a new city blurs past behind heavy condensation. I'm not interested. I'm hungry 
and I'm excited. Back on the bare boards of the new house, I sit cross-legged 
by my brother and unpeel the paper to reveal a golden disc perched on a mound 
of soft slippery chips. Because it has been deep-fried, it looks like a huge 
coin. This is Italian food. I file this in my mental reference library and 
notice that oil comes out when I squeeze the foam-like bread between my thumb 
and finger.

A couple of decades later, I'm sitting by my Italian friend Alicia in the 
Trattoria della Pesa, a very traditional Milanese restaurant. As each course 
appears, she explains a little about it. Cappone (capon) is castrated as a 
young rooster, so the flesh tends to have a more delicate flavour. Mostardo are 
a spicy candied fruit, both sweet and savoury. Risotto al salto is dry and, 
particular to the north, is traditionally reheated from the day before. When we 
say infinocchiare, we're talking about fennel, but the phrase is also used to 
mean taking the piss or taking advantage, from when fennel used to be served 
before wine was tasted at a meal; the anaesthetic properties disguised the bad 
taste. Lingue di gatto are "cats' tongues", delicate butter biscuits that melt 
on your tongue.

Each explanation is novel and exciting, triggering my saliva glands and 
imagination, but leaving me feeling that my understanding of Italian food 
hasn't really progressed much since I discovered deep-fried pizza.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 