
From the hilltop railway station, rain clouds veil sight of Dartmoor and, in 
nearby Stony Lane, run-off flows between shoals of sodden beech leaves. Down 
this sunken way towards the river, ferns, mosses and pennywort show green under 
the tangle of fading bramble, yellow-leafed hazel and bare sycamore; the 
enclosing hedge-banks frame occasional glimpses across the valley where steep 
woodland engulfs river-cliffs andpinnacles like Chimney Rock 
<http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/4567335>.

Sound of water roaring over the weir carries uphill and becomes even louder 
below Hatches Green, where tennis court and football pitch in King George’s 
Field are overlooked by the orange and dark green deciduous and coniferous 
woods opposite – once part of the Duke of Bedford’s estate.

Autumn on the Herefordshire Trail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/16/autumn-walking-tour-herefordshire-country-diary>
In the 1800s, the river bank here, on the Cornish side, was industrialised and 
busy <http://www.tvia.org.uk/pages/surfacemining_lodes16_20.shtml>. Chimneys 
rose from the Bealswood brickworks that baked the local blue clay; a paper mill 
became a smelly bone-crushing mill for fertiliser, and the town’s gas works 
opened in 1872.

Early on, a canal was cut to by-pass the fish weir at Weir Head and allow 
commercial shipping to navigate between tidal and non-tidal stretches; barges 
that carried coal, corn, manure, granite, bricks and lime had to be hauled 
manually upstream against the current and into the lock for access towards the
medieval New Bridge 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/research-publications/jmw-turner/joseph-mallord-william-turner-newbridge-gunnislake-and-the-tamar-valley-towards-calstock-r1131319>
.

A scheme to link Bude Haven on the north coast with the navigable Tamar had 
been abandoned, but this short section – theTamar Manure Navigation Canal 
<http://www.tvia.org.uk/pages/tamarmanurecanal.shtml> – was used for more than 
100 years. Now the lock-keeper’s cottage is a private house on its island; cut 
granite blocks still define sides of the lock, but trees overgrow the canal and 
waterlogged paths, making it difficult to envisage the tramway that linked with 
lime kilns atNetstakes quay 
<http://www.tvia.org.uk/cgi-bin/tviagal.pl?location=1008>, just downriver. 

Today, after heavy rain, brown water with eddies of bubbles and scum swirls 
beneath Colley Cliff towards the Impham bend and onwards to Calstock – a mile 
away as the crow flies, but five times as far around meanders and past the
historic quays of Morwellham <http://www.morwellham-quay.co.uk/>, Newquay, 
Gawton, Rumleigh, Okeltor and Tuckermarsh.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 