
Milk from Tasmanian devils could kill antibiotic-resistant bacteria like 
golden staph and potentially combat the deadly facial tumour disease that has 
killed80% of the wild devil population in the past 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/03/tasmanian-devils-thrown-a-lifeline-by-facial-tumour-that-threatens-them>
.

According to research led by Sydney University PhD student Emma Peel, milk 
produced by the marsupials contains antimicrobial peptides called cathelicidins 
which had been tested as being effective against a number of pathogens, 
including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or golden staph.

“These peptides are killing superbugs, so there is potential for future 
development into antibiotics,” Peeltold the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-17/tasmanian-devil-milk-study-could-help-in-fight-against-cancer/7938148>
.

Tasmanian devils rapidly evolving to resist contagious cancer, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/tasmanian-devils-rapidly-evolving-to-resist-contagious-cancer-study-finds>
“That is the next step for our research, to see if these peptides have 
anti-cancer potential, if they are killing superbugs maybe they could kill the 
facial tumour.”

Peel said the tests were done with artificial peptides made by extracting the 
cathelicidin sequence from the devil’s genome.

The artificial peptides also tested as between three and six times more 
effective against some fungal infections than anti-fungal medication.

Milking the famously aggressive animals was a process to be undertaken “very, 
very carefully and with a lots of safety gear,” Peel said.

Androo Kelly, owner and director of Trowunna Wildlife park in northern Tasmania
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania>, which has bred 16 
generations of devils, said it could be done but “I don’t think you would set 
up a dairy”.

He tried his hand at milking devils in the 1990s for an earlier series of 
research by University of Tasmania associate professor Menna Jones.

“The devils that we have, we have mothers with young that are also used to 
being handled, so it’s a simple thing that when the mothers are lactating you 
just squeeze the milk out,” he said. “It was more of a once off, it would not 
be a common practice.”

Kelly said the research answered the longstanding question of why young devils 
did not contract the highly contagious devil facial tumour disease from 
infected mothers. It also explained how the immature young, which are born at 
just 3mm long and mature in the pouch, survive without a mature immune system.

 “I really believed that the solution to the devils disease was something 
within them … this is only further supporting that,” he said.

Devil facial tumour disease was first reported in 1996 and spread to cover 95% 
of Tasmania, prompting an international breeding program to save the animal.

Recent research found the carrion-eating marsupials had already evolved a 
degree of resistance to the disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/tasmanian-devils-rapidly-evolving-to-resist-contagious-cancer-study-finds>
, which is caused bytwo of only four strains of viral cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/tasmanian-devils-can-catch-second-strain-of-facial-cancer-say-researchers>
 to be found in the wild.

Researchers in Hobart have also developed a vaccine and begun releasing 
vaccinated devils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/tasmanian-devils-can-catch-second-strain-of-facial-cancer-say-researchers>
 into areas believed to be free of the disease.
 