
Michael Billington's welcome appreciation of Shelagh Delaney's significance (A 
brief taste of success, but this one-hit-wonder broke the mould of British 
theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney-working-class-women>
, 22 November) omits, as does yourobituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney> notice, to 
mention one vital aspect of her play, A Taste of Honey.

At the time, and until 1968, the lord chamberlain was responsible for 
licensing and censoring plays. Delaney was the first dramatist successfully to 
overcome the ancient, censorial veto on stage plays that openly depicted gay 
characters or discussed homosexuality. Her sympathetic portrayal of the play's 
young, gay student was, therefore, ground-breaking. Until then playwrights 
tried to evade the censor's veto by resorting to subterfuge and innuendo. WhenA 
Taste of Honey <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-taste-of-honey> was 
submitted for licensing it caused a furore. The lord chamberlain's assistant 
comptroller, Brigadier Norman Gwatkin, commented: "I think it's revolting, 
quite apart from the homosexual bits … To me it has no saving grace whatsoever. 
If we pass muck like this, it does give our critics something to go on."

But the lord chamberlain's chief play-reader, Charles Heriot, judged: "It is 
concerned with the forbidden subject in a way that no one I believe could take 
exception to." The lord chamberlain inclined to Heriot's view and licensed the 
play. It is highly probable that Delaney's treatment of the subject and the 
favourable critical and public response to A Taste of Honey played a 
significant role in persuading the lord chamberlain partially to relax his ban 
on homosexuality and gays a few months later.Shelagh Delaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/shelagh-delaney> ought to rank as a gay 
heroine.
Nicholas de Jongh
London
 