
Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> hospitals and 
universities are conducting secret medical experiments on hundreds of primates, 
according to media reports.

Scientists told to stop wasting animal lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/18/animal-lives-wasted-in-drugs-safety-tests>
Fairfax Media reported 
<http://www.smh.com.au/environment/animals/baboons-used-in-frankenstein-like-experiments-in-sydney-20160120-gm9wa8>
 on Sunday that taxpayer funds had been used to complete surgical experiments, 
including the insertion of a pig’s kidney into a baboon.

NSW Health is reported to have denied the performing of whole organ 
transplants, despite the acknowledgement of the National Health and Medical
Research <https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> Council that it has 
funded research for “whole organ animal-to-animal xenotransplantation”.

Fairfax reported that Sydney Local Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> District said a baboon colony 
overseen by Royal Prince Alfred hospital “has helped medical researchers 
conduct important research which has contributed significantly to paving the 
way for new treatments of disorders such as pre-eclampsia, complicated 
diabetes, kidney disorders and vascular diseases”.

The University of Sydney told Fairfax that it aimed to reduce and replace the 
use of all animals in research.

A spokeswoman said they used about eight marmosets per year and “all 
procedures were performed on fully anaesthetised animals that were then 
euthanased – the animals were never aware of these procedures and did not feel 
any pain”.

“All researchers would prefer not to use animals in their research. However, 
in their quest to cure blindness, diabetes, cancer, epilepsy and many other 
illnesses, animal research is currently the best hope for finding a cure,” the 
spokeswoman said.

Monkeys break free in great escape from research facility in Puerto Rico
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/28/monkeys-freed-research-center-puerto-rico>
A Senate inquiry into the import of primates into Australia for medical 
research is set to report on its findings in early March.

The Greens senator Lee Rhiannon has proposed banning the importation of 
primates for research purposes and says research should not be secretive.

“Full details on the treatment of the animals used in research and the purpose 
of the experiments should be disclosed,” Rhiannon said.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 