
UK taxpayers subsidised cheap loans to a foreign metals company owned by a 
multibillionaire while the British steel industry was fighting for survival.

Accounts for UK Export Finance (UKEF), which lends money to companies planning 
to buy products from British exporters, show that it gave £82.8m in “buyer’s 
credit” to Lebedinsky GOK, which mines iron ore, a key element in steel 
production.


Lebedinsky is part of the metals and mining company Metalloinvest, which is 
owned by the Uzbek-born tycoonAlisher Usmanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, who has a stake in 
Arsenal.

UKEF’s support for Lebedinsky helped finance a contract with Midrex UK, a 
subsidiary of the US company Midrex Technologies, which is owned by Japan’s 
Kobe Steel.

Accounts for Midrex UK show that it employed six staff and paid no corporation 
tax in Britain.

Midrex Technologies says it set up a UK office to take advantage of the 
taxpayer-backed UKEF scheme. The company’s website says Midrex UK was 
“specifically established in the heart of one of the world’s financial hubs to 
provide our customers with access to valuable project financing”.

Gareth Stace, the director of UK Steel, said: “The UK steel sector has been in 
the deepest crisis for more than a generation in the past 12 months for two key 
reasons: higher costs resulting from punitive government policy and the massive 
rise in dumping of steel from countries such as Russia.

“Learning that government money is being pumped directly into the Russian 
steel sector beggars belief and actively goes against everything we have been 
calling on the UK government to do, to ensure that the UK steel sector can 
compete on a fair and level playing field.”

The Labour MP Stephen Kinnock, whose Aberavon constituency includes the Port 
Talbot steelworks, the future of whichhas been under threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/tata-steel-financial-aid-pledge-remains-despite-scrapping-of-sale>
, called on the business secretary, Greg Clark, to investigate the loans 
immediately.

“If it is true that UKEF has been underwriting loans for steel projects that 
deliver relatively little tangible benefit to the British economy, and which 
are actively supporting the foreign steel industry, then a number of questions 
will have to be answered by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy,” Kinnock said.

“The British steel industry has been battling for survival for some time now 
and so it beggars belief that British taxpayers have been underwriting loans 
that are supporting the activities of foreign companies that are operating in 
direct competition with our very own steel industry.

“British steelworkers make the best steel that money can buy. They are not 
looking for special treatment, but they are looking for a government that is 
going to fight their corner – a government that is doing all it possibly can to 
support and strengthen this vital foundation industry. Instead, they have a 
government that has demonstrated nothing but incompetence and indifference.

“I urge the new secretary of state to conduct an urgent, comprehensive and 
detailed inquiry into this case.”

A spokesman for Midrex said while Midrex UK was set up “partly at least” to 
take advantage of UKEF, British companies had benefited from its use of buyers’ 
credit.

“Under our contract, Midrex UK placed a number of subcontracts with various UK 
companies to supply equipment, goods and services as required under our main 
contract with Lebedinsky GOK,” a spokesman said.

“These subcontracts ran to tens of millions of dollars of work that was placed 
in the UK, which, in the absence of UKEF support, may not have all been won by 
the UK.”

UKEF said: “UK Export Finance’s mission is to ensure that no viable UK export 
fails for lack of finance or insurance, supporting UK economic growth and 
employment.

“We support UK businesses and do not discriminate against those with non-UK 
parent companies. Midrex UK is a UK company, and with our support, [it] sourced 
goods from UK suppliers in the Midlands for this transaction, supporting the UK 
manufacturing industry and jobs in the sector.”
 