
RIP Taylor Swift: buried by Kim Kardashian West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> on 18 July. Or so 
those gleefully celebrating the supposed downfall of megastar Swift want the 
obituary to go.

Many hundreds of thousands people seem to have been waiting for this moment 
for years: Swift’s pedestal has begun to crumble beneath her feat. The 
unstoppable force of her success combined with her image management has met – 
with a thundering crash – the immoveable object that is the Kardashian 
publicity-generating machine.

On Monday Kardashian West published video of Swift seeming to approve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/18/taylor-swift-condemns-kim-kardashians-release-of-kanye-west-phone-call>
 Kanye West’s controversial Famous lyric – an approval Swift’s camp has been 
forcefully denying. But even before that, Swift’s star was already under siege.

Taylor Swift is so annoying; she is the next Anne Hathaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway>.

Taylor Swift’s’s 4 July party was a “self-loving, narcissistic shriekfest”.

Is Taylor Swift <https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> bad for Tom 
Hiddleston’s career?

The above are real critiques 
<http://www.ok.co.uk/celebrity-news/559037/could-taylor-swift-be-bad-for-tom-hiddlestons-career>
 inreal news articles 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/07/06/why-taylor-swift-s-july-4-party-looked-like-utter-hell.html>
 andcommentary pieces 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/music/taylor-swifts-reign-comes-crashing-down-has-she-caught-a-case-of-the-anne-hathaways/news-story/286f1efec0058a47f334427eea6618e9>
, published by reputable news outlets. The predictable backlash that has been 
brewing against Swift for a couple of years is finally reaching crescendo.

It was only a matter of time before the talented, successful, unapologetic, 
in-control young woman was fodder for critics, reduced tocomparisons to 
“annoying” Anne Hathaway and almost-annoying Jennifer Lawrence 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/music/taylor-swifts-reign-comes-crashing-down-has-she-caught-a-case-of-the-anne-hathaways/news-story/286f1efec0058a47f334427eea6618e9>
 (notice it’s never men who are annoying?),“Mean Girls gone wild” 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/07/06/why-taylor-swift-s-july-4-party-looked-like-utter-hell.html>
, and the hashtags #taylorswiftisoverparty and #KimExposedTaylorParty.
Ryan Caldwell (@ryancald) 
Taylor Swift is that girl everyone wants at first before realizing that she's 
literally a psychopath#KimExposedTaylorParty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/KimExposedTaylorParty?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/ryancald/status/754912876398252032> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ryancald/status/754912876398252032> Vannia Aranda 
(@vee_088) 
@KimKardashian <https://twitter.com/KimKardashian> I have never loved you so 
much...I never thought I'd say this, but thank you#KimExposedTaylorParty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/KimExposedTaylorParty?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/vee_088/status/754912926952075264> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/vee_088/status/754912926952075264> Emily (@VilledaEmily23) 
Finally someone stood up to her😂 #KimExposedTaylorParty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/KimExposedTaylorParty?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/VilledaEmily23/status/754912926411034624> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/VilledaEmily23/status/754912926411034624> 
The door to the latest round of vicious commentary was opened by Swift’s 
apparently heavily stage managed appearances with Hiddleston as her new 
boyfriend. That the pair want to be seen together is obvious – nobody goes on a 
date to the Colosseum in an effort to avoid crowds – but it is Swift who has 
been the lightning rod for the ridiculous commentary on it. Hiddleston, 
meanwhile, is treated as though he is an infant under the spell of some wicked 
witch (so goes the gendered implication), with no agency of his own.

“He hates that he has become a joke,” the Hollywood Gossip reported 
<http://www.thehollywoodgossip.com/2016/07/tom-hiddleston-i-need-to-dump-taylor-swift-but-im-trapped/>
, about how “trapped” the rich and famous grown man is. “It’s hard for him to 
prove that to everybody because of how insistent Taylor is that everything that 
they do with each other is photographed.”

Vox dissected the commentary thus 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/7/9/12099354/taylor-swift-tom-hiddleston-hiddleswift-relationship-fake>
: “Somehow, as many angry observers implied, Hiddleston, and his smooth-as-silk 
British accent, was supposed to bebetter than this … and, by proxy, deserving 
of someone better than Swift.”

A series of aggressive tweets from her ex-boyfriend Calvin Harris sent 
thousands of people to Swift’s Instagram to leave a snake emoji. Instead of 
focusing on how hilarious it was that Swiftwrote a hit song for him under a 
male pseudonym 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2016/07/13/taylor_swift_ghostwriting_hits_as_nils_sjoberg_is_a_genius_jab_at_sexist.html>
, the media concentrated on the fact that Harris did not like the way she made 
it public.

Swift deserves critique for her brand of feminism, which is part 
friendship-as-beauty-pageant mixed with individualism on steroids. Is she a 
master manipulator of the media? Without a doubt. AndKanye was right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/14/kanye-west-taylor-swift-vmas>: 
Single Ladies is a better song and video than You Belong With Me.

No person is without fault, but none of the above warrants the viciousness 
with which Swift is torn into. She does not deserve to be labelled an“obnoxious 
Nazi barbie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/11/taylor-swift-an-obnoxious-nazi-barbie-writes-camille-paglia>
”, for a start.

At the heart of the coverage of Tay-Tay/Hiddleswift are themes as old as the 
Bible: suspicion of successful women, resentment of unapologetic women, a need 
for women to know their place.

This of course is not just about Swift; she hardly needs me rushing to her 
defence. It’s about the public discourse around young women: the way we still 
talk and write about their success, and the uncomfortable way we treat their 
sexuality. Why else would we criticise the number of boyfriends Swift has had, 
and the swiftness with which she moved on from Harris to become Hiddleswift.

When stories are published calling Taylor “insane” and a “control freak”, and 
when entire Tumblr threads are devoted to how “annoying” she is, we’re sending 
a message to young girls and women: You are not allowed to be seen enjoying 
your success or your sexuality – and you are certainly not to appear to think 
you deserve either.

Justin Bieber caused thousands of dollars’ worth of damage to his neighbour’s 
property by egging it <http://www.tmz.com/videos/0_gn5hov7t/>, and allegedly 
spat on his fans 
<http://www.theguardian.pe.ca/News/Canada%20-%20World/Society/2013-07-26/article-3329059/Justin-Bieber-allegedly-spits-over-Toronto-hotel-balcony-while-fans-wait-below/1>
. Herepeatedly storms off stage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNR34fnLuv4> 
in the middle of concerts andtalks openly about his relationships 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ply-n8tLzbY> – yet he still can be redeemed. 

Swift writes catchy songs about some ex-boyfriends 
<http://pets.people.com/pets/2016/02/11/article/justin-bieber-confiscated-pet-monkey-og-mally>
, appears surprised when she wins awards, complains about how she has been 
represented in a Kanye West song, and is never photographed with a hair out of 
place. Those are her crimes. And they are apparently unforgivable.

Before her, Hathaway’s crimes were crying when she won an Oscar – and 
obviously wanting to win an Oscar. Lawrence’s wasbeing too goofy 
<http://au.complex.com/pop-culture/2015/12/jennifer-lawrence-persona-overkill>. 
Meanwhile, Woody Allen continues to make movies, Bill Murray is a loveable but 
curmudgeonly old fella’ and Terry Richardson is a feted photographer.

Swift is the only woman to win the Grammy for album of the year twice; she has 
sold 40m albums worldwide and has written the vast majority of her own hits. If 
she seems little intense, it probably has something to do with why she is so 
wildly successful, yet we remain determined to reduce her – in her own 
tongue-in-cheek words – to a nightmare dressed like a daydream.
 