
Great Britain’s silver in the men’s 4x100m individual medley relay meant the 
team ended the Olympic swimming programme in the pool with six medals, the 
country’s best medal haul in the sport since 1908. The list of one gold and 
five silvers also exceeded the three-to-five-medal target set by UK Sport prior 
to the Games.

Michael Phelps caps a glittering Olympic career with one final swimming gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/michael-phelps-olympic-career-swimming-gold>
In the final swimming event at the Olympic Aquatic Centre in Rio, the quartet 
of Chris Walker-Hebborn, Adam Peaty, James Guy and Duncan Scott finished behind 
a dominant US teamled by Michael Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/michael-phelps-olympic-career-swimming-gold>
, but even the 23-times gold medallist was said to have been stunned with 
Peaty’s astonishing breaststroke leg, which was timed at 56.59sec. The 
Uttoxeter-born swimmer, whose effort was almost half a second quicker than the 
world record he setin the individual 100m final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-his-own-world-record-again-in-golden-olympic-swim>
 last week, said of Phelps’s reaction: “He was swearing and said ‘56.5 is mad’. 
He was pretty impressed.”

Peaty’s gold marked the first by a British male swimmer since Adrian Moorhouse 
won the same event in 1988, and the 21-year-old’s two medals at the Games were 
joined bya pair of individual silvers from Jazz Carlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/rio-2016-double-silver-swimming-medallist-jazz-carlin-pays-tribute-to-parents>
 in both the 400m and 800m freestyle events. On Saturday Carlin said: “Since I 
was a young girl it has been a dream to go to an Olympics and to finally be 
here is a dream come true but to be on the podium twice with two silver medals 
definitely hasn’t sunk in, it feels a bit surreal.”

Six medals matches the number won at the 1912 Olympics in Stockholm, and is 
now only bettered by the London 1908 haul, when the team competing as the 
United Kingdom won four golds, two silvers and a bronze.

British medals in the pool since 1984

Rio 2016 – six

Gold Adam Peaty (100m breaststroke)

Silver Jazz Carlin (400m freestyle, 800m freestyle); Siobhan O’Connor (200m 
individual medley); James Guy, Stephen Milne, Duncan Scott, Dan Wallace, Robbie 
Renwick (4x200m freestyle relay); Chris Walker-Hebborn,Adam Peaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-peaty>, James Guy, Duncan Scott (4x100m 
medley relay)

London 2012 – three

Silver Michael Jamieson (200m breaststroke)

Bronze Rebecca Adlington (400m freestyle, 800m freestyle)

Beijing 2008 – three

Gold Rebecca Adlington (400m freestyle, 800m freestyle)

Bronze Jo Jackson (400m freestyle)

Athens 2004 – two

Bronze Steve Parry (200m butterfly); David Davies (1500m freestyle)

Sydney 2000 – none

Two fifth places were the best results for the British team

Atlanta 1996 – two

Silver Paul Palmer (400m freestyle)

Bronze Graeme Smith (1500m freestyle)

Barcelona 1992 – one

Bronze Nick Gillingham (200m breaststroke)

Seoul 1988 – three

Gold Adrian Moorhouse (100m breaststroke)

Silver Nick Gillingham (200m breaststroke)

Bronze Andy Jameson (100m butterfly)

Los Angeles 1984 – five

Silver Sarah Hardcastle (400m freestyle)

Bronze Neil Cochran (200m individual medley); June Croft (400m freestyle); 
Sarah Hardcastle (800m freestyle); Neil Cochran, Paul Easter, Paul Howe, Andrew 
Astbury (4x200m freestyle relay)
 