
It started on a Sunday, two weeks and half a lifetime ago. Adam Peaty in the 
pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-world-record-again-on-memorable-eveningfor-britain>
. Two dry days, then cameJoe Clarke in his canoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/joe-clarke-rio-2016-team-gb-canoe-slalom-gold-medal>
, Jack Laugher and Chris Mearstogether in the springboard diving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/chris-mears-team-gb-diving-rio-2016>
. Flowing on,the men’s team sprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/great-britain-mens-cycling-team-sprint-rio-2016-olympics>
. And then the flood. Three one day, thewomen’s coxless pair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/helen-glover-heather-stanning-rio-2016-olympics-rowing>
, themen’s coxless four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/great-britain-mens-four-olympic-gold>
, and themen’s team pursuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/team-gb-bradley-wiggins-olympic-gold-mens-team-pursuit-australia>
. Three more the next, themen’s eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/britain-men-s-eight-row-olympic-gold-glory-women-silver>
 and thewomen’s team pursuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/britain-women-gold-olympic-team-pursuit-rio-2016>
 andMo Farah’s first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/he-gets-knocked-down-but-mo-farah-gets-back-up-to-win-10000m-gold>
. A full five on the middle Sunday, success coming in such a giddy rush now it 
was a struggle to keep up.Max Whitlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/gb-max-whitlock-floor-gold-gymnastics-rio-olympics>
 andAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
,Jason Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/jason-kenny-gold-medal-olympics-callum-skinner>
 andJustin Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/justin-rose-olympic-games-golf-gold-medal-great-britain-rio-2016>
. On Monday, more.Charlotte Dujardin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/charlotte-dujardin-wins-olympic-gold-dressage>
,Giles Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/giles-scott-sailing-finn-class-rio-2016-olympics>
 thenLaura Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/laura-trott-rio-2016-olympic-omnium-gold-medal>
.Kenny again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/jason-kenny-wins-dramatic-keirin-for-sixth-olympic-gold>
. And on.Alistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/alistair-brownlee-jonny-triathlon-ollympics-rio-2016-gold-silver>
.Saskia Clark and Hannah Mills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/hannah-mills-saskia-clark-sailing-olympics-gold>
.Jade Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/jade-jones-maturity-taekwondo-olympic-final-rio>
,Nick Skelton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/veteran-showjumper-nick-skelton-olympic-gold-big-time>
, thewomen’s hockey team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/gb-women-hockey-historic-gold-shootout-final-olympics>
.Liam Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/liam-heath-great-britain-rio-2016-olympic-gold>
.Nicola Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/nicola-adams-rio-2016-olympics-boxing-gold-great-britain>
. One last of all, one morefor Mo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/mo-farah-gold-medal-5000m-double-double-history>
.

Twenty-seven golds, all told, and 23 silvers and 17 bronzes. Sixty-seven 
medals altogether, the most Great Britain have won at an Olympics since the 
1908 Games, surpassing even London 2012, and putting Great Britain ahead of 
China in the final medals table. It was only 20 years ago the team came 
back from Atlanta with a single gold medal between them, belonging to the 
coxless pair of Matthew Pinsent and Steve Redgrave. Everything else Great 
Britain did at those Olympics was silver or bronze or another hard luck story. 
This wave started building soon afterwards, when John Major decided to start 
channelling funds from the national lottery into elite sport. It seemed to 
reach a peak at London 2012 but has rolled on fast for another four years. 
“Where was that legacy?” Sebastian Coe said, through a grin, when he was asked 
on Saturday night about Team GB’s success.

Magical Mo Farah bags another Olympic gold and earns his place in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/mo-farah-gold-medal-5000m-double-double-history>
“We have talked a lot about legacy and one of the things I was absolutely sure 
we wanted to make happen was that this wasn’t just about participation,” Lord 
Coe continued. “It was about inspiring a new generation to want to do what they 
have seen Chris Hoy and Victoria Pendleton do in London, and we have seen that 
happen across a range of sports.” There is some truth in that but not nearly so 
much as there is in the straightforward fact that the more you invest in your 
athletes and their training, the better they will do. The wayUK Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uk-sport> has been working it, in what it 
calls the “no-compromise approach”, the better they do, the more investment 
they will get.

So as investment has grown, from £60m before Sydney in 2000, to just under 
£280m for Rio 16 years later, Great Britain have climbed the medal table, from 
36th in Atlanta, to 10th in Sydney and again in Athens, fourth in Beijing, 
third in London and, finally, second here. However, success doesn’t always 
become the British and before these Olympics were even over we had started to 
second-guess ourselves.The Guardian’s Simon Jenkins wondered whether spending 
money on elite sport was a sin somehow akin to doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/olympics-hysteria-britain-turned-soviet-team-gb>
. Janet Street-Porter asked why, after all this investment,the number of 
British people participating in sport had actually fallen since 2012 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/rio-2016-team-gb-olympic-medals-55m-each-can-we-justify-brits-slump-sofa-a7198906.html>
. One is a better question than the other. This system works and that should be 
celebrated. But we need to ask how to best ensure that all this amounts to 
something more than a handful of happy athletes and two weeks of good TV for 
the rest of us.

In all the excitement, you may have missed Mel Marshall during these Olympics. 
Marshall, 34, is the head coach at the City of Derby Swimming Club, where Peaty 
is her star pupil. She is one of the thousands of people whose hard and often 
thankless work behind the scenes has played such an important part in Great 
Britain’s success at these Games. When Peaty won that first gold medal with his 
record-breaking swim in the 100m breaststroke, Marshall came down from the 
stands to talk to the press and take a quick turn in the spotlight. Happy as 
she was for Peaty, some of what she said was a lot more sobering than anyone 
wanted to hear in the first rush of his victory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fgreat-britain-sporting-superpower-rio-olympic-medal-haul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a338bdd0e58b3d1e77387e50490b063a43909b0%2F49_50_5377_3226%2F5377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%20second%20place%20in%20Olympic%20table%20underlines%20value%20not%20price%20of%20gold%20medal%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fgreat-britain-sporting-superpower-rio-olympic-medal-haul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%20second%20place%20in%20Olympic%20table%20underlines%20value%20not%20price%20of%20gold%20medal%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fgreat-britain-sporting-superpower-rio-olympic-medal-haul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a338bdd0e58b3d1e77387e50490b063a43909b0%2F49_50_5377_3226%2F5377.jpg>
 Adam Peaty was helped in his Olympic quest by people behind the scenes at the 
City of Derby Swimmming Club. Photograph: Adam Pretty/Getty Images 
“We have had a very difficult year because we have lost facilities and all 
that kind of stuff,” Marshall said. “We’ve had some difficulties in terms of 
pools closing and all that kind of stuff.” How many? “All of them. We have lost 
three pools this year.”

In February, Derby city council announced that it was going to shut Moorways 
pool to save the £350,000 it costs to run it. Another, at Queen’s leisure 
centre, was also closed because it had become so decrepit the ceiling was at 
risk of falling in. The council eventually agreed to use £450,000 from their 
risk reserves to repair it. And, after campaigners gathered a petition with 
4,000 signatures, they also committed to keeping Moorways open for another 12 
months.

“That’s the background noise you just have to try to deal with,” Marshall 
said. She explained that in the circumstances she felt she had little choice 
but to invest the time and resources she had into training Peaty. “You just 
have to put all your eggs in one basket and still try and deliver the goods.”

This isn’t just happening in Derby. In the past three years, 17 leisure 
centres have either been threatened with closure or already been closed in 
Cornwall, so have nine in Birmingham, eight in Edinburgh and five in 
Shropshire. Local council cuts mean thatsport and leisure facilities are 
suffering in every county 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/blog/2015/mar/25/olympic-legacy-london-2012-idle-boasts>
 in the country. The trade union Unison estimates that £71m was cut from 
leisure centre budgets between 2010 and 2013.

Rio Olympics 2016 – medal table and results in full
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/aug/05/rio-olympics-2016-medal-table-and-results-in-full>
Coe says the legacy of London 2012 “wasn’t just about participation” but 
“inspiring a generation”. However, the two things are inextricably linked. It 
it true that Peaty, for one, made a resolution to compete in Rio after he 
watched his friend Craig Benson swim at the London Olympics. Peaty, however, 
was already an elite swimmer and, despite Coe’s claim, the measure of London’s 
success isn’t just how well our twentysomethings are competing now but how well 
our younger athletes do in a decade’s time. There is little point inspiring 
them to play sport if they have no place left to go and do it. The government 
has realised this and recently pledged to give an extra £150m of funding to 
primary schools between now and 2020. There is much, much more still to be done.

There isn’t actually all that much gold in a gold medal. At these Games, they 
have been made mostly out of silver recycled from mirrors and x-ray plates, and 
then gold-plated. Which means they are worth around £450. A silver costs half 
as much and a bronze almost nothing at all. Britain, if you divide the amount 
UK Sport invested by the number of medals the team won, spent more than £4m on 
each of them. Only a cynic would object because it is not the price of the 
medal that matters so much as the value.

But to extract that, we need to start investing as much time, energy, money 
and effort in the grassroots of our sport as we do the elite men and women who 
compete at the Olympics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fmo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mo%20Farah%20wins%20the%20'double%20double'%20gold%20medals%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fmo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mo%20Farah%20wins%20the%20%27double%20double%27%20gold%20medals%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fmo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights&media=>
Mo Farah wins the ‘double double’ gold medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/21/mo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights> 