
Last October, I wrote about a Silicon Valley startup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/25/healthcare-innovation-casues-bad-blood-in-us>
 called Theranos that claimed to have developed a revolutionary technology for 
medical diagnosis. The essence of it was that instead of having a vial of blood 
extracted from your arm, all that you needed was a pinprick’s worth. The peg 
for the column wasan impressive piece of investigative reporting 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-has-struggled-with-blood-tests-1444881901>
 by John Carreyrou of theWall Street Journal published under the headline “Hot 
Startup Theranos Has Struggled With Its Blood-Test Technology”.

Carreyrou had uncovered signs that all was not what it seemed in a startup 
that was straight from Silicon Valley central casting. It was led by a 
charismatic, glamorous, secretive young woman, Elizabeth Holmes, who modelled 
herself on Steve Jobs, right down to the black turtleneck sweater. It had a 
valuation of $9bn (£6.74bn), which made Holmes the youngest billionaire on the 
planet.

Governments and media are so dazzled by digital technology that they seem 
unable to appreciate what’s really going on

But, unusually for Silicon Valley, it had a board largely comprising east 
coast establishment boobies: two former US secretaries of state (Henry 
Kissinger, George Schultz), a former chairman of the Senate armed services 
committee (Sam Nunn), and a former defense secretary (William Perry). Given 
that everything these guys know about blood-testing technology could be written 
in large type on the back of a postage stamp, it was clear that Holmes didn’t 
want a board that could ask awkward questions.

Still, a technology that could eliminate one of the biggest bottlenecks in 
every hospital in the world would be a boon for humanity and so I expressed the 
hope that things were not as bad as theWSJ suggested. But it transpired that 
things were much worse than even Carreyrou suspected. The company has attracted 
the attention of a slew of federal agencies, including the Food and Drug 
Administration, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the FBI, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the US Attorney’s Office for the 
northern district of California. It also faces two class-action fraud lawsuits. 
AndForbes magazine has deleted Holmes from its list of America’s richest 
self-made women and reduced its previous estimate of her net worth from $4.5bn 
to zero.

The rise and precipitous fall of Theranos is a cautionary tale for our times 
and is beautifully told by Nick Bilton ofVanity Fair in a fascinating article 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/09/elizabeth-holmes-theranos-exclusive> 
that is worth reading in full. For me, though, it has a wider significance, 
because it illustrates a more general problem with corporations that sail under 
the tech banner, namely their loud insistence that any attempt to regulate them 
constitutes an attempt by the analogue world to stifle innovation and hold back 
the digital future.

Dan Lyons: ‘It made me confront myself… I’d never felt old before’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/04/dan-lyons-fake-steve-jobs-id-never-felt-old-before>
At the moment, most governments and almost all mainstream media are so dazzled 
by digital technology that they seem unable to appreciate what’s really going 
on. What’s happening is that the internet and its associated technologies have 
morphed from exotic novelties into a general purpose technology (GPT) like 
mains electricity. That has two implications. The first is that the companies 
that have mastered the technology are moving out of the tech compound and into 
the wider world. This is whyApple is planning to move into the automobile 
business 
<http://www.macworld.co.uk/news/apple/icar-release-date-rumours-evidence-images-project-titan-new-report-3425394>
,Tesla is heading for trucking 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2016/07/28/elon-musk-vision-autonomous-buses-updated-tesla-master-plan-part-deux/>
,Google is moving into healthcare 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-12/google-ventures-seeks-to-make-name-as-farsighted-health-investor>
, Uber is aiming toeliminate car ownership 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21706258-worlds-most-valuable-startup-leading-race-transform-future>
 altogether andAirbnb has the global hotel business in its sights 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2015-06-16/airbnb-s-international-growth-strategy>
.

The second implication is that, as Anil Dash puts it in an insightful essay 
<https://medium.com/humane-tech/there-is-no-technology-industry-44774dfb3ed7#.rq4li4y05>
, there is no “tech” industry any more. “Uber is providing predatory sub-prime 
leases to its drivers through its subsidiary Xchange,” he writes. “Mayonnaise 
startup Hampton Creek is under [inquiry] for buying back its own mayo. Amazon 
is going toe to toe with companies like HBO with a prestige series like
Transparent. And absurdly, we’re expecting lawmakers, the media and average 
consumers to understand these wildly different offerings – and countless more 
ranging from mattresses to medical testing – as part of one single, endlessly 
complex industry”, namely “tech”.

He’s right. It’s absurd. Uber isn’t a tech company any more than John Lewis is 
an electricity company. Theranos is/was not a tech company but a corporation 
supposedly providing medical services. Airbnb isn’t a tech company, but an 
organisation that’s in the hotel business. And so on. All these outfits should 
be regulated in ways appropriate to the businesses they are actually in, rather 
than being allowed to sail under a flag of convenience called “tech”. Which is 
why the fall ofTheranos <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/theranos> is 
actually a hopeful sign.
 