
Taiye Selasi: When you were last in Berlin we had a conversation, with 
Binyavanga Wainaina <https://www.theguardian.com/books/binyavanga-wainaina>, 
about how a writer arrives at a given piece of text. I’d just read one of your 
Instagram captions, which, like much of your prose, seemed to have flowed 
perfectly formed from top of mind to tip of finger. “It so clearly comes so 
easily,” I marvelled, not without some envy. You smiled, and asked, “How do you 
know?” How do we know that the casually composed photograph, the hastily 
written paragraph, is the fruit of instantaneous revelation and not of 
assiduous labour? Is perhaps part of the genius of all great artists their 
ability to hide their sweat?

Teju Cole: Trick question there. I’m not going to say anything about what a 
genius does, because how wouldI know? I do find it very helpful to remain aware 
of contingency, in my own work and in that of others. Nothing about the making 
should be taken for granted. If I think of a writer whose work I admire for its 
fluency, I want to resist the temptation to assume it’s easier for her to get 
there than it would be for me. I’ve learned to suppose “this much excellence” 
is accompanied by “this much labour”.Sprezzatura, no? Though the temptation to 
think it comes easily to some people never goes away.

Translation is one of the purest luxuries. I can convey complex thoughts to 
people with whom I don’t share a language
Teju Cole 
TS: It was a joy to read your photography book Punto d’Ombra (published in 
English next year asBlind Spot) – not only to experience your visual language 
but to read you in Italian, my unlikely second one. The comparison to WG Sebald 
has by now become obligatory, but I find your use of English wholly unique. Did 
you have a hand in translating the short texts that accompany the images inPunto
? I wonder how you feel, generally, about translation?

TC: I love being translated. In a fortunate life like mine, a life in which I 
can do what interests me for a living, translation is one of the purest 
luxuries. I can convey complex thoughts to people with whom I don’t share a 
language. It’s miraculous. Unlike you, I don’t read Italian, but the 
translation of my work – all of it done by Gioia Guerzoni – has been praised by 
readers of that language. It certainly brought me a certain impish joy to have 
a book out in Italian well before anglophone readers – who tend to consider 
themselves number one – have a chance to read it.Every Day Is for the Thief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/25/every-day-is-for-the-thief-teju-cole-review>
 came out in Nigeria first,Open City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/17/open-city-teju-cole-review> was 
first published in the US,Punto d’Ombra exists for now only in Italian. It’s a 
map of my world, it levels the playing field, and I like it.

TS: The Nigerian novelist Elnathan John wrote a Facebook post the other day, 
decrying the tedious ways in which African authors are asked to account for 
their identities. He catalogued the questions he gets: “Are you Afropolitan, 
like Taiye Selasi? Are you an African writer, like Ngugi and his proteges? Are 
you lost likeTeju Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/books/teju-cole>? We cannot 
place him.” I’ve never thought of you of as “lost” (quite the contrary) but I 
know what John means. Those set on classifying African writers have lost you. 
How did you elude the border guards, and can you teach me?

TC: Yes, I’m a bit of a problem for the categorisers, partly because I don’t 
fight the categories. I’m comfortable being described as Afropolitan, or 
African, or American, or pan-African. Or Yoruba, or Brooklynite, or black, or 
Nigerian. Whatever. As long as the labels are numerous. I’m “local” in many 
places. But I don’t think this is a greater or lesser life than the one lived 
by people who are more grounded in one terrain.

TS: Of all the many places you’ve visited, where have you felt unwelcome? It 
should go without saying – although you’ve said it so beautifully – that you 
“can oppose white supremacy and still rejoice in gothic architecture”. But I 
wonder whether you have ever encountered, as I have, any anguish in your 
rejoicing?

TC: Travelling while black! You know it as well as I do. We know the modest 
protections afforded by privilege. But sometimes you’re out there on the street 
and people don’t quite know how to read you. India remains a challenge. I had a 
terrible time in Vienna, years ago, and the same with Antwerp, also many years 
ago. Now I go to Antwerp all the time and, despite their resurgent right wing, 
have a much more comfortable time there. Of course, the people who invite me to 
places always treat me with warmth, respect and generosity. And I think even 
racists on the street know how to detect real marginality. They might not 
hassle me, but they’d hassle someone who shared my skin colour but not my 
confidence or clothing or bearing.

Racism is not a matter of what one person does to another. It is the way the 
logic of a society excludes large numbers of people while allowing for a few 
modest exceptions from that group. You and I are often among the exceptions, 
though I’ve been chased often enough by doormen of hotels in which I’m staying 
(in France, in Brazil) to know that I have to stay alert and give an immediate 
account of why, being a young black dude, I am where I am.

TS: In 2011 we we sat together on a panel about the Afropolitan concept and 
experience at the Houston Museum of African American Culture. I remember your 
saying that you’d be happy to be called an Afropolitan just as long as you 
could be a pessimistic one. Do you consider yourself a pessimist?

TC: We can hardly escape James Baldwin’s formulation: “To be a negro in this 
country and be relatively conscious is to be in a state of rage all the time.” 
But I don’t want my life inundated by rage, no matter how justified it is. Life 
is also now. I want to see the ugliness, but also what else is there. After 
all, Baldwin goes on to say: “The first problem is how to control that rage so 
that it doesn’t destroy you.”

I negotiate my way through this by reminding myself that specific hurts are 
related to more general hurts. I might specifically be a black man in America, 
but when I sit down to work I also have to keep in mind what is endured by 
women, or gay people, or political dissidents. I don’t do it to draw a facile 
link between sufferings, but to insist that we all begin from the same ground: 
that of being human. We all have feelings, and we all have a longing to make 
sense of the things we feel. As a writer, I seek to articulate that common 
pain. That’s not pessimist, it’s realist. But of course, that’s what every 
pessimist says.

Most men, even the feminists among us, still swim merrily along in all the 
advantages that masculinity proffers
Teju Cole 
TS: In your essay “In Place of Thought” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/in-place-of-thought>, inspired by 
Flaubert’sDictionary of Received Ideas, you give us: “Feminists. Wonderful, in 
theory” then “Magisterial. Large book, written by a man.” You write often and 
explicitly of race and nation, but more allusively about gender. Would you want 
to say a bit of the unsaid?

TC: Misogyny is atmospheric. What does an embodied commitment to the equality 
of women look like for a male writer? I think the central conflict of my novel
Open City is about how this smart man, this occasionally charming man, is also 
guilty of an atrocious act of violence to a woman. I found that I had to write 
about it, but the only way to write about it was to write around it. But 
writing in a non-fictional mode, as in the essays ofKnown and Strange Things, 
permits me a more straightforward expression of what’s at stake – and part of 
what’s at stake is getting to the point where we say, “Come the fuck on, this 
should all be self-evident by now.” You can say that seriously, or with bitter 
irony. But of course, it’s not at all self-evident. Most men, even the 
feminists among us, still swim merrily along in all the advantages that 
masculinity proffers.

TS: Coming now to style. I smiled when I found the Beowulf quote at the 
beginning of your preface toKnown and Strange Things, that 
single-word-sentence: “So.”Open City opens with the same in medias res “and so” 
(“And so when I began to go on evening walks last fall”). “Black Body” – the 
first essay in the collection, a brilliant postscript to Baldwin’s “Stranger in 
the Village” – begins mid-motion (“Then the bus”), “Reconciliation” with the 
physical ellipses implied by many of your first lines. You have written of 
continuous cities; it occurs to me that your style suggests a continuous 
journey. We are always finding you in transit. Tell me about these opening 
lines.

TC: … that style is the chassis and meaning is the engine. Any writer dreams 
of combining the two to convey the reader into a state of grace. Your novel,
Ghana Must Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/03/ghana-must-go-selasi-review>, 
for example, tells a story of multiplicity as a way of life, but the chassis, 
the structural support, of the book is your choice of those iambics. When we 
enter the propulsive rhythm of your prose, the staccato, the deployment of 
commas, we know that we are in the hands of someone who has made a definite 
choice and who knows what to do with it. We surrender to that and are carried 
along.

I don’t know why beginning things in the middle has become so important to me. 
I suppose I wanted to give the reader the confidence that: listen, I know I can 
throw you into this narrative and you’ll be fine. I can be as telegraphic as I 
wish and you’ll still find your bearings. And when we leave the narrative, too, 
it’s not with noise and fury but with a sense of: it ends here as well as 
anywhere else.Wisława Szymborska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/02/wislawa-szymborska> wrote that 
the book of events is always open in the middle. I do love this implication, 
that a story spills beyond the banks of the book. Mark a beginning here, mark 
an end here, like someone cutting a length out of the ribbon of reality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fteju-cole-taiye-selasi-interview-known-strange-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F078be9158669dfcddb58dbe9c2254b196a00eb9d%2F0_0_6023_4018%2F6023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teju%20Cole%20talks%20to%20Taiye%20Selasi%3A%20%E2%80%98Afropolitan%2C%20American%2C%20African.%20Whatever%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fteju-cole-taiye-selasi-interview-known-strange-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teju%20Cole%20talks%20to%20Taiye%20Selasi%3A%20%E2%80%98Afropolitan%2C%20American%2C%20African.%20Whatever%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fteju-cole-taiye-selasi-interview-known-strange-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F078be9158669dfcddb58dbe9c2254b196a00eb9d%2F0_0_6023_4018%2F6023.jpg>
Zürich by Teju Cole 
TS: In Known and Strange Things you’ve selected one of my favourite 
photographs,Zürich (2015), a marvel of hue and mood. Like Zürich, many of your 
photos exclude human subjects, but I’ve noticed that your images are beginning 
to include more bodies, more faces, as well as more black and white (as in the 
series you shot in southern Italy). How do you feel your photography practice 
is evolving?

TC: Those Neapolitan and Sicilian photographs were fun! Taken on the fly, out 
in the streets, with an iPhone. They are in a classic street photography mode, 
a style that’s not really mine though I’m well practised in it. I’d say that, 
from the postmodern point of view, style is not something you have to be stuck 
with. I go back to the chassis analogy: the engine remains the same, but from 
time to time, you change the car’s bodywork. It keeps you lively. But 
ultimately, I don’t trust excessive facility, and so I have to leave the 
crowd-pleasing photos behind after a while. I retreat to my colour film photos, 
which are slow in the making, and which give a more reticent sort of 
satisfaction. That Zürich picture, for instance, and others like it: that’s 
closer to my native visual language, and those are the photos that form the 
core ofPunto d’Ombra.

TS: Amitava Kumar  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amitava-kumar>recently 
wrote of your photography, “Your eye is such a delicate wanderer.” In following 
its wanderings, I have often a sense of beholding something more delicate, yes, 
but also more ordinary and more heartbreaking than the eye can typically bear. 
Your photographs, for me, insist on intimacy, transparency, confrontation.

TC: I think a certain toughness, a certain querulousness, is the common 
contemporary pose. But I’m deeply interested in tenderness, in intimacy. I want 
this softness to come through in my work. It doesn’t cancel out the politics, 
but it goes out well ahead of it. And for that tenderness to come across, no 
matter how knotty the argument at hand, I have to set myself into an attitude 
of tenderness when I’m making the work.

• Known and Strange Things by Teju Cole is published by Faber on 18 August. To 
order a copy for £14.75 (RRP £17.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/known-and-strange-things.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.Ghana Must Go by Taiye Selasi is published by Penguin.
 