
Telegraph.co.uk topped 40 million monthly users in August, as online readers 
flocked to national newspaper websites for live coverage of the riots.

The Telegraph Media Group website enjoyed the biggest monthly rise in daily 
readers in August, with a 9.39% lift to 2,145,989 users. Telegraph.co.uk saw a 
6.95% increase in its monthly visitors, compared with July, reaching 40,928,617 
last month.

Guardian.co.uk reported the second biggest monthly rise in daily online 
readers. An 8.85% month-on-month increase in daily users saw theguardian.com 
top 3 million users for the first time, according to the latest Audit Bureau of 
Circulations figures released on Thursday. The theguardian.com website network 
includes MediaGuardian.co.uk.

Mail Online remains by far the busiest newspaper website in the UK, although 
the showbiz-heavy site did not benefit as handsomely as its rivals in August 
when readers searched for live coverage of the civil disorder across England.

The Associated Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> 
website network reported a 3.89% lift in daily online traffic compared with 
July, to 4,404,242, with monthly users rising 2.68% to 74,922,559.

Independent.co.uk also reaped dividends for its in-depth coverage of the 
riots, with a 6.77% month-on-month rise in daily online users to 664,685. 
Average monthly users on the Independent's website reached 14,770,314, a 9.27% 
increase on July.

Mirror Group Digital's network of websites, which includes 3am.co.uk and 
MirrorFootball.co.uk, were the only national newspaper sites to see a fall in 
traffic in August.

Daily users for Mirror Group websites fell 2.9% month on month, to 716,114, 
while average monthly users dropped 3.96% to 14,926,263.

Guardian.co.uk did not report monthly unique user figures for August as part 
of a new policy of reducing the focus on monthly traffic figures that means 
publishing this data every other month.

MailOnline

Daily average browsers: 4,404,242

Month-on-month: +3.89%

Year-on-year: +72.55%

Monthly browsers: 74,922,559

Month-on-month: +2.68%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 3,058,871

Month-on-month: +8.85%

Year-on-year: +57.55%

Monthly browsers: N/A

Month-on-month change: N/A

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 2,149,989

Month-on-month: +9.39%

Year-on-year: +27.89%

Monthly browsers: 40,928,617

Month-on-month: +6.95%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 716,114

Month-on-month: +3.89%

Year-on-year: +72.55%

Monthly browsers: 15,542,461

Month-on-month: -3.96%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 664,685

Month-on-month: +6.77%

Year-on-year: +35.51%

Monthly browsers: 14,770,314

Month-on-month: +9.27%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>. 
 