
It's not quite Dirty Den rolling back into the Queen Vic 14 years after he 
dropped into a canal, but it's still an impressive revival: UK viewers are
watching more TV now than they did five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/aug/19/television-viewing-increases-internet>
. The 3% increase between 2004 and 2009 identified by Ofcom doesn't sound much, 
but in an era when computerised distractions have emerged to compete for the 
audience's attention, it isn't what was supposed to happen.

Earlier this summer, Clay Shirky was making exciting promises about all the 
great stuff the populace was going to accomplish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/27/cognitive-surplus-clay-shirky-book-review>
 in the time we used to spend watching telly as we abandoned the small screen 
to create and communicate online. Now it looks like we're still as square-eyed 
as ever.

While broadcasters and manufacturers work on the roll-out of new tech like 3D 
to help TV match the competition from online rivals, this recent boost has been 
driven by the entertainment industry's most basic tool: really good stories, 
really well told. From the reality juggernauts ofX Factor 
<http://xfactor.itv.com/2010/> and Strictly 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/strictlycomedancing/>, to dramas like Doctor Who 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/dw> and the comedy brilliance of The IT Crowd 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-it-crowd>, the biggest hits of the last 
five years have had narrative nailed. You've got your great heroes, your 
compelling villains, characters you care about, and things happening to those 
characters that you do not want to miss.

Compared to the fractured world of online diversions, one of the biggest 
pleasures of TV is that it's communal – even if you're watching all alone in 
your living room, you know that you're sharing the sofa in spirit with millions 
of other fellow viewers. A big TV moment can easily outgun the hottest internet 
meme when it comes to supplying workplace conversation. The excitement of 
something like thefinale of Ashes to Ashes 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1280359/Ashes-To-Ashes-Im-arresting-murdering-Quattro--Gene-Hunt-makes-bow-finale.html>
 lasts from initial viewing through days of heatedly swapping details and 
theories with friends and co-workers. Did you spot all the clues? Were you 
expectingthat? And what, exactly, did the bit at the end signify?

Only now, you don't have to wait for office hours to get your TV geek on. 
Increasingly, people are watching TV with their laptop or smartphone beside 
them so they can invite the rest of the audience in with them. Rather than 
diverting people from television, online platforms have helped drive people 
towards it: log into Twitter or Facebook, and you can share the latestBGT 
<http://talent.itv.com/2010/> or episode of Glee <http://www.e4.com/glee/> with 
hundreds of chatty fellow watchers. It's an incentive to appointment viewing – 
partly for the social aspect, partly because there's almost no dodging spoilers 
when you're eavesdropping on the internet.

But if you do have to play catch-up, TV's more flexible than ever. Ofcom 
reckons that 15% of viewing time is dedicated to programmes recorded on DVR, 
while every major broadcaster offers an on-demand service. And that doesn't 
just mean that it's easier to keep up with a favourite show: it also means that 
the shows you're watching are likely to be packing more complexity, as makers 
anticipate eager viewers repeating the show for themselves on the hunt for 
nuance.30 Rock <http://www.nbc.com/30-rock/> is even funnier with digital 
freeze-frame on hand to isolate all the gags, and even a kids show likePhineas 
and Ferb <http://tv.disney.go.com/disneychannel/phineasandferb/> on Disney XD 
bristles with more references and in-jokes than a single viewing can pull out.

Forget the red button and the phone-ins: this is how TV got to be really 
interactive. This decade's viewer isn't just a consumer: we're critics, and 
even collaborators sometimes as makers turn to the fans of their shows as a 
creative resource.Television <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/television>
 is working harder than ever to keep us interested, and it's transformed itself 
from a medium verging on redundancy to something that deserves to be the focus 
of the living room. These are great times to watch.
 