
Morwenna Banks


It was the Morecambe and Wise sketch with André Previn. It had the following 
elements; Eric Morecambe a man for whom the over-used phrase “comedy genius” 
actually applies, Ernie Wise, his loveable comedy partner, the impeccable 
writing of Eddie Braben and the secret weapon that was Previn, then conductor 
of the London Symphony Orchestra. Our whole family watched it, squashed into 
our itchy G-plan sofa and we shed actual tears of laughter. And it was as if a 
firework exploded in my head. I can’t say that it’s the defining moment that 
made me want to go into comedy because as child living in a small Cornish 
village, I didn’t know that comedy was even a job. But I will say that sketch 
left a deep imprint. I knew that it was, unassailably, A GOOD THING. It became 
my benchmark of quality and the comedy bar was set unreachably high. It helped 
me understand the mathematics of comedy, the importance of timing and the 
meaning of “funny bones”. And finally, the line “I’m playing all the right 
notes. But not necessarily in the right order” – is in my opinion one of the 
best bits of poetry ever written.

 * Miss You Already, starring Toni Collette and Drew Barrymore, is in cinemas 
in September. Shush! and Absolutely are on Radio 4 in the autumn Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeceSHKqwUPY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeceSHKqwUPY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeceSHKqwUPY&media=>
Ed Byrne


I think it’s got to be Larry Miller’s five levels of drinking. Miller is 
probably most famous for starring inPretty Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pretty-woman>. He is the nice manager of the 
shop that Richard Gere takes Julia Roberts to. But he’s actually also a great 
comic actor and a standup. The difference between American comedy and UK comedy 
is that you can be doing the same routine in the States for a long time. In the 
UK you are expected to turn around material a lot faster. The “five levels of 
drinking” was Larry’s classic “bit”. When people ask who I was influenced by 
when I was growing up, I always say Dave Allen andBilly Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/billyconnolly>. But in terms of making me 
want to be a comic it’s actually down to Larry Miller. I remember seeing him 
doing this routine on TV at the Just For Laughs festival in Montreal when I was 
a teenager and it was the first time I saw some comedy and thought “that is 
what I want to do when I grow up”.

• Outside Looking In 
<http://www.gildedballoon.co.uk/tickets/performances.php?eventId=14:722> is at 
the Gilded Balloon, Edinburgh from 5 August
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaYTJJDjjNSY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaYTJJDjjNSY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaYTJJDjjNSY&media=>
Nina Conti


Back in 2000 when I learned ventriloquism and thought it might amuse me for 
the summer, I saw a ventriloquist called Dan Horn. He started his act with a 
small dog puppet who sucked all the air out of a balloon and when he was full, 
he suddenly blasted off to the back curtain in that farty, air-expelling way. 
Dan’s main puppet was a slightly deaf, butt-scratching old man called Orson. 
Dan used sticks to manipulate Orson’s arms and made them move with insanely 
lifelike dexterity. The warmth of Dan himself was wonderful to be in the 
presence of; he genuinely seemed to laugh at and love his puppets. To end the 
act, he reunited Orson with his long lost sweetheart, and seeing this gross old 
guy reunited in love was hilarious but brought tears to my eyes. Having been so 
moved, I realised this venting stuff was powerful and bursting with potential. 
Fifteen years after that summer, I’m still doing it.

• In Your Face 
<https://edinburghfestival.list.co.uk/event/475371-nina-conti-in-your-face/> is 
at Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, from 5 August
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEQ__N-W7290&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEQ__N-W7290>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEQ__N-W7290&media=>
Sarah Hadland


When I was 16 years old I was obsessed with Victoria Wood  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood>and my favourite TV 
programme was Victoria Wood: As Seen on TV. During my first term at Laine 
Theatre Arts school, the principal Betty Laine had asked us to showcase our 
strengths. As it was a musical theatre course most people sang or did an edgy 
dance routine.

I wrote a sketch that was blatantly lifted from Wood’s Joan and Margery 
sketches. Sandwiched between break-dancing twins in fluoro tracksuits (this was 
the late 80s) and an aggressively belted out I Will Always Love You on we came, 
two 16-year-olds as old northern women doing a comedy duologue. When everyone 
else wanted to look like Jennifer Beals from Flashdance in a tight Lycra 
one-piece, I longed to be Julie Walters in Two Soups, with a hunchback and a 
hearing aid.

Prior to Victoria Wood, Bella Emberg in Russ Abbot’s Madhouse was my main 
reference for women in comedy. Bleak.

Suddenly here was a properly funny woman being hilarious in work she’d written 
herself, and I knew all the words to all the sketches off by heart. Getting 
those laughs in front of 30 students in a dance studio in Epsom, my love for 
character comedy began and between them, Victoria Wood and Betty Laine started 
me on that journey. My top three Wood sketches would probably be Shoe Shop, 
obviouslyTwo Soups <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6aYLOf8CUQ> and the sublime
Making of Acorn Antiques <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KSiTLJpP-EA>. She is 
a comedy genius.

• Sarah Hadland appears in The Job Lot on ITV2 this September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC0n88tZQc4Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC0n88tZQc4Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC0n88tZQc4Q&media=>
Harry Hill

For me it was Spike Milligan’s Pakistani Dalek sketch. In it a Dalek comes 
home after work and he goes, “Hi honey, I’m home!” He then goes on to basically 
wreck the joint. The sketch combined two things I love, Spike Milligan and 
Daleks. It was completely anarchic and lots of fun. There was something about 
the cheap aesthetic of it, like the fact a stuffed cat gets blown up. I share 
that idea that good comedy should be about the content rather then having 
things perfectly finished. In the sketch get the joke immediately and move on. 
It was the only time that [Dalek creator] Terry Nation gave his permission to 
use the Daleks [outside Doctor Who]. I’ve asked about using them over the 
years, but to no avail.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsBY9lDE48YY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsBY9lDE48YY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsBY9lDE48YY&media=>
Patrick Kielty


I grew up in rural County Down in Ireland; I was an altar boy and I was 
brought up as a Catholic. When I was about eight or nine, I remember sitting 
down with my parents and my brother and watching Dave Allen at Large. I recall 
listening to the stuff that he was talking about on the show and just thinking 
“wow”. My parents were laughing along, but at the same time they would whisper 
to us: “Don’t tell anybody you watched this!” I think Allen really altered the 
landscape of comedy. Before him there was a very mainstream style of comedy 
that was popular. There was a setup and then a punchline. But Allen told yarns, 
he told stories. Just the image of him sitting there in his high chair, 
stroking his hand across his thigh, holding a glass of whisky and telling 
stories was very different. There was one story in particular I remember 
vividly. In the TV studio, the lights went down and the spotlight shone on him. 
He started telling a story about how he ended up in a haunted house one night. 
He told the audience that he was in bed with a sheet up around his neck. 
Suddenly a hand reached out to him [in the story a terrorised Allen bites the 
hand, which turns out to be his own] and he said “that’s how I lost my finger”. 
Allen then held up the hand with the missing digit and sipped his whisky. There 
was something compelling and wonderful about that. It made me think, “wouldn’t 
it be great to have someone pay you money to tell stories on stage?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsAxHdTkzIjA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsAxHdTkzIjA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsAxHdTkzIjA&media=>
Jessica Knappett


I love dirty jokes, bad language and shocking stories and for this I can only 
blame my parents. When I was six, the song they had me singing off by heart on 
long car journeys, (apart fromMonty Python’s Penis Song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGRPFUYUUdQ>) was Peter Cook and Dudley 
Moore’s Jump from the album Derek and Clive Live, which Peter Sellers described 
as “a shower of filth”. Jump is a song about a man trapped atop a burning 
building who is coaxed to his death with the words “Jump, you fucker, jump, 
jump into this here blanket what we are holding, and you will be alright”. The 
song continues: “He jumped. Hit the deck. Broke his fucking neck. There was no 
blanket.” My parents are sick, sick people but I realise now Jump is every 
aspect of comedy I love rolled into one song: outrageous, slightly offensive, 
but most importantly brilliant storytelling packed full of surprise. We adopted 
a line from the song as our family’s catchphrase and haven’t looked back: 
“Laugh? I nearly shat.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0iMhe14pwM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0iMhe14pwM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0iMhe14pwM&media=>
Stewart Lee


In October 1984, when I was 16 years old, I saw the comedian Ted Chippington 
open forthe Fall <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fall>, then as now my 
favourite group, at the Powerhouse in Birmingham. In those days alternative 
comedy was something that happened in London and if you lived in the Midlands 
you just read about in the Guardian. But I’d already seen Porky the Poet (a 
youngPhill Jupitus <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/phill-jupitus>) opening 
for Billy Bragg and Peter Richardson from the Comic Strip opening for Dexy’s. 
But Ted was different. He didn’t seen to want to be there, or care what the 
aggravated audience made of his act, which was essentially monotonous 
variations on the following joke in a flat Midlands accent.

“I was walking down this road the other day, and a bloke said, “How far is it 
to the railway station mate?” I said, “One mile.” (In a raspy voice). He said 
“One mile?” I said, “Yes. One mile, roughly speaking. Could be a bit more than 
a mile. Could be a bit less. You never can tell unless you measure it.”

Half the room was angry, half the room, me included, was in hysterics. My life 
changed in that moment and everything good that has happened to me since stems 
from it. I’d wanted to write comedy, but I never thought I had the personality 
to be a performer, which, whether it was Ben Elton or Bruce Forsyth, was still 
a big showbiz thing. Ted showed me that standup could be anything. You didn’t 
even have to look like you enjoyed it.

• Stewart Lee: A Room with a Stew <http://www.stewartlee.co.uk/gigs.php> is at 
the Assembly Rooms, George St, Edinburgh, 8-30 Aug
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DezWNh64s38o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DezWNh64s38o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DezWNh64s38o&media=>
Amy Poehler


There were so many inspiring comedians when I was growing up in the 70s; 
whether it was listening to Steve Martin records, watching The Carol Burnett 
Show on CBS or seeing my mom laughing along to Monty Python. But one who 
particularly struck me was a character that Gilda Radner used to do on Saturday 
Night Live called Judy Miller. She was this hyper-young girl scout who was 
stuck upstairs in her bedroom because her mother was entertaining friends, 
getting over-excited, performing her own little imaginary TV show and bouncing 
off the walls. I remember loving how physical and joyful it was. Gilda was this 
tiny lady who was larger than life and just deeply funny.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrR4K5KtaNl8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrR4K5KtaNl8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrR4K5KtaNl8&media=>
Mark Thomas


The most influential joke I ever heard was from Steptoe and Son. It is of its 
time and hugely unfunny now, but this is the story. My dad was a self-employed 
builder from south London, whose notion of a work-life balance was to work so 
hard and so long that life took place in the rest periods. The one concession 
to this rule was our ritual, watching Steptoe and Son together, a 
father-and-son sitcom about scrap-metal merchants, or “totters” as they were 
then known. My dad regarded himself as a “totter” as he would pick up every 
piece of scrap-metal on the site: fallen copper nails, cast-off cast iron 
gutters, replaced aluminum gullies from the roof, and every six months we would 
go to the most thrilling place I knew, the scrap-metal yard off Lots Road by 
the Thames. One evening before our TV ritual, my dad was called to the front 
door to talk to a neighbour about a building job; he missed the entire episode 
and I sat and watched alone. When it ended I sidled up to my dad, still 
chatting on the doorstep, and repeated a joke I had just heard.

“Dad…”

“What, love?”

“When is he going to visit us?”

“What you on about?”

“The prime minister.”

“What?”

“VAT,” I explained to him. Value added tax had just been introduced and was 
quite a subject for topical material.

“VAT?”

“Visiting All Totters. That’s what it stands for. When do we get a visit?”

The two men roared with laughter and the neighbour congratulated my dad.

“You got a right one there, Colin.”

I stood on the doorstep in my pyjamas beaming, holding my dad’s hand. I had 
just done my first comedy gig.

• Trespass at the Fringe <http://www.markthomasinfo.co.uk/tour-dates/> is at 
the Dissection Room, Summerhall, Edinburgh from 6 Aug
 