
Brendan Rodgers isn’t happy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/16/brendan-rodgers-liverpool-arsenal-fa-cup>
. ﻿At the press conference afterArsenal’s defeat of Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/16/arsenal-liverpool-fa-cup-match-report>
 in the quarter-finals of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, Rodgers was left “fuming” after 
a “blatant” foul on Luis Suárez by Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain went unpunished. 
Certainly, Oxlade-Chamberlain’s challenge looked to be a foul as he barged 
Suárez off the ball. However, is it really up there with the worst penalty 
decisons of all time? We take a look at when referees get it very, very wrong – 
awarding penalties for ghost challenges; or conversely, ignoring the most 
blatant of misdemeanours.

Holland v Portugal, 2006

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEal0LSSnaEc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEal0LSSnaEc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEal0LSSnaEc&media=>
At the 2006 World Cup, Holland’s second-round match against Portugal was a 
positive blizzard of cards 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/world_cup_2006/4991538.stm>. Russian 
referee Valentin Ivanov set the record for the highest number of red cards ever 
given in a World Cup match (four) and equalled the record for total cards (a 
whopping 16). After the match, Fifa president Sepp Blatter commented: “There 
could have been a yellow card for the referee.”


Despite this, the challenge in which Nuno Valente appeared to commit an Eric 
Cantona-style spinning-bird kick <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wo2aUfwPQvs>
into the chest of Arjen Robben went unpunished. Ivanov had already blown for an 
(incorrect) offside decision against Dirk Kuyt. But the fact that Valente 
leaving his studs in Robben’s sternum resulted in no action – given the general 
trigger-happy distribution of cards – is flabbergasting. (Then again, Luis Figo 
was only shown a yellow card forheadbutting Mark van Bommel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZRISRQhfzpQ> later on). 

Dundalk v Derry City, 1988

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwPKKpU5gNeE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwPKKpU5gNeE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwPKKpU5gNeE&media=>
The 1988 Football Association of Ireland <http://www.fai.ie/> Cup was won by 
Dundalk 1–0, against Derry City. The sad thing is the game was won by a 
penalty, given for a challenge softer than a Mr Whippy ice-cream on a hot 
summer’s day. When Dundalk’s Larry Wyse picked up the ball on the edge of the 
box, the Candystripes’ Martin Bayly seemed to briefly touch arms with Wyse, and 
yet the referee blew up loud and sharp. Derry’s John Cleary scored from the 
spot to ultimately secure the Cup. Awful decision.


Brisbane Roar v Perth Glory, 2012

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsMr1g9cC68g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsMr1g9cC68g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsMr1g9cC68g&media=>
In what is probably the most ludicrous pick of the bunch, Brisbane Roar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar> were awarded a penalty for 
one of their players mis-kicking the ball, swiping at air, and then tripping 
over his own feet. The only thing that would have completed Besart Berish’s 
comedy routine in the box would have been if he’d blown a horn and squirted 
water from a flower on his lapel. He converted his penalty kick low into the 
right hand corner.


To make matters worse, this all happened in the A-League Grand Final 
(2011-2012 season). The decision came late in the game, and leftPerth Glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory> too little time to find an 
equaliser. It definitely wasn’t referee Jarred Gillett’s finest moment, put it 
that way.


France v Germany, 1982

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtGq7VcaHoqo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtGq7VcaHoqo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtGq7VcaHoqo&media=>
One of the most disgraceful fouls to have gone unreprimanded, this ‘tackle’ 
from Germany’s ’82 goalkeeperHarald ‘Toni’ Schumacher  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harald_Schumacher>in the World Cup semi-final was 
horrifically dangerous and intentional, and resulted in France’sPatrick 
Battiston <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_Battiston>being stretchered off 
the pitch unconscious with his teeth knocked out, broken vertebrae, and having 
to be administered oxygen. He later slipped into a coma before recovering. 
Schumacher, who had jumped into the player and smashed his hip into Battinson’s 
face, stood unmoved while the player lay flattened on the turf.

 Battiston’s team mate Michel Platini later said that he thought that 
Battiston was dead, because “he had no pulse and looked pale”. Schumacher’s 
take on the whole thing was somewhat different. Upon hearing that Battinson had 
his teeth spattered all over the grass, he said: “If that’s all that’s wrong 
with him, I’ll pay him the crowns.” Nice guy.


Dundee United v Celtic, 2008

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzn_hGj2zjw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzn_hGj2zjw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzn_hGj2zjw&media=>
Referee Charlie Richmond was accused of being a Celtic  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>fan after this decision during a 
2008 Scottish Premier League 1-1 draw, such was its misguidedness. In what was 
a stonewall penalty, Gary Caldwell came sliding into the path of Roy O’Donovan 
in the middle of a Cruyff turn,scything him down  
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/scot_prem/7561742.stm>and missing the 
ball by the width of the Grand Canyon.


Manchester City v Manchester United, 1996

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6bnz1Y9FZ_8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6bnz1Y9FZ_8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6bnz1Y9FZ_8&media=>
Commentator Clive Tyldesley can’t contain his surprise at this decision by 
referee Alan Wilkie in the 1996 FA Cup quarter-final. You could watch this clip 
over and over again searching for a foul, but it would be a bit like searching 
for a non-existent needle in a haystack. Apparently, Michael Frontzeck is 
holdingEric Cantona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eric-cantona>, but 
there doesn’t seem to be any empirical evidence for this. All we can see is Ryan
Giggs <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ryan-giggs>’ corner flying over the 
box, and Roy Keane’s awful mane. Cantona hammered the penalty home to take the 
lead just before half-time.

City’s manager Alan Ball said: “It changed the game. We had the tie taken away 
from us by a bizarre decision. Nobody in the crowd could believe it. There was 
confusion on every player’s face.” Even Lee Sharpe admitted: “if it had 
happened to us, we’d have felt a little hard done by”.


Esporte Clube Juventude v Vasco da Gama, 1997

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAlTSdbbWhh4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAlTSdbbWhh4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAlTSdbbWhh4&media=>
This is pretty hilarious. In this game in Brasileirão Serie A, Vasco’s Ramon 
falls down, skidding along the turf, and is promptly awarded a completely 
misjudged penalty. It doesn’t look as though Carlos Alberto actually dives, but 
he certainly isn’t fouled. He just sort of, trips over himself with his 
velocity. Carlos Alberto converts the penalty to give Vasco a thoroughly 
undeserved lead. The game eventually ended in a 1–1 draw. Vasco went on to win 
the Campeonato Brasileiro.

Chelsea v West Bromich Albion, 2013

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F18%2F10-of-the-worst-penalty-decisions-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F18%2F1392727810662%2Fb9753a49-d8c7-4b91-b312-161cbb4c8cfd-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20of%20the%20worst%20penalty%20decisions%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F18%2F10-of-the-worst-penalty-decisions-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20of%20the%20worst%20penalty%20decisions%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F18%2F10-of-the-worst-penalty-decisions-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F18%2F1392727810662%2Fb9753a49-d8c7-4b91-b312-161cbb4c8cfd-2060x1371.jpeg>
 West Brom players surround referee Andre Marriner after he awards a late 
penalty when Ramires goes to ground. Photograph: Charlie Crowhurst/Getty Images 
The Baggies  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom>were all set for a 
historic win overChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> before 
Ramires dived his way to a draw at Stamford Bridge, deep into injury-time. This 
was a dive that was so obvious on television replay that itprompted an apology 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/premier-league/referee-chief-mike-riley-apologises-to-west-brom-over-penalty-given-to-chelsea-for-ramires-dive-8951809.html>
 from referees’ chief, Mike Riley (though it was Andre Marriner who had awarded 
the spot-kick). Ostensibly, Ramires collided with Steven Reid, but it is clear 
that no contact between the players is made.

Eden Hazard converted the subsequent penalty to level the score at 2–2. After 
Riley’s apology, West Brom boss Steve Clarke said: “It doesn’t get us any more 
points but it’s nice of Mike to phone. If he’s apologising, he obviously feels 
it was the wrong decision.”


Manchester United v Real Sociedad, 2013

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI0dLxcnqvQk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI0dLxcnqvQk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI0dLxcnqvQk&media=>
No list of bad penalty decisions would be complete without including the 
alleged serial-diverAshley Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-young>. The Manchester United  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>player has developed a 
reputation for his in-the-box theatrics, conning referees into giving penalties 
for non-existent fouls. This is one of the worst examples, in aChampions League 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>group game against Real 
Sociedad <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad>, to win a penalty 
(whichRobin van Persie <https://www.theguardian.com/football/robin-van-persie> 
struck against the post). Roy Keane criticised Young for manipulating referee 
Nicola Rizzoli, saying: “He has obviously gone down too much over the last few 
months. He’s conned the referee there.”

United boss David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes>, 
however, defended Young insisting he was “tugged in the box”. Sure David, sure.


Nigeria v Argentina, 2011

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR1yTSf5kwIw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR1yTSf5kwIw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR1yTSf5kwIw&media=>
Here’s a penalty given for a handball, which is actually quite clearly 
controlled on the knee. Or maybe the crotch. But definitely not the hand. The 
referee, Ibrahim Chaibou, who is standing less than ten metres away, blows for 
the foul and the Nigerians can’t believe it. However, the decision came in the 
98th minute when the Nigerians led 4–0, so all in all, it doesn’t really make 
too much difference. Or maybe it did, given that there was aFifa investigation 
into suspicious betting patterns 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/8555881/Fifa-investigating-unusual-betting-patterns-in-international-between-Nigeria-and-Argentina.html>
 during the friendly. This penalty decision and the eight minutes of added time 
fuelled the concerns, although there have been no formal charges or sanctions 
levelled against Chaibou,who denies any connection to match-fixing 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/more-sports/much-investigated-ref-denies-fixing-soccer-matches-article-1.1264379>
.

Tell us your thoughts on the worst penalty decisions you’ve ever witnessed in 
the comments below.

 