
In the same week that Vienna was named the world’s top city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/vienna-named-worlds-top-city-for-quality-of-life>
 for quality of life, one unfortunate resident, bartender Edin Mehic, wasfined 
€70 for burping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/vienna-police-fine-man-70-for-loud-belch>
 near a policeman. Perhaps the two are connected. Perhaps life in Vienna is so 
damn perfect that the police would be completely redundant if they didn’t slap 
fines on people for uncouth bodily broadcasts. It’s either that or we live in a 
world full of trivial laws that are hard to comprehend and easy to fall foul of.

You guessed it – it’s the latter. Here are some you should watch out for. 

Barbados: Don’t wear camouflage clothing 

With the news that All Saints are back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/23/all-saints-girl-band-back-new-single-one-strike>
 – finally – it’s only a matter of time until we see a resurgence in baggy camo 
pants and khaki belly tops. If you decide to celebrate the return of the UK’s 
most musically discerning girl band by digging up your old Gap outfits, then 
don’t, we repeat DON’T, rock those togs in Barbados. It’s against the law for 
anyone, even children, to dress in camo-gear or even carry any items with camo 
material. Only the army gets to do that.

Vienna named world's top city for quality of life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/vienna-named-worlds-top-city-for-quality-of-life>
Florence: Don’t eat near churches or monuments

This is an important one to know, because it’s hard to think of anything more 
touristy than sitting down on the steps of a city centre sight and having a 
picnic. Doing so, however, is a offence in some Italian towns, such as 
Florence, and you could be fined. Burping is OK, though. Italy actually has a
burping festival <http://www.ruttosound.com/it/chisiamo/>. Police in Vienna, if 
you’re reading this: it could be a lot worse.

Denmark: Don’t turn your headlights off, ever

In Denmark it’s the law that you have to have your headlights on, dipped, even 
during the day. If you’re in a Danish car it should do this automatically, but 
it’s one to watch if you arrive in a foreign vehicle. Apart from that (and 
let’s face it, it’s hardly something to get flustered about)Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> is one of the happiest countries in 
the world and we should all move there.

Saudi Arabia and UAE: Don’t kiss in public

Let’s face it: lawmakers anywhere in the world would make terrible party 
planners. But those in Saudi Arabia and the UAE are probably the biggest buzz 
kills around: kissing in public can get you arrested (in 2013 one couple got
jailed for a year 
<http://travel.aol.co.uk/2013/01/25/couple-caught-kissing-on-dubai-beach-jailed-for-a-year/>
 for doing so), cross-dressing is illegal, e-cigarettes are illegal and all sex 
outside of marriage is illegal. So, you know, watch yourself.

Maldives: Don’t bring a bible

Like Saudi Arabia, the Maldives is another hit holiday destination with strict 
Islamic laws. Here, it’s an offence to import materials deemed contrary to 
Islam, so bibles are definitely not allowed. Porn will also get you into 
trouble, so, um, leave both of those things at home.

Fiji: Don’t sunbathe topless

You could probably get away with this in some of the high-end resorts, but, 
for the most part, public nudity is out of the question, and this includes 
topless bathing. Locals are very much on board with this too. There’s a 
discussion onTripadvisor 
<https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/ShowTopic-g294331-i883-k1144322-Being_Nude_in_Fiji-Fiji.html>
 in which a traveller recounts seeing a girl try to pull her friend’s top off 
in the water, at which point one of the native boatmen ran over screaming, “NO!”

Before we ditch the EU, can we please remember what travel used to be like? | 
Katherine Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/05/european-travel-before-the-eu-freed-us>
Virginia Beach and Ocean City, US: Don’t swear

Maryland’s popular beach town Ocean City and Virginia Beach, Virginia, have 
both decided to clean up their coastlines in the last few years, bringing in 
bans on cursing and giving moms on holiday with their kids some serious backup 
in the process. WhileOcean City 
<http://baltimore.cbslocal.com/2014/03/25/mind-your-manners-ocean-city-to-post-no-profanity-signs/>
 opted for signs stating: “No profanity please”,Virginia Beach 
<https://www.virginiabeach.com/article/va-beach-no-cursing-law> went for a 
spiral followed by a lightning bolt, a hashtag and two exclamation marks with a 
red strike across it. In 2014, 25 people got caught cursing on Virginia Beach, 
putting $6,000 in the city swear jar.

Barcelona: Don’t walk around in your swimsuit

Unless you’re on the beach, obviously. Apart from that, you face a fine of up 
to €500 for being naked, semi-naked or adorned in swimming clothes on the 
streets of the city. The law was passed in 2011 to stop Barcelona getting a 
reputation as a beach resort.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Ften-tips-on-how-not-to-get-in-trouble-on-your-travels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3c2f4e72651ce785cf7818fe41babd72894c74e%2F0_97_3504_2104%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20tips%20on%20how%20not%20to%20get%20in%20trouble%20on%20your%20travels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Ften-tips-on-how-not-to-get-in-trouble-on-your-travels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20tips%20on%20how%20not%20to%20get%20in%20trouble%20on%20your%20travels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Ften-tips-on-how-not-to-get-in-trouble-on-your-travels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3c2f4e72651ce785cf7818fe41babd72894c74e%2F0_97_3504_2104%2F3504.jpg>
 Stopping is verboten on the German autobahn. Photograph: Morris 
MacMatzen/Reuters/Corbis 
Germany: Don’t stop on the autobahn


It’s a serious offence to stop unnecessarily on a German motorway – and 
running out of fuel is not an excuse. You can face fines and driving bans for 
this.

Singapore: Don’t do graffiti (or chew gum)

Ok, graffiti is illegal in most places. But in Singapore it could get you 
caned, astwo German tourists 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-singapore-graffiti-sentence-idUSKBN0M10DK20150305>
 found out last year after getting caught tagging a train carriage. They also 
got nine months in jail. While you’re remembering not to do graffiti, also 
remember not to chew gum, which has been illegal since 1992. You can face fines 
or caning for this too, though there are exceptions for medical reasons. 
Tourists particularly should be careful bringing gum into the country: any more 
than two packs could see you charged with gum smuggling. It’s possibly the 
funniest sounding offence out there, but one year in jail or a £4,000 fine 
would probably slap the smile off your face.
 