
Iain Dale's scuffle this week at Brighton, as the burly head of Biteback 
wrestled with a small elderly protester while his authorDamian McBride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/damian-mcbride> was being interviewed for 
breakfast TV, led to what was probably the most public humiliation ever 
undergone by a publisher: the clip went viral, TV news channels and news­papers 
gleefully showed the images, and comments (in the press and on Dale's blog) 
were largely hostile. It deserves a place in a top 10 of publishers' worst 
experiences, which otherwise merci­fully took place away from the public eye...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2vfJPk8isQQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2vfJPk8isQQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2vfJPk8isQQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
1933: Thomas Wolfe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/04/tom-wolfe-back-blood-review> 
submits a lengthy manu­script to Max Perkins at Scribner's. Having made Wolfe's 
Look Homeward, Angel a hit by cutting out 90,000 words, Perkins (played by 
Colin Firth in the forthcoming film Genius) buckles down, groaning, and turns 
it into the still-vast but single volume Of Time and the River. Yet Wolfe stuns 
him again by leaving Scribner's.

1960: Mrs Max Schuster, a discrimina­ting reader, peruses Harold Robbins's 
raunchy novel The Carpetbaggers and asks Max: "Is this the kind of dreck you 
want to publish at Simon & Schuster?" Afraid of her scorn, he lets the book 
(total sales more than 8m copies) and Robbins (best-selling writer of the 1960s 
and 70s) go elsewhere.

1972: Reclusive tycoon Howard Hughes gives a press conference by phone to 
denounce Clifford Irving's fake Hughes autobio­graphy. Panic at McGraw Hill, 
which had paid $765,000 to Irving, most of it intended for Hughes but 
channelled back to Irving via a dodgy Swiss bank account.
1980. Buccaneering Roger Straus and bookish Robert Giroux, the odd couple who 
had madeFarrar, Straus and Giroux 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2013/08/12/130812crbo_books_gottlieb>
 America's most illustrious literary publisher, fall out over what Giroux says 
about Straus in his introduction to an anthology marking his 25 years at FSG. 
Their relationship never recovers from the tiff and the firm's heyday is over.
 Glum: Anita Brookner 
1984: Anita Brookner's glum hymn to spinsterhood Hotel du Lac is the shock 
winner of the Booker prize, leaving the publishers of the rival favourites, JG 
Ballard's Empire of the Sun (Gollancz) and Julian Barnes's Flaubert's Parrot 
(Cape), open-mouthed at the prizegiving banquet.

1993: Martin Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> tells 
Jonathan Cape £300,000 just won't do as an advance for the hot commercial 
property that is The Information, by an author still regarded as a literary 
rock star (and now with Andrew "The Jackal" Wylie as his agent). They are 
forced to let him decamp to HarperCollins for an advance closer to £500,000.

1995: At least nine UK publishers, including Transworld and Harper­Collins, 
reject Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone as too long, too old-fashioned 
or both. Their humiliation comes later when JK Rowling's series breaks sales 
records and is adapted into blockbuster movies, and the editors' unfeeling kids 
become Potter potty.
 Adamant: Julian Assange 
2011: Julian Assange tells Canongate he wants to cancel his lucrative contract 
for a memoir, although a draft has ­already been written. Saying the ­advance 
has been spent, Canongate publishes the unfinished text despite his opposition, 
at the price of disobliging reviews, weak sales and verbal attacks by the 
WikiLeaks founder.

2012: Bit by bit, evidence emerges that young pop science writer Jonah Lehrer 
is a self-plagiarist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/03/jonah-lehrer-trouble-with-facts> 
and fabricator of quotes. As some of it is in his latest ­effort Imagine (about 
creativity, ­piquantly), Houghton Mifflin Harcourt is forced to pull the book; 
and a prestig­ious magazine has egg on its face, too, as Lehrer has recyled 
himself in blog posts for his new employer, the New Yorker. He quits after only 
two months.
 