
Ten data-driven sporting victories - part two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/16/ten-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-two>
Michael Johnson’s 200m and 400m gold medals in 1996 Olympics

At the 1996 Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>, 
Michael Johnson became the only man in history to win the 200m and the 400m 
gold medals at a single Olympics, setting a world record time of 19.32 in the 
200m and an Olympic record of 43.49 in the 400m. By the time Johnson retired 
from athletics in 2001, he had amassed a total of thirteen Olympic and World 
Championship gold medals.

Scrupulous planning and rigorous preparation were hallmarks of Johnson’s 
approach, and since his retirement as a professional athlete, Johnson has 
founded a business – Michael Johnson Performance – which provides athletes with 
advanced athletic assessment, using a variety of tools and advanced 
technological capabilities to assist in evaluating and training any athlete.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426259799936%2F7cbac9b4-f0f4-474e-95b2-41b2c162eaa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426259799936%2F7cbac9b4-f0f4-474e-95b2-41b2c162eaa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Team BMW Oracle gliding to victory in the 33rd America’s Cup off the coast of 
Valencia. Photograph: Kai Foersterling/EPA 
BMW Oracle Racing’s victory in the 33rd America’s Cup

BMW Oracle Racing’s victory in the 33rd America’s Cup yacht race in February 
2010 showcased extraordinary sailing expertise, but also the power of 
technology. The design of the boat itself was, of course, instrumental, but to 
sail it to its full potential, the crew reviewed enormous amounts of reliable 
data every time they took the boat for a test run.

The team collected performance data from 250 sensors at the rate of 10 times 
per second, so in any given hour of sailing, 90 million data points were 
generated. Using Oracle Data Mining in Oracle Database 11g to extract maximum 
value from the data, the statistics were reviewed and shared with crew members 
daily. The data was streamed to a data centre where a dedicated team tackled 
deeper analysis.

Without the data mining, Ian Burns, design coordinator for BMW Oracle Racing, 
says the boat wouldn’t have run as fast. The technology, he said, allowed the 
team to compare the incremental improvements in performance from the first day 
of sailing to the very last day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426260999543%2Fef650f39-12d1-4e92-a79f-b5f727ef8b79-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426260999543%2Fef650f39-12d1-4e92-a79f-b5f727ef8b79-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bradley Wiggins powered to victory in the 2012 Tour de France. Photograph: 
Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
Bradley Wiggins wins 2012 Tour De France

When Bradley Wiggins won the Tour de France in 2012, he punched a button on 
his SRM bike computer to log the ride data before he celebrated by punching the 
air with pride. Team Sky’s success in theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> – with six stage wins and 
number one and two on the podium – was soon followed by the success of the 
British Cycling team the same summer when Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome took 
gold and bronze at the Olympics in the men’s time trial.

Team Sky and Team GP have relied heavily on technology for their winning 
advantage, thanks in large part to Head of Performance Support, Tim Kerrison, 
who is very data-driven in his approach. While the use of data analysis is 
customary in the Tour de France, Wiggins and Team Sky have dedicated coaching 
staff assessing every training session and providing real-time feedback.


Wiggins had an SRM power meter on his bike, with the data feeding through to 
TrainingPeaks, an endurance training technology that gives insight into 
performance, form, and how to mould custom training programs for each rider. 
Brad Culberson, CTO at TrainingPeaks, wrote: “Riders know that having that data 
available will not only help them be faster, but will help them to stand out in 
the technologically-savvy programme.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426261378189%2F9a80a3f2-db09-419e-8835-e9d6ba56206e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426261378189%2F9a80a3f2-db09-419e-8835-e9d6ba56206e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Saracens captain Wikus van Heerden leads out the team against the Sale Sharks 
during their 2009 Premiership winning season. Photograph: Christopher Lee/Getty 
Images 
Saracens win premiership for first time in history

Until 2009, Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had been one 
of the biggest under-achievers in rugby union particularly in the professional 
era, despite signing star international players. The appointment of Brendan 
Venter as director of rugby for the club in 2009, however, was a turning point. 
Venter was a player in the South African rugby team which won the World Cup in 
1995, and also a qualified GP.

Bill Gerrard, professor of business and sports analytics at Leeds University, 
has worked closely with Saracens, and explains how Venter introduced “an 
in-depth evidence-based approach with the coaching staff which committed to 
using data to inform their decisions on team selection, game tactics, training 
priorities and player recruitment.”

In May 2011, Saracens won the Premiership for the first time in their history 
and have become one of the leading teams in European rugby, reaching the 
finalist of the Heineken Cup last season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426262807357%2Fd0199e57-a303-4dc2-9a5c-53b7fb8391ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20data-driven%20sporting%20victories%20-%20part%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ften-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426262807357%2Fd0199e57-a303-4dc2-9a5c-53b7fb8391ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Peter Nicol defeated ranking world number one David Palmer in the final of the 
2006 Commonwealth Games. Photograph: Phil Cole/Getty Images 
Peter Nicol defeats David Palmer in 2006 Commonwealth Games squash final

In the 2006 Commonwealth Games, Peter Nicol played in his third consecutive 
Commonwealth Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games> 
final, against ranking world number one at the time, David Palmer. Stafford 
Murray, Head of Performance Analysis at the EIS, recalls how in the lead-up to 
the final, David Palmer’s profile was analysed in great depth by team GB:

 “We looked at data from Palmer’s matches and put together a normative profile 
– a thumbprint for how someone plays – which showed that the front left corner 
was where most of Palmer’s opponents were playing winning shots.” Nicol, he 
explains, “was weak in that area so his coach changed his forehand technique to 
reduce the likelihood of error”. Nicol went on to defeat Palmer 3-1.

The winning formula, according to Murray, was a combination of the input of 
coach and the athlete’s ability to change technically: “In a moment of glory, 
Nicol was prepared to trust his coach and change his technique.”

 * Top ten data-driven sporting victories - part two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/16/ten-data-driven-sporting-victories-part-two>
Eleanor Dallaway is editor of Infosecurity magazine 
<http://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/>.

The Creative Data hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/creative-data> is funded by 
Accenture <http://www.accenture-rugby.com/>. All content is editorially 
independent except for pieces labelled ‘Brought to you by Accenture’. Find out 
morehere. <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 