
Cardinham Woods <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/cardinham> in Cornwall only opened 
its new mountain-biking trails – including the fearsomely named Bodmin Beast 
and Hell's Teeth – this year, but it's already becoming a favoured spot among 
informed and experienced mountain bikers.

Leigh Woods 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/website/recreation.nsf/luwebdocsbykey/englandbathandnortheastsomersetnoforestbristolwoodlandsleighwoods>
 and Ashton Courtin Bristol are perfect for a fast fix. Just moments from the 
city centre, they couldn't feel further from urbanity. Cycle three marked Leigh 
Woods trails against a stunning backdrop with views of Avon Gorge and Clifton 
suspension bridge.

New Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/newforest> You won't find trails for 
the extreme cyclist here, but you will enjoy 100 miles of traffic-free routes 
on flat, gravel track that is perfect for families.  Summer is an extra-special 
time as the adorable New Forest foals are around, but do not disturb or attempt 
to feed the forest ponies.

Grizedale Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/grizedale> in Cumbria has ancient 
oak woodlands and glorious views over the Lake District and across to the Old 
Man of Coniston. Of the six way-marked cycling trails, only one is technical 
and challenging while the others follow forest roads. All include hills, though.

Kielder Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/kielderforestpark> in 
Northumberland (pictured below) is awesome both for its size and variety of 
routes. This is England's largest forest, so if you are planning to cover more 
than a fraction of it, you've really got to tackle it by bike.

Forest of Dean <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestofdean> offers family routes, 
such as the Peregrine Path, and mountain biking in the Sallowvallets area. It 
doesn't promise the biggest terrain or gnarliest descents but fast, fun trails 
– and incredible bacon butties – have made it the English forest of choice for 
mountain- biking experts atWideopen <http://wideopenmag.co.uk/> magazine.

Dalby Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/dalbyforest> in Yorkshire is one of 
the best mountain-biking sites in the world. The four-mile, black-graded World 
Cup cycle trail is challenging, but there are less frenetic blue and green 
trails (graded easy and moderate), too.

Sherwood Pines <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/sherwoodpines> mountain- bike 
trails range from green (easy) to orange (extreme) in the East Midlands' 
largest forest open to the public. Route 6 of the wonderful National Cycle 
Network runs right through it too, so cycle tourers get a taste of the woodland 
as part of a longer ride.

Bedgebury Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/bedgebury> in Kent has an 
eight-mile single track for mountain biking or a six-mile family trail, which 
is easy to cut short if needed. It's not possible to cycle in the National 
Pinetum, but take time to explore it on foot.

Hamsterley Forest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/hamsterleyforest> in County 
Durham is a well-known mountain-biking spot, renowned for its downhill trails 
and offering technical, challenging riding. The Walney to Wear long-distance 
cycle route passes through this forest, too.
 