
Ten days have passed since BuzzFeed and the BBC detonated a 9,000-word report 
alleging“widespread” match-fixing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/eight-players-australian-open-draw-suspected-match-fixing>
 “in the upper echelons” of men’s tennis, and the suspicions and insinuations 
continue to linger like a stink bomb.

During the Australian Open Lleyton Hewitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/21/andy-murray-lleyton-hewitt-australian-open-match-fixing-claims>
, one of the game’s most tenacious and admired scrappers, was forced to deny he 
was a secret cheat after the final moments of his 19-year singles’ career. The 
Dutch player Robin Hasse was accused of corruption on Twitter based on no 
evidence. And a mixed doubles match on Sunday was also called into question by 
the bookmakers Pinnacle although others disputed whether there were suspicious 
betting patterns. Meanwhile the public is left wondering just who – or what – 
it can believe. As the ATP chairman Chris Kermode put it when an independent 
review into tennis’s anti-corruption practices was announced in Australia: “We 
are in a toxic environment for sport at the moment.”

Toxic and, in Hewitt’s case, dangerously indiscriminate. The former Wimbledon 
and US Open champion was not named by BuzzFeed, nor its reporting partner, the 
BBC, in a list of 15 players it had found “who regularly lost matches in which 
heavily lopsided betting appeared to substantially shift the odds – a red flag 
for possible match-fixing”. This claim was based on BuzzFeed’s own data 
analysis of changes to bookmakers’ odds in 27,000 ATP matches since 2009. 
However, its decision to make its data available to the public, albeit with the 
player names replaced by 64 digit codes, allowed tennis experts to decipher 
Hewitt as one of the men it was talking about.

Prosecuting tennis players for alleged match-fixing ‘would be complex’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/tennis-players-alleged-match-fixing-lawyer-integrity-unit-betting>
Suddenly Hewitt found himself facing trial by algorithm. “I know my name’s 
been thrown into it,” he admitted. “I don’t think anyone here would think I’ve 
done anything corrupt or match-fixing. It’s just absurd. I think anyone 
throwing my name out there makes the whole thing an absolute farce.” Tellingly, 
no one else is pointing the finger. Ian Dorward, a professional tennis gambler 
who previously worked on the other side of the fence for a bookmaker, analysed 
eight of Hewitt’s allegedly suspicious matches andfound no evidence of 
wrongdoing 
<http://www.sportdw.com/2016/01/tennis-fixing-buzzfeed-hewitt-innocent.html>.

As Dorward put it: “As much as I appreciate BuzzFeed releasing their data, 
they must have known that it would be possible to identify the players from it.”

Other betting experts contacted by the Guardian agreed. As one put it: 
“Hewitt’s inclusion instinctively made no sense at all, as he didn’t fit the 
profile. He was far too wealthy, wasn’t a name that had ever been linked to 
fixing, and had far too much to lose in terms of reputation.” And yet here he 
was, being forced to defend it. It was an avoidable mistake too. Anyone with a 
passing interest in tennis would have known that Hewitt was particularly 
difficult for bookmakers to price up during the latter stages of his career. He 
often didn’t play for long periods. He suffered repeated injuries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fbuzzfeed-bbc-tennis-match-fixing-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb413f82d3d863fb24f1570c4625646c85a161c2%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tennis%20match-fixing%20allegations%20leave%20questions%20to%20be%20answered%20%7C%20Sean%20Ingle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fbuzzfeed-bbc-tennis-match-fixing-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tennis%20match-fixing%20allegations%20leave%20questions%20to%20be%20answered%20%7C%20Sean%20Ingle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fbuzzfeed-bbc-tennis-match-fixing-allegations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb413f82d3d863fb24f1570c4625646c85a161c2%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
 Lleyton Hewitt walks off after his Australian Open defeat to David Ferrer. 
Hewitt later felt moved to defend himself at the post-game press conference, 
saying: ‘I think anyone throwing my name out there makes the whole thing an 
absolute farce.’ Photograph: Tracey Nearmy/EPA 
And, towards the end, only a few places – Australia and the US Open in 
particular – brought out his very best. Clued-up professional gamblers knew 
this. So they backed against the Australian when appropriate, often changing 
the betting odds.

Does this mean all of the BBC-BuzzFeed report should be questioned? No. Much 
of it tallies with what people within the game have said for years. It was 
right to warn that theTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Integrity Unit, set up in 2008, is not catching enough cheats – although 
whether that is due to it having just five staff, or institutional timidity for 
fear of being sued, is disputed.

It was also correct to warn that tennis has a problem with match-fixing. As a 
former tennis trader at a major global bookmaker told the Guardian: “Tennis is 
probably the dirtiest sport I worked on that didn’t involve Chinese or Filipino 
markets. We always had to be really careful. We were always saying: ‘Don’t be 
run over.’ If something feels fishy, take the market down and protect yourself. 
That’s how it works.”

This particular firm had a list of players who they were highly suspicious of. 
And they were more wary when two players from the same country faced each 
other. But he was emphatic that, at the top level, the sport had got cleaner.

One professional gambler the Guardian spoke to, on condition of anonymity, 
also reeled off a list of suspicious players and matches, with evidence of 
strange betting patterns. But he said that after theinfamous Nikolay Davydenko 
versus Martin Vassallo Argüello encounter in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/aug/03/tennis.sport>, which Betfair 
refused to pay out on because the price movements were so strange, the 
resulting publicity led to less of it happening on the main ATP tour. Tennis’s 
governing bodies investigated the match but found no evidence of rule-breaking 
by either player.

“There was a resurgence of this sort of massed, blatant fixing in 2010, 
notably at the two Russian events, but that was like a last hurrah and a lot of 
the fixers have now retired,” he said. “It’s much, much rarer now, at least on 
the main tour – the fixers now focus on Challenger events.

“As a general summary, fixing is drastically less common on the main tour than 
it was five years ago, and it in turn was less common than five years before 
that, he added. “The fixers haven’t gone away though, they’ve moved down to 
Challengers. I’d hesitate to credit the tennis authorities with that at all – 
on fixing as well as doping they are almost universally useless – it seems to 
be more the result of changes in the gambling markets.”

When the Wimbledon chairman and head of the sport’s integrity board Phillip 
Brook was asked about the BBC/BuzzFeed investigation on Wednesday he replied: 
“I was disappointed in the programme. I don’t think we felt it revealed 
anything new.”

That doesn’t mean players on the main ATP Tour aren’t match-fixing, of course. 
Often you hear the same names over again. One reasonably well-known star crops 
up repeatedly. But when BuzzFeed claims, in its opening salvo, that it has 
“secret files exposing evidence of widespread match-fixing by players at the 
upper levels of world tennis” some believe it is adding too much topspin to the 
story.

The website alleges that a core group of 16 players who have been ranked in 
the top 50 over the past decade were repeatedly reported to authorities over 
suspicious betting patterns in their matches, including “winners of singles and 
doubles titles at grand slams”. That latter claim deserves closer scrutiny, 
given the list of men’s grand slam winners is not a long one. The BBC’s report 
only refers to“winners of grand slams” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/tennis/35319202> which might indicate a subtle 
difference.

The view of Richard Ings, the executive vice-president of rules and 
competitions at the ATP from 2001 and 2005, is worth noting. As Ings, who set 
up tennis’s first anti-corruption programme, told the Guardian: “In 
professional tennis, unusual betting patterns happen regularly. But a match 
with a suspicious betting pattern is not indicative of match-fixing. More 
investigation must take place, including phone records, transactions and 
betting accounts to ID how many – if any – were breaches of rules.”

‘There hasn’t been match-fixing at Wimbledon,’ says All England Club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/wimbledon-match-fixing-all-england-club-richard-lewis>
That point is vital. BuzzFeed’s algorithm is a reasonable first filter, 
generating a list of players and matches to investigate in further detail, but 
to suggest that it should equate to a red-flag against someone’s name is hugely 
simplistic. Other indicators are also required. As the tennis analyst and 
professional trader Dan Weston told the Guardian it was “easy” for anyone with 
a knowledge of betting markets to spot match-fixing, because there are usually 
at least two of three key ingredients.

• Unusual pre-match odds movement, usually in the last hour or two before a 
match, because that’s when large bookmakers such as Pinnacle increase the sums 
that can be wagered and it takes more to move the market.

• Dubious activity either in-play, or on side markets. Weston rattled off 
instances when a player was a set and at least a break down yet was still 
heavily favoured by the betting markets to win. He also cited several cases 
where a player who started the match as favourite was an underdog to win the 
first set – a clear red flag.

• A fixed match often has a much higher than usual amount of money matched on 
betting exchanges such as Betfair or at major global bookies such as Pinnacle. 
BuzzFeed stands firmly by its reporting, which it says is based on “more than 
20 gambling industry officials, international police detectives and sports 
integrity experts” who told it that tennis was failing to confront a serious 
problem with match-fixing. But when it comes to its algorithm it is clear that 
solely assessing pre-match odds was not enough.

As Scott Ferguson, formerly the head of education at Betfair and now a 
respected betting industry spokesman, put it:“BuzzFeed was a bit irresponsible. 
They had an important piece of the pie, but not all of it.”

When Ferguson worked for Betfair from 2002 to 2008, its integrity unit spent 
most of its time monitoring three things: racing, credit cards and tennis. 
“Betfair were sick to death with nothing being done about corruption in 
tennis,” he says.

“Things have improved at the top level, but there is more of it going on in 
the Challengers and Futures level” – which is where those ranked outside the 
top 70 or 80 mostly play.

That is where everyone says the majority of the match-fixing takes place now. 
There are far more Challenger matches than on the main tour, which means more 
opportunities for the fixers. There is far less prize money, which means 
players may be easier to bribe. And, unlike a decade ago, most bookmakers offer 
prices on lower ranks of the tennis ladder.

The review into the Tennis Integrity Unit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/tennis-authorities-to-review-anti-corruption-unit-after-match-fixing-allegations>
, announced on Wednesday, is “aimed at further safeguarding the integrity of 
the game,” a joint statement read from the ATP, WTA, ITF and heads of all four 
grand slams, but others are asking what else should be done.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Findependent-review-of-tennis-anti-corruption-group-announced-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F27%2F1453908845109%2FKP_1502426_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Independent%20review%20of%20tennis%20anti-corruption%20group%20announced%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Findependent-review-of-tennis-anti-corruption-group-announced-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Independent%20review%20of%20tennis%20anti-corruption%20group%20announced%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Findependent-review-of-tennis-anti-corruption-group-announced-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F27%2F1453908845109%2FKP_1502426_crop_640x360.jpg>
Independent review of tennis anti-corruption group announced. 
<http://Independent review of tennis anti-corruption group announced – video> 
There have been suggestions, from Andy Murray and others, that tennis should 
reconsider its relationship with betting companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/andy-murray-hypocritical-betting-firm-sponsorship-match-fixing>
. But as Ferguson argues: “Does having a betting partner really affect how 
players behave? For years Queen’s was sponsored by Stella Artois – were players 
getting smashed as a result?”

A more sensible option would be to dramatically strengthen the fight against 
corruption. And that goes beyond beefing up the TIU, which has only five staff 
to investigate corruption in a global sport, and into ensuring security around 
minor tournaments, where it is often easy for unscrupulous types to talk and 
try to influence players.

Others would also like to see a permanent external body to review its 
Integrity Unit’s interpretation of the evidence. In doping cases, the World 
Anti-Doping Agency is able to oversee a dispute between an athlete and a 
federation and if necessary, present it to another panel.

In tennis it has always been in-house. There is no appeal or review. And there 
is no independent external board. Which is far from ideal.

And despite most experts insisting tennis is much cleaner now than previously 
– the early noughties were described as “the wild west” by one analyst – it is 
clear that tennis should do more. As Ings points out: “Other sports such as 
football and athletics have promised us previously that everything is under 
control, just like tennis has, but that trust has been misplaced.

“The tennis authorities need to explain, with much greater clarity, how the 
sport will be protected from corruption.”

And, despite their latest announcement, those words can’t come soon enough.

 * This article was amended on 28 January 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that Scott Ferguson worked at Betfair between 2004 and 2006. He 
worked at Betfair between 2002 and 2008, and was head of education from 2005 to 
2008. 
 