
Alan Taylor, the director of robot reboot Terminator Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-genesis>, has spoken out over his 
struggles with the marketing of his new film.

Terminator Genisys review: Arnie's back, but the lustre isn't
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/terminator-genisys-review-arnold-schwarzenegger>
Taylor, who previously directed Thor: The Dark World, wasn’t happy about the 
spoiler-filled trailer which revealed some of the key changes to the Terminator 
timeline.

“I had a few heads-ups and a few unpleasant conversations where I squawked 
about this or that,” Taylor toldUproxx 
<http://uproxx.com/movies/2015/06/terminator-genisys-alan-taylor/> about his 
feelings on the campaign. “I think they felt like they had to send a strong 
message to a very wary audience that there was something new, that this was 
going to new territory.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrGSxss7gWak&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrGSxss7gWak>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrGSxss7gWak&media=>
“They were concerned that people were misperceiving this as kind of a reboot, 
and none of us wanted to reboot two perfect movies by James Cameron. I think 
they felt they had to do something game-changing in how the film was being 
perceived.”

A key twist was dropped in April with the second official trailer and Taylor 
was disappointed, especially given how powerful he thought the moment would 
play without any knowledge. “I certainly directed those scenes with the 
intention that no one would know,” he said.

He said that out of all the surprises he encountered during the shoot, “almost 
all of them to do with marketing”.

Taylor also spoke about his time directing the sequel to Kenneth Branagh’s 
Thor. “The Marvel experience was particularly wrenching because I was sort of 
given absolute freedom while we were shooting, and then in post it turned into 
a different movie,” he said. “So, that is something I hope never to repeat and 
don’t wish upon anybody else.”

Terminator Genisys has been picking up largely negative reviews with just a 
26% rating on Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/terminator_genisys/>. The Guardian’s Henry 
Barnes called it“soft and phoney” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/terminator-genisys-review-arnold-schwarzenegger>
.
 