
Future Terminator movies are on hold indefinitely following the US box office 
failure of new instalment Genisys,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/dangers-financiers-think-they-can-827843>
.

Plans for a “cinematic universe” based on the long-running man versus machines 
sci fi saga have also been shelved by studio Paramount, the trade bible 
reports, citing inside sources. Terminator: Genisys has so far scored more than 
$440m worldwide on the back of a $112m haul in China, but new report suggests a 
weak $89m US total and a $150m production budget means it will still lose money.

Terminator: Genisys review – Arnie's back, in a cynical franchisebot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/terminator-genisys-review-arnies-back-in-a-cynical-franchisebot>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-emilia-clarke-terminator-genisys-video-interviews&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435670097132%2FKP_335939_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%20on%20Terminator%20Genisys%3A%20'Sometimes%20older%20is%20better'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-emilia-clarke-terminator-genisys-video-interviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%20on%20Terminator%20Genisys%3A%20%27Sometimes%20older%20is%20better%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-emilia-clarke-terminator-genisys-video-interviews&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435670097132%2FKP_335939_crop_640x360.jpg>
Genisys’s apparent failure comes despite producer David Ellison’s success in 
recruitingArnold Schwarzenegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger> to return to the 
iconic role of the T800 cyborg he first played in 1984’s The Terminator. The 
new film also brought on board a high profile cast, including Game of Thrones’ 
Emilia Clarke as Sarah Connor and Zero Dark Thirty’s Jason Clarke as her son, 
John, leader of the human resistance.

Terminator creator James Cameron, who oversaw the first two films in the saga, 
also gave the new movie his blessing after dismissing 2003’s Terminator 3: Rise 
of the Machines and 2009’s Terminator Salvation. But the film, directed by Game 
of Thrones regular Alan Taylor, received short shrift from critics, withThe 
Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw labelling it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/terminator-genisys-review-arnies-back-in-a-cynical-franchisebot>
 a “cynical franchisebot, machine-tooled to clank into cinemas and gouge money 
out of people”.

Why Terminator Genisys is a disaster that could be averted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/17/terminator-genisys-disaster-could-be-averted-arnold-schwarzenegger-time-travel>
The Terminator saga’s apparent demise calls into question whether success at 
the Chinese box office can, after all, save creaking franchises from going 
under. The Guillermo Del Toro sci fi epic Pacific Rim was also expected to get 
a second instalment after doing surprisingly well in the world’s most populous 
nation two years ago,but according to recent reports now looks equally dead in 
the water <http://www.slashfilm.com/pacific-rim-2-release-date-cancelled/>. 

Forbes magazine, which argues Terminator will rise again 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/markhughes/2015/09/30/terminator-genisys-passing-450-million-sequel-inevitable/>
, suggests Hollywood studios receive only 20-30% of receipts from Chinese 
cinemas, compared to roughly 50% from other territories. Such a dynamic could 
explain why success in the US remains the gold standard for big budget fantasy 
fare.
 