
The late Terry Pratchett’s last novel The Shepherd’s Crown is in the running 
for the oldest children’s book award in the UK, theCarnegie medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/carnegie-medal>, organisers have announced.

The CILIP Carnegie, which dates back to 1936 and has been won by names from 
Arthur Ransome to Noel Streatfeild, wasPratchett’s first major book prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/jul/13/books.booksnews> when he won it in 
2002. The author, who died last year after being diagnosed in 2007 with a rare 
form of Alzheimer’s, won the Carnegie in 2002 with his first novel for 
children, The Amazing Maurice and his Educated Rodents.

The Shepherd’s Crown review – Terry Pratchett’s farewell to Discworld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/30/the-shepherds-crown-review-terry-pratchett-discworld-posthumous>
Winning the prize 14 years ago, Pratchett gave a barnstorming acceptance 
speech in which he laid out the difference in the way he was viewed as a writer 
in the US and in the UK. “Over there, where I’ve only recently made much of an 
impression, the reviews tended to be quite serious and detailed, with – as 
Maurice himself would have put it, ‘long words, like corrugated iron’. Over 
here, while being very nice, they tended towards the ‘another wacky, zany book 
by comic author Terry Pratchett’. In fact, Maurice has no wack and very little 
zane. It’s quite a serious book. Only the scenery is funny,”said Pratchett at 
the time 
<http://www.carnegiegreenaway.org.uk/pressdesk/press.php?release=pres_terspeach.htm>
.

“The problem is that we think the opposite of funny is serious. It is not. In 
fact, as GK Chesterton pointed out, the opposite of funny is not funny, and the 
opposite of serious is not serious. Benny Hill was funny and not serious; Rory 
Bremner is funny and serious; most politicians are serious but, unfortunately, 
not funny. Humour has its uses. Laughter can get through the keyhole while 
seriousness is still hammering on the door. New ideas can ride in on the back 
of a joke, old ideas can be given an added edge.”

What makes a book great? with Frances Hardinge and Robert McCrum – books 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/jan/29/great-fiction-non-frances-hardinge-robert-mccrum-podcast>
This year, The Shepherd’s Crown, which continues the adventures of Pratchett’s 
teenage witch Tiffany Aching, is up against a host of former winners. The 
20-strong longlist also features Frances Hardinge’s The Lie Tree, whichwon the 
Costa book of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/26/frances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015>
, as well as novels from previous Carnegie medallists Sally Gardner, Patrick 
Ness and David Almond.

CILIP (the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals) also 
announced the longlist for the Kate Greenaway medal for illustration, with 
former children’s laureate Anthony Browne making the cut for Willy’s Stories, 
featuring his well-known chimpanzee. Current laureate Chris Riddell is 
nominated twice for the Kate Greenaway, for his own Goth Girl and the Fete 
Worse Than Death, and for Neil Gaiman’s The Sleeper and the Spindle. Oliver 
Jeffers is up for his picture bookOnce Upon an Alphabet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/13/once-upon-an-alphabet-by-oliver-jeffers-picture-book>
, which he also wrote himself, and for his illustrations in The Day the Crayons 
Came Home, written by Drew Daywalt.

The medals are judged by panels of expert librarians. This year’s chair, 
Sioned Jacques, called the longlists “outstanding”, adding that they “perfectly 
reflect the vibrancy of children’s books in the UK today”.

“This is a real golden age of writing and illustrating for children and the 
range of skills and storytelling on display in the longlists is proof of the 
incredibly high standards of this ever-growing area of publishing – every book 
is a potential winner. These are all fantastic books and every one of them 
deserves a wide audience,” said Jacques.

“The images and stories in both longlists leap off the page and the whole 
gamut of human life and experience is reflected, with books that cover family 
and friendship, love and loyalty and secrets and lies,” said CILIP president 
Dawn Finch. “There are books that explore war, slavery, civil rights and 
equality, others that re-imagine ancient myths, stories of coming-of-age and 
tales that span time and space, firing imaginations with every page that is 
read.”

The shortlists will be announced on 15 March, and the winners will be 
announced on 20 June. Each medallist will receive £500 of books to donate to 
their local library, a gold medal, and £5,000 from the Colin Mears award.
 