
Terry Riley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/jan/28/terry-riley-contemporary-music-guide>
 is sitting in a quiet corner of the legendary Café Einstein in Berlin’s 
red-light district. A patient smile plays around his face – but mention the 
m-word and irritation suddenly ripples through his great candyfloss beard. 
“Minimalism was never a word we used for what we did,” he says. “It was a tag 
from the art world someone stuck to us later. My heart sinks when I get emails 
from music students saying they are writing a ‘minimalist piece’. Once you 
become an ism, what you’re doing is dead.”

Riley’s problem is that he is the composer of perhaps the defining work of 
what has become known as minimalist music.In C 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjR4QYsa9nE>, the groundbreaking piece he 
first performed on 4 November 1964, may have become an “ism” but it is no 
artefact: for its 50th anniversary, tributes and reinterpretations keep coming. 
A new version – recorded byDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn> and his Africa Express team, 
with help fromBrian Eno <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brianeno> and Nick 
Zinner of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/13/yeah-yeah-yeahs-mosquito-interview>
 – is out this week. Today, the Californian is in Berlin to meet with the 
German conductorAndré de Ridder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/apr/11/andre-de-ridder-sunken-garden>
, who instigated and led this new version, recorded last year in Bamako, the 
capital of Mali. For his 80th birthday next year, there will be Riley 
retrospectives at music festivals around the world. The beard will be doing a 
lot of rippling.
 Interactive video of Africa Express playing an exclusive performance of In C 
Mali at Tate Modern, London 
In C was born in the blue fog of Parisian jazz. In February 1962, Riley and 
his wife arrived in the French capital from the US. He made a living playing 
boogie-woogie piano at military bases and at Fred Payne’s Artists Bar in 
Pigalle. In the pool room of the bar one day, he bumped intojazz legend Chet 
Baker <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z4PKzz81m5c>, who had just returned from 
Italy where he had been imprisoned for drug possession.

The two hit it off and, in June 1963, were asked by the playwright Ken Dewey 
to come up with a soundtrack foran experimental theatre piece called The Gift 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lMcmMhfYkNI>. Riley recorded Baker and his 
band playing a number of works, includingMiles Davis’s So What 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/06/miles-davis-interview-rocks-backpages>
, and then starting messing about with the tapes in the studio. “I added a 
spoken-word part, created loops with Chet’s trumpet, and let them run out of 
sync. It was a kind of precursor to In C.”

The piece itself came to Riley about 11 months later, when he was back in the 
US. “I was on a coach in San Francisco,” he says, “and it just revealed itself 
to me, like in a dream.” By the end of the next day, he had written In C down 
on paper, and a few months later the piece premiered at theSan Francisco Tape 
Music Center 
<http://www.artpractical.com/feature/a_thing_in_the_process_of_becoming/>. 
Another Riley work performed at that 4 November concert was Coule, its title 
riffing on the French verb “to flow” and its English homophone. But In C didn’t 
flow in the way cool jazz did: it had an incessant, throbbing forward drive. To 
modern ears, it sounds a bit like the string section from thePsycho shower scene
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/psycho-shower-scene-hitchcock-horror>
 played by a bunch of stoned beatniks, or the London Philharmonic doing 
krautrock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fterry-riley-in-c-mali-minimalism-african-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417019666849%2F358d7ff2-2cab-4cba-9b97-51eecc37353c-1618x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terry%20Riley%E2%80%99s%20masterpiece%20%E2%80%93%20and%20minimalism%2C%20African%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fterry-riley-in-c-mali-minimalism-african-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terry%20Riley%E2%80%99s%20masterpiece%20%E2%80%93%20and%20minimalism%2C%20African%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fterry-riley-in-c-mali-minimalism-african-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417019666849%2F358d7ff2-2cab-4cba-9b97-51eecc37353c-1618x2040.jpeg>
 Terry Riley: ‘I am still interested in music as ecstasy, as something that 
transports you away from the everyday to another place.’ Photograph: Chris 
Felver/Getty Images 
With In C, Riley wanted to achieve the same effect with a live orchestra that 
he had previously created electronically: the score has 53 different musical 
phrases, lasting from half a beat to 32. Performers can play these phrases over 
and over, starting them at different times, so the music falls in and out of 
sync. A performance can be over in 15 minutes, or last several hours, with a 
steady pulse of the note C – played in the original performance bySteve Reich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/11/steve-reich-radiohead-interview-phillip-glass>
 on a Wurlitzer organ – keeping chaos at bay. The first gig featured 15 
musicians, though Riley now thinks 25 to 30 are needed “to build up the right 
wall of sound”. Last October, Portishead’s Adrian Utley recordedit with 19 
other guitarists 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/13569-adrian-utley-portishead-guitar-orchestra-album-stream>
.

Riley isn’t too fond of talking about the work these days, though. “I wanted 
to keep on doing something new,” he says. A few weeks after that first 
performance, he recalls, Steve Reich started publishing his own sound collages 
and people started saying to Riley: “Oh, what you’re doing sounds a lot like 
Steve’s work.” As Riley says: “This wasn’t easy for me to take. I felt it had 
taken me years to find a style that gave me an identity, and now it was 
suddenly being taken away from me.”

With 1969’s A Rainbow in Curved Air 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hy3W-3HPMWg>, he returned to electronic 
overdubs, and his current compositions are more traditionally classical, albeit 
with gospel and jazz elements. “I am still interested in music as ecstasy, as 
something that transports you away from the everyday to another place.” But he 
was excited when De Ridder sent him aSoundcloud link to the Africa Express 
version 
<https://soundcloud.com/transgressive-records/africa-express-presents-terry-rileys-in-c-mali-5-minute-edit/s-mPuPJ>
. He immediately emailed him back, saying it sounded as if his piece was 
“taking flight with the soul of Africa”.

While the term minimalism evokes disciplinarians in black rollneck jumpers, 
the enduring spirit of In C is anything but: it snatches the baton from the 
composer and hands it to the musicians. Riley recalls recordinga version with 
the Shanghai Film Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YGCp4PPaRSg> in 
the 1980s. “They wanted to use all these western instruments because they 
couldn’t reach the fourth degree of the scale on their instruments. But that’s 
precisely what I loved about it.”

The Africa Express version is, likewise, faithful to the spirit rather than 
the letter of In C. De Ridder had brought a copy of Riley’s score to Bamako 
because he had been performing the piece with his own ensemble,Stargaze 
<http://www.we-are-stargaze.com/>. He soon found out that straight repetition 
was alien to the philosophy of Malian musicians. Instead, they ended up jamming 
over him playing the phrases on the violin.

Riley’s favourite part of their version, he says, is when the C pulse suddenly 
stops and one of the musicians starts speaking over the music, about the first 
time he learnt to play his instrument, the kora. “That blew my mind,” he says. 
“I always welcome it when pieces change. The worst interpretations I’ve heard 
of In C mechanically try to copy the original performance.” The thought sends 
one final quiver of irritation through his facial hair. “Rules,” he says, “are 
not as important as results.”

• Africa Express presents … Terry Riley’s In C Mali is out on Transgressive 
Records <http://www.transgressiverecords.com/>.
 