
The surface of the lake is perfectly still. The steep hills on either side and 
the high mountains beyond are empty of human life, save for the occasional 
lonely farmstead embedded in the hillside. There are no visible roads, no 
telephone wires to connect this place to the outside world. It's not difficult, 
on the ferry journey along Lake Koman in northernAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>, to imagine you're drifting through 
a landscape that has lain undisturbed for centuries.

It's the height of summer but there aren't many people on the ferry either. 
Most of our fellow passengers on this hulking cargo ship are down below, 
smoking and drinking lethally strong coffee in the bar. They've seen it all 
before. Those who haven't – my girlfriend and I, a few backpackers and some 
tough-looking Czech bikers – are on the upper deck drinking in the staggering 
scenery.

Anywhere else in Europe, this two-hour journey (which our guide book describes 
as "one of the world's great boat trips") would be hopping with tourists, but 
Albania is not a big draw – at least not yet. The last century has been hard on 
this little country, just across the sea from Italy and just north of Greece. 
More than 40 years of communist rule under the isolationist dictator Enver 
Hoxha, followed by a ruinous period of extreme capitalism in the mid-90s, have 
left the country struggling to find its feet in the new millennium.

Our first port of call had been Shkodër, the largest city in the north, 
overlooked by an impressive medieval castle built by Venetians, and 
crisscrossed by wide communist-era boulevards. When its population emerges in 
the evening to promenade and gather outside cafés, you could imagine you were 
somewhere in Italy – until you hear a muezzin's call from one of the city's 
many mosques, or fix your eye on a building that looks like it was transplanted 
from 1950s Moscow.

We planned to strike out the next morning for the Albanian Alps in the 
north-east. The best way to get there, if you want to avoid a long, precarious 
road journey, is by the Lake Koman ferry. But we had no idea how to get to the 
lake, couldn't find an information office, and even the guidebook was sketchy 
on the subject. Eventually a taxi driver with a few words of English called a 
friend and arranged for us to be picked up early the next morning. This was 
typical of our experience. Ask someone on the street and, even if they can't 
help, they'll find someone whose second cousin definitely can. If helpfulness 
and hospitality were a marketable resource, Albania would be rich.

It was 6.30am when George, a cheerful man with a thick moustache, ushered us 
into his minivan outside the Rozafa Hotel. At 6.32am, we drew up alongside a 
café on the same street and George treated us to early-morning espressos 
accompanied by shots of Metaxa brandy. At 7.15am, we were finally good to go.
 In the Albanian Alps 
Lake Koman was created by a dam – a major hydroelectric project built in the 
1980s. An hour into the ferry journey, the tree-lined hills give way to sheer 
limestone cliffs which gradually close in until it looks like you've run out of 
lake. Just as you conclude you're heading straight into the side of a mountain, 
the water opens up again and you turn into a narrow passageway between two 
vertical walls of rock. It's like the riverboat sequence in the firstLord of 
the Rings <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/lord-of-the-rings>movie. Even the 
Czech bikers were gaping.

The Valbona valley, at the heart of the Albanian Alps, is a two-hour drive 
from the ferry's Fierzë terminus. It's flanked on each side by high mountains. 
The elevation was so dramatic that we had to crane our necks to see their 
craggy peaks.

We spent several nights at a friendly little chalet-style hotel called 
Rilindja, hiking around the local villages and eating fresh river trout. And 
yet we'd seen only a fraction of what the country has to offer during our 10 
days here. We missed out on the fine beaches (it has a coastline that bridges 
two seas – the Adriatic and the Ionian), the Greek and Roman ruins at Butrint, 
the town of Gjirokastra (Nobel laureateIsmail Kadare 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/ismail-kadare>, who was born there, describes 
it as "the steepest city in the world … unbelievable [and] dreamlike"), not to 
mention the capital city, Tirana. If you're willing to put up with bumpy roads 
and idiosyncratic transport arrangements, Albania is a rare find.

Essentials


Buses from Shkodër to Lake Koman depart from Café Barcelona on the corner of 
Rruga Skenderbeg and Rruga Marin Barleti at 6.30, 7 and 7.30am (all arriving 
for the ferry). Rozafa Hotel (+355 22 242 797) has doubles from €24. In 
Valbona, double rooms at Hotel Rilindja (journeytovalbona.com 
<http://journeytovalbona.com>) cost from €30 B&B. Camping costs from €5pp. 
British Airways (ba.com <http://ba.com>) flies from London to Tirana from £92 
return
 