
There's been much critical puffing of Thank You for Smoking, a sly adaptation 
of Christopher Buckley's 1994 novel about the rise of spin culture.Aaron Eckhart
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart> is perfectly cast as smug 
slug Nick Naylor who lobbies for people's right to give themselves cancer, and 
who encourages kids at St Euthanasias high school to decide for themselves 
whether cigarettes are really as bad as mum and dad say. In his lunch breaks 
Nick trades body counts with his 'Merchants of Death' cohorts in the booze and 
firearms business, beautifully sketched by the boisterous David Koechner and 
the magnificently mercurial Maria Bello. Nick's newest mission is to seal a 
deal putting cigs back into cinema, with plans for Brad Pitt and Catherine 
Zeta-Jones to blow zero-gravity smoke rings around their naked bodies in some 
seven-figure sci-fi product placement. Only a senator (William H Macy), a 
tumour-ridden cowboy (Sam Elliott) and a death threat stand between Naylor and 
his mortgage payments. While the set-up is a scorcher, Jason Reitman's sassy 
feature debut loses some steam as we get closer to the narrative butt. The 
one-liners still sting but, in the wake of a kidnapping and some father-son 
bonding, the story starts to drag. As an attack on the smoking lobby, it has 
none of the fire of Michael Mann's The Insider, while Wag the Dog walked a 
similarly poisonous PR line. Still, there's enough bite in the dialogue and 
performances to provoke a hacking cough of approval, and the laugh-out-loud 
moments are many, not least in scenes featuring Rob Lowe's unctuous Hollywood 
agent.
 