
November's final Thursday is rarely a reason for rejoicing in American 
fiction, although authors may have been quietly grateful to their Puritan 
ancestors for the opportunities Thanksgiving presents for depicting unravelling 
families, public rows and cooking crises. Not to mention sour comedy, as in
Scott Fitzgerald's leftover turkey recipes in The Crack-Up 
<http://www.listsofnote.com/2012/04/f-scott-fitzgeralds-turkey-recipes.html>.

In Anne Tyler's A Patchwork Planet, the problem 
<http://voices.washingtonpost.com/shortstack/2008/11/five_novels_with_great_thanksg.html>
 is a missing turkey (and one too many pumpkin pies). In Jay McInerney's Model 
Behaviour, it's parents who turn up for a restaurant meal with the protagonist 
in Manhattan, where his drunken dad behaves monstrously. Rick Moody's The Ice 
Storm, set over a Thanksgiving weekend in 1973, sees two families imploding as 
the kids' and parents' sins and lies are exposed during the eponymous storm. 
But shunning your kinsfolk is just as bleak in Jonathan Franzen's The 
Corrections, which shows loathsome lecturer Chip shopping for one on the 
November holiday after being dumped by his student girlfriend.

Two recent novels derive their structure from the build-up to the supper. In 
Suzanne Berne's The Ghost at the Table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141028477/the-ghost-at-the-table>
, sisters squabble over their childhood years, while inRichard Ford's The Lay 
of the Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780747585992/the-lay-of-the-land>
 his hero Frank Bascombe prepares for the various challenges presented by his 
two ex-wives and children, and meanwhile experiences setbacks, ranging from 
George W Bush's election victory to being shot at.

In modern Thanksgiving fiction (as in Thanksgiving movies), in short, what the 
reader is invited to give thanks for is not belonging to families like these: 
if you're looking for Dickensian warmth and wholesomeness, you'll need to go 
back to Louisa May Alcott's story,"An Old-Fashioned Thanks-giving" 
<http://womenshistory.about.com/library/etext/bl_alcott_thanksgiving.htm>. And 
even that has a title suggesting that, in 1881, the celebratory meal was 
already prone to go pear-shaped.
 