
See a full list of editorial team members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/oct/22/the-guardian-us-team-reporters-and-correspondents>

Business management

Eamonn Store, CEO

Eamonn Store is the Guardian’s North American CEO. Previously Store was 
President, Agency Development at MEC, a GroupM company. He joined MEC in 2005 
as Managing Director, Global Solutions and has been based in New York since 
2007. Previously he held senior positions at Starcom, Profero and Carat 
International. Prior to starting his media planning career at Carat UK in 1988, 
Store trained as a Pilot Officer with the British Royal Navy.

Editorial management


Lee Glendinning, Editor of Guardian US


Lee Glendinning is editor of Guardian US, where she was previously deputy 
editor and head of news. Prior to that she was also deputy editor of Guardian 
Australia. Lee joined the Guardian in 2006 and has worked as both a news editor 
and reporter in London. She began her career as a reporter at the Sydney 
Morning Herald.

Twitter: @lee_glend <https://twitter.com/lee_glend>

Merope Mills, West Coast Editor

Merope is west coast editor for Guardian US. She joined the Guardian 2003, 
where she previously served as weekend editor and film & music editor in London.

merope.mills@theguardian.com <mailto:merope.mills@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter:@meropemills <https://twitter.com/meropemills>

Jennifer Kho, Managing Editor


Jennifer is the managing editor and previously oversaw all editorial 
partnerships. She has edited and reported on a broad range of topics, but 
especially business and tech. Her stories have appeared in publications 
including The Los Angeles Times, The New York Times’ Green blog, Forbes.com, 
Fast Company, The Christian Science Monitor, GigaOM and Red Herring.

jennifer.kho@theguardian.com <mailto:jennifer.kho@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@jennkho <http://twitter.com/#!/jennkho>

David Taylor, Head of News

David is head of news for Guardian US. He rejoined The Guardian in 2015 after 
six years at The Times of London, where he was head of news and then Washington 
DC-based US Editor. He joined The Guardian first time around as deputy home 
editor in 2006 and before that worked as a home affairs specialist and news 
reporter at titles including The London Evening Standard.

david.taylor@theguardian.com <mailto:David.taylor@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter:@geordiedav <https://twitter.com/geordiedav>

Paul Owen, Deputy Head of News


Paul Owen is deputy of news for Guardian US and previously was live editor . 
He has also written for the Times Literary Supplement, the Times, and the 
Independent, among others. He is co-editor of the bookThe Wire Re-up: The 
Guardian Guide to the Greatest TV Show Ever Made 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780852652213>
. In 2011 he was nominated at the Amnesty International and the Foreign Press 
Association awards for his work on theMiddle East live blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live>.

paul.owen@theguardian.com <mailto:paul.owen@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@paultowen <https://twitter.com/paultowen>

Mike Barry, Head of Audience


Mike leads the effort to build relationships with the Guardian US audience, 
cultivate communities around the Guardian’s journalism, and advocate for our 
readers in the newsroom. Previously, Mike led audience initiatives for The Week 
magazine’s digital arm and was a politics editor at The Huffington Post. Mike’s 
team includes Harry Slater, Sarah Eberspacher and Ross Maghielse


mike.barry@theguardian.com <mailto:mike.barry@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter:@MikeElliotBarry <http://twitter.com/mikeelliotbarry>

Kenan Davis, Head of Interactive

Before joining the Guardian in 2013 as an interactive journalist, Kenan was 
digital media co-ordinator at the Columbia Journalism school and has worked on 
the Emmy-winning NSA Decoded and Beyond the Border projects, as well as the 
Counted and the World Cup interactives.


kenan.davis@theguardian.com  <mailto:kenan.davis@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter:@kenandavis <https://twitter.com/kenandavis>


Kerry Eustice, Editorial Partnerships Editor

Kerry is editorial partnerships editor. She previously oversaw the 10 
education and society professional networks at the Guardian in London, working 
with the teams to grow audiences, build loyalty and liaise with commercial 
colleagues. She was part of the team that launched the first professional 
networks.

kerry.eustice@theguardian.com <mailto:kerry.eustice@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter:@kerryeustice <https://twitter.com/kerryeustice>

Martin Hodgson, International Editor


Martin is responsible for international coverage on Guardian US. He joined the 
Guardian as an assistant news editor in 2009, and before that worked as a 
freelance reporter and foreign correspondent.

martin.hodgson@theguardian.com <mailto:martin.hodgson@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @martinxhodgson <https://twitter.com/martinxhodgson>

Tom Lutz, Sport Editor

Tom is sport editor for Guardian US, a position he previously held for 
Guardian Australia. He has worked for the Guardian since 2003. Tom’s Deputy is 
Bryan Graham.

tom.lutz@theguardian.com <mailto:tom.lutz@theguardian.com> | Twitter:@tom_lutz 
<https://twitter.com/tom_lutz>

Martin Pengelly, Weekend editor


Martin is responsible for news coverage on Saturdays and Sundays. He has 
worked for the Guardian since 2004. Previously, he worked for The Independent 
and The Independent on Sunday.

martin.pengelly@theguardian.com <mailto:martin.pengelly@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @MartinPengelly <http://twitter.com/#!/MartinPengelly>

Jessica Reed, Features Editor

Jessica is features editor for Guardian US. She’s French. She likes to receive 
emails with excellent ideas (here’show to pitch to her 
<https://medium.com/@jessicaelisabethreed/how-to-pitch-to-me-plus-what-i-would-give-my-right-arm-to-read-more-of-f63cb82c4470>
). She previously worked as opinion editor for Guardian Australia and also 
worked for five years in the Guardian’s London office.

jessica.reed@theguardian.com <mailto:jessica.reed@theguardian.com>| Twitter: 
@guardianjessica <https://twitter.com/guardianjessica>

Dominic Rushe, Business Editor

Dominic has been based in New York since 2001. He has worked for a number of 
newspapers, including the Daily Mail and the Sunday Times of London. He was 
part of the team awarded the 2014 Pulitzer prize for public service for 
groundbreaking articles on NSA surveillance.

dominic.rushe@theguardian.com <mailto:dominic.rushe@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @dominicru <https://twitter.com/dominicru>


David Shariatmadari, Head of Opinion 


David oversees the Guardian’s US opinion section, which is part of Comment is 
free. Previously, he worked as deputy opinion editor for five years in London.

Please read the Guardian US opinion pitch guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/24/guardian-us-opinion-pitch-guidelines>
.

david.shariatmadari@theguardian.com 
<mailto:david.shariatmadari@theguardian.com> | Twitter:  
<https://twitter.com/D_Shariatmadari>@D_Shariatmadari 
<https://twitter.com/D_Shariatmadari>

Benjamin Lee, Arts Editor, East Coast

Ben is the east coast arts editor. He was previously a digital contributing 
editor for the film team at the Guardian’s London office. Before the Guardian, 
he worked for men’s lifestyle magazine.

benjamin.lee@theguardian.com <mailto:benjamin.lee@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@benfraserlee <https://twitter.com/benfraserlee>

To book Guardian US writers on television or radio, or for general press 
inquiries, please email the press office atp 
<mailto:pressoffice@theguardian.com>ress.office@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ress.office@theguardian.com> or call (917) 900-4675 <>

Non-Editorial Contacts


For more information about advertising with the Guardian US, please visit our 
advertising site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/advertising/guardian-america-advertising-info>. 

For ad queries please contact Dee Gravino at diana.gravino@theguardian.com 
<mailto:diana.gravino@theguardian.com> or +1 917-900-4635.

Chris Carr, EVP Finance

Chris Carr is responsible for overseeing the financial and operational aspects 
of the Guardian’s US business. He previously held a range of roles at BBC 
Worldwide starting in the 1990’s. Carr qualified as a Chartered Accountant with 
KPMG, and is a member of the Institute of the Chartered Accountants of England 
and Wales.

chris.carr@theguardian.com <mailto: chris.carr@theguardian.com>



Jen Soch, EVP Commercial Delivery

Jen drives integration across the Guardian US commercial operation and helps 
ensure effective delivery of advertising solutions. She previously held the 
role of Managing Director, Digital Investment at Amplifi US. Prior to Amplifi, 
Jenn spent over a decade working for media agencies MEC and Mediavest, leading 
planning and strategy activity for a range of client accounts.

jen.soch@theguardian.com <mailto:jen.soch@theguardian.com>

 <mailto:randee.cerota@theguardian.com>

Chris Gherardi, Human Resources

You can see our current vacancies here <https://www.theguardian.com/workforus> 
|us-hr@theguardian.com <mailto:us-hr@theguardian.com>

 