
1. St Vincent | St Vincent

What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/12/best-albums-of-2014-no-1-st-vincent-by-st-vincent>
 “On St Vincent, Annie Clark sounded suspiciously like an artist reaching the 
top of their game, currently capable of doing it all. She could write 
beautiful, crystalline melodies – the woozy swoon of I Prefer Your Love, Prince 
Johnny’s astonishing octave-leaping chorus, the warped power ballad Severed 
Crossed Fingers – then arrange them in a way that made them sound more 
astonishing still.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmVAxUMuhz98&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmVAxUMuhz98>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmVAxUMuhz98&media=>
Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/12/best-albums-of-2014-no-1-st-vincent-by-st-vincent>

2. War On Drugs | Lost in the Dream


What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/11/best-albums-of-2014-no-2-lost-in-the-dream-by-the-war-on-drugs>
 “‘Balearic Springsteen’ is not, sadly, the defining sound of 2014, but while 
Lost in the Dream might not be the sort of album that could only have been made 
this year, the fact that it has placed so highly in this poll means it’s the 
sort of intimate, empathetic record that really gets under the skin. What was 
clearly punishing for Granduciel has become cathartic for the rest of us.

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/11/best-albums-of-2014-no-2-lost-in-the-dream-by-the-war-on-drugs>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvkLOg252KRE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvkLOg252KRE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvkLOg252KRE&media=>
3. FKA twigs | LP1

What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/10/best-albums-of-2014-no-3-lp1-by-fka-twigs>
 “People have said that LP1 is a sparse record. True, there are gaps and pauses 
all over the place, but the production is fundamentally busy and demanding. 
There’s an awful lot going on. Choruses swell, beats scatter, the melody can 
slow mid-song before lurching back to its original tempo. The music pulls off 
the same trick as the vocals: providing intimacy and distance, all in the same 
breath: a push and pull of showing and concealing.”

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/10/best-albums-of-2014-no-3-lp1-by-fka-twigs>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3yDP9MKVhZc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3yDP9MKVhZc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3yDP9MKVhZc&media=>
4. Aphex Twin | Syro


What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/09/best-albums-of-2014-no-4-syro-by-aphex-twin>
 “Some would grouse that Syro didn’t reinvent music – a rather high bar you had 
to regard as a compliment, of sorts. But if we don’t get Aphex the innovator 
here, we get something just as good: Aphex the virtuoso. Much of Syro was 
rooted in an athletic ‘80s electro funk, typified by the inhumanly fast keytar 
runs of syro u473t8+e (piezoluminescence mix). But the album’s real hallmark 
was its generosity of melody.”

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/09/best-albums-of-2014-no-4-syro-by-aphex-twin>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis&media=>
5. Caribou | Our Love


What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/08/best-albums-of-2014-no-5-our-love-by-caribou>
 “Club bangers have long been littered with platitudes about losing yourself to 
dance or feeling someone up at the end of the night. Our Love, though, runs 
deeper. Its songs are about the complexities of adult relationships, whether 
new fatherhood or friends’ divorces – even deaths. And yet despite this 
bittersweet melancholy, and Snaith’s chilly falsetto, Our Love manages to sound 
like it’s bathed in a warm, amber glow.”

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/08/best-albums-of-2014-no-5-our-love-by-caribou>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIMwgcRByA8Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIMwgcRByA8Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIMwgcRByA8Y&media=>
6. La Roux | Trouble in Paradise


What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/05/best-albums-of-2014-no-6-trouble-in-paradise-by-la-roux>
 “This was an album loaded with potential singles. As for the tinny production 
that marred La Roux’s excellent debut, that had been replaced with a far more 
organic 80s sound: groove-laden bass, scratchy funk guitars and a real sense of 
musical joie de vivre throughout. What you could evidently hear, and what 
explains at least some of the five year delay, is a sense of perfectionism, of 
the musicians being given the time and freedom to explore the possibilities 
around each song.”

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/05/best-albums-of-2014-no-6-trouble-in-paradise-by-la-roux>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKlyDYI_ddZY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKlyDYI_ddZY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKlyDYI_ddZY&media=>
7. Run the Jewels | Run the Jewels 2

What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/04/best-albums-of-2014-no-7-run-the-jewels-2-by-run-the-jewels>
 “El-P has been known to talk about the importance of lyricism creeping back 
into hip-hop, after what he perceived as a period when wordplay and prose took 
a backseat. On Run the Jewels 2, he and Killer Mike placed their words 
centre-stage, tackling tough topics, from racial profiling in America to drug 
dealer guilt and rough sex, with blazing streams of consciousness delivered in 
their two distinct, rapid-fire styles.”

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/04/best-albums-of-2014-no-7-run-the-jewels-2-by-run-the-jewels>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG-S9mtYowPY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG-S9mtYowPY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG-S9mtYowPY&media=>
8. Beck | Morning Phase

What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/03/best-albums-of-2014-no-8-morning-phase-by-beck>
 “For a man heralded as one of music’s most progressive and surreal 
shapeshifters, there is something reassuringly simple and old fashioned about 
the way this album sounds. Perhaps this is why, amidst the digital dystopia of 
2014, it is one of the year’s best. It’s a record that’s been laboured over and 
fine-tuned and finds Beck adopting the guise of songwriting greats – the 
furrowed sensitivity of Nick Drake, the wizened philosophy of Neil Young.”

Read the full article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/03/best-albums-of-2014-no-8-morning-phase-by-beck>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6Zp84XH6Eo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6Zp84XH6Eo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6Zp84XH6Eo&media=>
9. Flying Lotus | You’re Dead

What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/02/best-albums-of-2014-no-9-youre-dead-by-flying-lotus>
 “Originally planned as a straight-up jazz record, You’re Dead! slowly morphed 
into an even more ambitious, wide-ranging album with guest appearances from the 
likes of Kendrick Lamar, Snoop Dogg and Herbie Hancock. This meeting of jazz 
and hip-hop is what the album excels at exploring – a bold, ambitious statement 
that truly worked.”

Read the full article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/02/best-albums-of-2014-no-9-youre-dead-by-flying-lotus>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2lXD0vv-ds8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2lXD0vv-ds8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2lXD0vv-ds8&media=>
10. Sleaford Mods | Divide and Exit

What we say: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/01/-sp-best-albums-of-2014-no-10-divide-and-exit-by-sleaford-mods>
 “You could drive yourself mad thinking about what Sleaford Mods “mean”, and 
why the lyrics of Jason Williamson began to resonate in 2014, after seven 
albums. The pat response would be to claim that it’s all about austerity 
Britain. Yet any connection with the state of the country might be more to do 
with a rising feeling of anger and resentment at the world: Williamson’s lyrics 
sound less like social commentary than the thoughts that would spill out of us 
all if only we dared speak them aloud.”

Read the full article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/01/-sp-best-albums-of-2014-no-10-divide-and-exit-by-sleaford-mods>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCFFWF1DnZKM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCFFWF1DnZKM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCFFWF1DnZKM&media=>
11. Mac DeMarco | Salad Days

What we said:  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/27/mac-demarco-salad-days-review> 
“DeMarco is incredibly adept at distilling an unlikely selection of influences 
into something that’s idiosyncratic without being gratingly quirky. On Salad 
Days, you can hear both the wide-eyed romanticism ofJonathan Richman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLnf5Cg1Zsk&feature=kp> – he’s big on handing 
out common-sense relationship advice – and the skewed oddness that ensued when
Arthur Russell attempted to write straightforward pop music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HS411Ktc9vM>, but DeMarco is clearly most 
passionately in love with Walls and Bridges-era John Lennon.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvF7P3oq8Enc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvF7P3oq8Enc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvF7P3oq8Enc&media=>
12. Taylor Swift | 1989

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/24/taylor-swift-1989-review> “The 
really striking thing about 1989 is how completely Taylor Swift dominates the 
album. As a songwriter, Swift has a keen grasp both of her audience and of pop 
history. She avoids the usual hollow platitudes about self-empowerment and 
meaningless aspirational guff about the VIP area in the club in favour of 
Springsteenesque narratives of escape and the kind of doomed romantic fatalism 
in which 60s girl groups dealt.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnfWlot6h_JM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnfWlot6h_JM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnfWlot6h_JM&media=>
13. Kate Tempest | Everybody Down 

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/15/kate-tempest-everybody-down-review>
 “The obvious reference point is the Streets’ second album,A Grand Don’t Come 
for Free <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/may/07/popandrock.shopping3>, 
although Dan Carey’s unsteadying beats leave no room for Mike Skinner’s 
trademark way with a chorus. Tempest shines, though, through her use of 
language, which illuminates the subject matter – from boardroom drug deals to 
vacuous parties where “everybody … has got a hyphenated second name” – to 
dazzling effect.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEiBdU0tFB0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEiBdU0tFB0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEiBdU0tFB0&media=>
14. Future Islands | Singles

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/20/future-islands-singles-review> 
“Beginning withSeasons (Waiting on You) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-5Ae-LhMIG0> – a song that already feels like a 
modern classic in the wake oftheir Letterman performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/mar/07/my-mind-has-been-blown-by-future-islands-on-letterman>
 – the band whip through chintzy 80s R&B synths and buffed-up AOR guitars with 
such vigour it feels as if it were their last shot at the big time (considering 
they formed in 2006 and just got signed to 4AD, perhaps it is). Swaggering 
sonics aside, it’s very hard to see past the visceral vocals of Samuel T 
Herring.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-5Ae-LhMIG0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-5Ae-LhMIG0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-5Ae-LhMIG0&media=>
15. Angel Olsen | Burn Your Fire For No Witness

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/16/burn-fire-no-witness-angel-olsen-review>
 “There is a lot of heartbreak on Burn Your Fire For No Witness, as well as a 
lot of pleasing anachronism; a lot of hard-won resignation and what you might 
call stern vulnerability, a quality that Olsen shares withJoni Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonimitchell> without sounding at all like 
Mitchell. Her soprano can be a delicate and ghostly thing ... but Olsen’s 
quaver holds your gaze, using her vibrato for effect, not whining or crumbling.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0CQSOoFlaxI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0CQSOoFlaxI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0CQSOoFlaxI&media=>
16. Wild Beasts | Present Tense

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/20/wild-beasts-present-tense-review>
 “Wild Beasts revel in their idiosyncrasies; you can hear it in the duelling 
vocals and choral layers, the words that shouldn’t fit, the tunes that veer off 
in unexpected directions. What’s new here is that they have tempered and honed 
those flourishes. It’s modest in its experiments, never forgoing an accessible 
ear for the sake of being difficult.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9IIbbFIQTKI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9IIbbFIQTKI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9IIbbFIQTKI&media=>
17. Young Fathers | Dead 

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/30/young-fathers-dead-review> “You 
could compare Young Fathers’ globalised, magpie borrowing to that ofMIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mia>, but their music feels far less 
frenetic and contrived, less concerned with proving a point. For an album that 
throws an awful lot of eclectic influences at the listener over the course of 
34 minutes, Dead feels remarkably unforced and organic.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7UmjvbmHQM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7UmjvbmHQM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7UmjvbmHQM&media=>
18. Jenny Lewis | The Voyager

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/24/jenny-lewis-the-voyager-review> 
“The Voyager’s finely wrought sketches of mortality and infidelity sound like 
the product of months of painstaking polishing. The formerRilo Kiley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/14/rilo-kiley-split> singer is 
eminently skilled at turning the detritus of relationships into relatable 
lyrics, caustically writing about ageing, her biological clock and watching an 
ex-boyfriend move on with undue haste.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrvcf6dCk-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrvcf6dCk-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrvcf6dCk-k&media=>
19. Jhene Aiko | Souled Out

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/15/timbaland-future-stars-experimental-cassie>
 “The R&B pendulum has been swinging back towards women. Jhené Aiko, FKA Twigs 
and Kelela have different influences and approaches, but what they share is a 
love of R&B at its most forward-looking and futuristic, the sort that was 
prevalent between the mid 90s and the mid-noughties, when Timbaland, the 
Neptunes andRodney Jerkins <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Va1Y6uAgNJY> were in 
their heyday.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D00bumpN0Mhw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D00bumpN0Mhw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D00bumpN0Mhw&media=>
20. Owen Pallett | In Conflict

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/25/in-conflict-review-owen-pallett> 
“Owen Pallett is equally comfortable in the worlds of baroque pop and 
classical. His fourth album emphasises his fluidity, its complex arrangements 
and Pallett’s choirboy voice placing him somewhere between Arthur Russell and a 
less hysterical Rufus Wainwright.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgt8wR8CagQo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgt8wR8CagQo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgt8wR8CagQo&media=>
21. Ratking | So It Goes

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/03/ratking-so-it-goes-review> “The 
New York collective have created a dirty, aggressive, but creatively fecund 
form ofhip-hop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop> that’s steeped in 
their city’s musical legacy, but still heading in a new direction. Unrelenting 
and abrasive it may be, but So It Goes turns a new page in New York hip-hop.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSpBCXWKx4Tg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSpBCXWKx4Tg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSpBCXWKx4Tg&media=>
22. Merchandise | After the End

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/14/merchandise-after-the-end-review>
 “After the End is not just an enjoyable record in its own right, but one that 
feels like a significant step in Merchandise’s journey. You’re left excited 
about where they might go next, with a real sense that they could improve with 
age. After the End may only occasionally hit the band’s lofty targets – but 
sometimes just seeing someone strive can be a thrill in itself.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8M6OLS2JBZU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8M6OLS2JBZU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8M6OLS2JBZU&media=>
23. Hurray for the Riff Raff | Small Town Heroes

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/27/hurray-riff-raff-small-town-heroes-review>
 “As the album plays, with barely changing acoustic instrumentation, doo wop 
and early R&B start to make their presence felt. You might call it a postmodern 
take on 20th-century American music, but it’s so warm and welcoming that it 
never feels like an exercise in technique or a mere demonstration of knowledge.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbMtwjaNuQ8w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbMtwjaNuQ8w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbMtwjaNuQ8w&media=>
24. Banks | Goddess 

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/04/banks-goddess-review-accomplished-debut>
 “When Banks breathes over Lil Silva, Shlohmo and Sohn’s understated synths and 
basslines on singlesGoddess 
<https://soundcloud.com/banksbanksbanks/banks-goddess-1>, Brain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NL9T42SVnN0> and Waiting Game 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IaI5JCxOCdw>, the internet hype humming around 
her makes sense. She lays her emotions bare, at times almost embarrassingly so, 
sounding raw and vengeful.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIaI5JCxOCdw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIaI5JCxOCdw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIaI5JCxOCdw&media=>
25. Actress | Ghettoville

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/23/actress-ghettoville-review> 
“This fourth album takes inspiration from society’s outcasts – drug addicts, 
the homeless – although the dystopian vibe does brighten towards the climax, 
when Darren Cunningham adds soulful vocal samples to his palette of ambient, 
industrial, techno, avant-electronica, glitch, minimalism and pretty much any 
other genre he feels like taking apart.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPXQnH_ieLn8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPXQnH_ieLn8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPXQnH_ieLn8&media=>
26. Tinashe | Aquarius 

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/02/tinashe-aquarius-review> “This 
debut from Zimbabwean-American actor/singerTinashe Kachingwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/27/tinashe-review-xoyo-london> will 
undoubtedly be compared to R&B minimalists likeMila J 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3-xPHyorME> and Jhené Aiko 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oEm3lY3trRU>, but her antecedents stretch 
further back.Janet Jackson’s seductive 1990s incarnation 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QUOkg4jFNus> and Aaliyah’s futuristic soul are 
obvious influences, and while Aquarius doesn’t hit those heights, it sets 
Tinashe up as a potentially major artist for 2015.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-s7TCuCpB5c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-s7TCuCpB5c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-s7TCuCpB5c&media=>
27. Kindness | Otherness

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/09/kindness-otherness-review> “This 
really is a beautifully crafted album, its sincere homages to Jam & Lewis’s 
crisp R&B or Womack & Womack’s swish club soul transformed by a distinctly 
English kind of longing. Adam Bainbridge remains a slightly aloof presence 
throughout, but zesty vocal cameos from Kelela, Robyn, Tawiah and Ghanaian 
rapper M.anifest save Otherness from slipping into tasteful self-indulgence.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7GBDwFDtmLo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7GBDwFDtmLo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7GBDwFDtmLo&media=>
28. Damon Albarn | Everyday Robots

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/24/damon-albarn-everyday-robots-review>
 “Beautiful, but subtle, cloudy and elusive, Everyday Robots certainly isn’t 
the album it’s purported to be. You come out of the other side not much the 
wiser about the man behind it. Never mind: the music is good enough that a lack 
of revelation doesn’t really seem to matter while Everyday Robots is playing. 
Whoever Damon Albarn is, he’s extremely good at what he does.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrjbiUj-FD-o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrjbiUj-FD-o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrjbiUj-FD-o&media=>
29. Ariel Pink | Pom Pom 

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/16/ariel-pink-pom-pom-review> 
“There is substance here, and many styles. The highly moving Picture Me Gone 
finds Pink in powerful sentimental form. Like Brian Wilson trapped in a tar 
pit, Pink sings about a dad bequeathing his digital history to his child. 
However, if this is Pink’s big-push album, in which he becomes the 21st 
century’s Wayne Coyne, it’s not working. Pink has melody to burn, but the 
unevenness of Pom Pom is a stumbling block.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS87mPfD_yI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS87mPfD_yI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS87mPfD_yI&media=>
30. East India Youth | Total Strife Forever

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/09/east-india-youth-total-strife-forever-review>
 “East India Youth’s William Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/02/music-stars-breakthrough-2014> 
is an artist of two halves. On the one hand he’s an emotional electronic 
songsmith: think a James Blake you don’t want to grab by the scruff of the neck 
and pack off to national service. On the other, he’s an inventive composer who 
can turn his hand toHarold Budd <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_Budd>esque 
soundscapes one minute (Total Strife Forever I-IV) and surprisingly banging 
techno such as Hinterland the next.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1wL_JE_ksh8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1wL_JE_ksh8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1wL_JE_ksh8&media=>
31. Leonard Cohen | Popular Problems

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/18/leonard-cohen-popular-problems-album-review>
 “An artist who 10 years ago could make finishing an album seem like a tough 
call now makes it sound effortless. Nothing here feels laboured: he can deliver 
songs as beautifully wrought as Samson in New Orleans – a depiction of the 
aftermath of hurricane Katrina – with a gorgeous understatement that only 
magnifies its impact: ‘And we who cried for mercy from the bottom of the 
pit/Was our prayer so damn unworthy that the sun rejected it?’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU4JJNypZUOQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU4JJNypZUOQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU4JJNypZUOQ&media=>
32. Shabazz Palaces | Lese Majesty

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/24/shabazz-palaces-lese-majesty-review>
 “Lese Majesty is a noticeably less forbidding album in practice than it looks 
on paper. There are certainly moments when it feels like a bunch of weird words 
and noises thrown together to no real cumulative effect ... but more often, 
Lese Majesty lures you into its skewed, wildly inventive world.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da_bqk0uaXNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da_bqk0uaXNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da_bqk0uaXNo&media=>
33. Scott Walker and Sunn 0))) | Soused 

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/16/scott-walker-sunn-o-soused-review>
 “Soused is surprisingly melodic, Sunn O))) provide a menacing but rich 
backdrop to Walker’s distinctive baritone. The sound palette may have changed, 
but Walker’s lyrics address familiar themes: totalitarian states; humankind’s 
brutality; and the movies.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_NIop72vis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_NIop72vis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_NIop72vis&media=>
34. Jamie T | Carry on the Grudge

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/25/jamie-t-carry-on-the-grudge-review-melodic-and-potent>
 “As a lyricist, Treays is very good on the weirdness and uncertainty of your 
late 20s: the shifts in friendships, the galling moment when you realise you’re 
an adult, whether or not you feel like one. There’s something really affecting 
and realistic about the way Carry on the Grudge lurches from expansive 
thoughtfulness to the adolescent he-nicked-my-bird mewling of Peter.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-tmoaFAT108&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-tmoaFAT108>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-tmoaFAT108&media=>
35. Peggy Seeger | Everything Changes

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/28/peggy-seeger-everything-changes-review>
 “This album is a revelation. Throughout her lengthy career,Peggy Seeger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/24/peggy-seeger-voice-of-experience>
 has proved that she is a thoughtful songwriter with an easygoing voice that 
offsets her often angry lyrics, but here she explores new, pained and personal 
territory, and does so with delicacy and soul. Listening to her relaxed, often 
acrobatic vocals, it’s hard to believe she’s 79. And she is still willing to 
experiment.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjxqDWGSNnVU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjxqDWGSNnVU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjxqDWGSNnVU&media=>
36. Ex Hex | Rips

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/09/ex-hex-rips-review> “Ex Hex make 
some of the most endlessly repeat-listenable should-be-hits of recent years. 
From the hurtling clang ofBeast 
<https://soundcloud.com/mergerecords/ex-hex-beast>; to How You Got That Girl’s 
gleaming, twirling chorus; to New Kid, with its whiplashing pickslides and 
turbo-booster solo – these songs will be echoing in your ears long after Rips’ 
lean, mean 35 mins are over, and very welcome they will be there, too.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2bhLw3v_tiY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2bhLw3v_tiY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2bhLw3v_tiY&media=>
37. Freddie Gibbs & Madlib | Piñata

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/13/freddie-gibbs-and-madlib-pinata-review>
 “Freddie Gibbs is a grizzled street rapper with a voice that sounds uncannily 
like Tupac Shakur’s. Madlib is a producer with a long-established reputation 
for raiding recorded obscurities for loops with a discernible quirk. It’s an 
odd couple, but what they share is a fetishisation of independence, a 
determination not to (to coin an old phrase) ‘sell out’.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkGaRbhat-FA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkGaRbhat-FA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkGaRbhat-FA&media=>
38. Toumani Diabaté and Sidiki Diabaté | Toumani & Sidiki


What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/01/toumani-diabate-sidiki-diabate-review>
 “On their debut album of kora duets, the pair of them can be heard driving the 
music on withattacking, rhythmic playing and flurries of rapid-fire 
improvisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/mar/17/toumani-diabate-sidiki-master-apprentice-video>
. It’s a virtuoso, and mostly upbeat collaboration, but the best track is the 
one new composition, Lampedusa, a gently exquisite lament for African migrants 
who died trying to reach Europe.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgRo8fCXxNsQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgRo8fCXxNsQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgRo8fCXxNsQ&media=>
39. Sharon Van Etten | Are We There

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/22/sharon-van-etten-are-we-there-review>
 “The lyrics onSharon Van Etten <http://www.sharonvanetten.com/>’s fourth album 
don’t always make for easy listening. “He can break me, with one hand,” she 
falsettos during one chorus, whereas Your Love Is Killing Me features broken 
legs, cut tongues and burned skin. As withher 2012 breakthrough album Tramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/04/sharon-van-etten-review>, these 
revelations feel intimate and shocking, and gain further power when Van Etten 
appears to fall back under her lover’s spell.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfDW-W2J84Hc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfDW-W2J84Hc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfDW-W2J84Hc&media=>
40. Tricky | Adrian Thaws

What we said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/04/tricky-adrian-thaws-review-path> 
“From opener Sun Down, you’re transported to Tricky’s world. It’s dark, 
seductive and filled with songs that are linked via his inventive production 
and bleak worldview. Sonically, it ranges from avant garde soundscapes (My 
Palestine Girl) to low-slung soul (Silly Games) and reveals an artist who’s 
still capable of surprising, disturbing and revelling in his own 
idiosyncracies.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DryFTvqbCGdQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DryFTvqbCGdQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DryFTvqbCGdQ&media=>
Which album has topped your own list this year? Tell us in the form below, and 
we’ll round up your picks in a readers’ choice list.

Please sign in with your Guardian site profile to complete the form
Click here to open the form. 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/form/embed/1881812-obZxGXHL5s>  