
“Everybody ought to be taught to draw just as much as everybody ought to be 
taught to read and write,” said William Morris. Rather than his extensive 
musings on art and politics, Morris is perhaps better known for his wallpaper 
and fabric designs of the late Victorian period. A revival of his work in the 
early 1970s was greeted enthusiastically by my family. My mother made a new 
cover for our battered sofa from his Woodpecker fabric and my sisters wore 
smock-like dresses made from his textiles. Sat on the sofa, camouflaged in 
Morris patterns, they almost disappeared. The effect was heightened when my 
father wallpapered our living room in Peacock and Dragon. The crazy unremitting 
dynamism of his floral forest imagery gave me a headache.

This week the Frieze art fair opens in London. Had it been going in the 19th 
century, I suspect that William Morris would have been there showing his work 
but, like many contemporary artists, would be wondering if the fur coats and 
facelifts were really the most receptive audience for his art. Morris had 
reservations about the popularity of his designs. He regretted what he saw as 
his “ministering to the swinish luxury of the rich”. His adoption of Marxism 
later in life seems at odds with his entrepreneurial spirit.
 William Morris. ‘I do not want art for a few, any more than education for a 
few, or freedom for a few.’ Photograph: Frederick Hollyer 
This autumn, if you visit the William Morris Gallery 
<http://www.wmgallery.org.uk/> in Walthamstow, east London, you will find, 
alongside the permanent collection and its extraordinary exploration of 
Morris’s life and work, a film of me driving around Camberley in a camper van 
with a megaphone telling people to “be Bobtimistic” and “be inspired: vote Bob 
for more art in our schools”.

Art is Your Human Right: why can’t politics be more fun? 
<http://www.wmgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions-43/art-is-your-human-right/> 
documents my attempt earlier in the year tostand for parliament against Michael 
Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/08/2015-vote-creativity-not-austerity-standing-against-gove>
 in his constituency of Surrey Heath. The exhibition also features paintings, 
banners and sculptures from my four-year effort to tell the story of why 
politicians should take the arts more seriously.

It's clear this government doesn't value the arts in schools | Dreda Say 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/21/government-arts-schools-michael-gove>
William Morris stood on soap boxes, went on marches and wrote about the causes 
he believed in. He even tried to influence policy makers, lobbying a royal 
commission on technical education. If Morris was alive today I think he would 
be surprised by how wonderfully the arts and art education has developed, but 
he would also be dismayed that we are deliberately throwing away those advances 
by the removal of all political support for the arts. Five years of Gove 
telling the world the arts are not worth studying has meant that the tide has 
gone out for the arts and institutions have been leftgasping for air 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/royal-college-of-art-in-a-state-of-jeopardy-as-staff-quit-and-students-protest-a6675941.html>
.

It is easy for politicians to deliver warm words about the arts. If you are a 
fan of the creative industries argument, that the potential contribution to the 
economy is huge, then Morris can be your inspiration. But if, like me, you 
think that if you threaten the arts then you also threaten free speech and free 
expression, Morris too has something to say. Art around the world is under 
threat. Lock up thepoet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/29/qatari-poet-jailed-arab-spring>, 
bug the artist’s studio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/04/ai-weiwei-finds-listening-devices-hidden-in-beijing-studio>
 or blow up an ancient city and you say to humanity “you have no voice, you 
will have no legacy and your life means nothing”. Morris, in his book Hopes and 
Fears for Art, wrote: “I do not want art for a few, any more than education for 
a few, or freedom for a few.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Farts-under-threat-william-morris-victorian-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18780e2f561f9e55f97065709b71f18e66905e82%2F0_0_4928_4928%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20arts%20are%20under%20threat%20%E2%80%93%20William%20Morris%20should%20inspire%20us%20to%20defend%20them%20%7C%20Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Farts-under-threat-william-morris-victorian-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20arts%20are%20under%20threat%20%E2%80%93%20William%20Morris%20should%20inspire%20us%20to%20defend%20them%20%7C%20Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Farts-under-threat-william-morris-victorian-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18780e2f561f9e55f97065709b71f18e66905e82%2F0_0_4928_4928%2F4928.jpg>
 Photograph: Paul Tucker 
In this country right now we are giving children the message that individual 
vision is worth nothing. The deeply depressing thing is that no politician, 
very few artists, and not even the head ofArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england> seem to be prepared 
to stand up for the arts and say, as Morris said, art should be for all.

Most disappointingly, after the euphoric optimism of Jeremy Corbyn’s win and 
hisapparent commitment to the arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/01/jeremy-corbyn-reverse-bbc-arts-council-cuts>
, the Labour leader appointed Michael Dugher as the shadow culture minister. 
Last month Dugherdelivered 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/130137185474/speech-by-michael-dugher-to-labour-party-annual>
 what must have been the shortest ever address to a Labour conference. William 
Morris would have been horrified by the banality of Dugher’s speech. A few 
predictable swipes at the Tories about the BBC, some jokes about the rugby 
which backfired, followed by a surprising agreement with the Tories that arts 
funding needs a populist London-bashing redistributive review. Has Dugher 
nothing to say about the closure of foundation courses or the dismantling of 
further education, adult education and education maintenance allowance? No 
words of support for the Arts Council as a national organisation or for free 
admission to our museums?

I invite Dugher, Ed Vaizey, Gove and Nicky Morgan to visit the William Morris 
Gallery this autumn to see why many of us still think, like Morris, that to 
defend the arts is to defend democracy. The arts are about our humanity and 
free expression is our human right.
 