
On Friday and Saturday, after the release of an 11-year-old recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-tape-quit-republicans-lewd-comments>
 that revealed Donald Trump boasting about his advances on a married woman and 
his desire to “grab [women] by the pussy”, a succession of Republican lawmakers 
condemned the remarks and in some cases withdrew their support for their 
party’s presidential nominee.

Donald Trump defiant as groping tape drives growing Republican calls to quit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-tape-quit-republicans-lewd-comments>
Here is a list of those Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> and their current statements 
and positions regarding Trump, in context of what they have previously said on 
the subject.

Republicans who have endorsed and now abandoned Trump 

John Thune, South Dakota senator and third-ranking Republican in the Senate: “
Donald Trump should withdraw 
<https://twitter.com/SenJohnThune/status/784798261781598208> and Mike Pence 
should be our nominee effective immediately.” In May, Thune argued Trump was a 
necessary candidate of “change”,saying 
<http://www.argusleader.com/story/news/2016/05/31/thune-if-people-want-change-think-their-answer-trump/85197252/>
: “We have to get it right in 2016 because the future of our country is hanging 
in the balance in so many different ways. And there are three words that ought 
to scare everyone in this room: President Hillary Clinton.”

John McCain, Arizona senator and 2008 presidential nominee: “I have wanted to 
support the candidate our party nominated. He was not my choice, but as a past 
nominee, I thought it important I respect the fact thatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> won a majority of the 
delegates by the rules our party set. I thought I owed his supporters that 
deference.

“But Donald Trump’s behavior this week, concluding with the disclosure of his 
demeaning comments about women and his boasts of sexual assaults, make it 
impossible to offer even conditional support for his candidacy … We will write 
in the name of some good conservative Republican who is qualified to be 
president.”

Kelly Ayotte, New Hampshire senator: “I cannot and will not support a 
candidate for president who brags about degrading and assaulting women.” Last 
week, Ayottecalled Trump a “role model” 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/sen-ayotte-trump-absolutely-a-role-model-for-kids-229076>
 and then promptly recanted the remark, saying neither he nor Hillary Clinton 
were worthy of admiration.

Jason Chaffetz, Utah representative: “I’m pulling my endorsement. I cannot 
support in any way, shape or form the comments or approach Donald Trump has 
taken.” This summer, after some public struggle, Chaffetzsaid he would support 
the nominee 
<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/865653609/Utah-GOP-leaders-ready-to-support-presidential-nominee-wont-say-they-support-Trump.html?pg=all>
.

Bradley Byrne, Alabama representative: “It is now clear Donald Trump is not 
fit to be president of the United States 
<https://twitter.com/kylegriffin1/status/784796608361791488> and cannot defeat 
Hillary Clinton. I believe he should step aside.”

Gary Herbert, Utah governor: “Donald Trump’s statements are beyond offensive 
<https://twitter.com/HerbertForUtah/status/784571669662826496> & despicable. 
While I cannot vote for Hillary Clinton, I will not vote for Trump.”

Dennis Daugaard, South Dakota governor: “Enough is enough 
<https://twitter.com/SDGovDaugaard/status/784797034410680320>. Donald Trump 
should withdraw in favor of Governor Mike Pence. This election is too 
important.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fclinton-critic-jason-chaffetz-withdraws-support-for-trump-lewd-remarks-republicans-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton%20critic%20Jason%20Chaffetz%20withdraws%20support%20for%20Trump%20after%20lewd%20remarks%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fclinton-critic-jason-chaffetz-withdraws-support-for-trump-lewd-remarks-republicans-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinton%20critic%20Jason%20Chaffetz%20withdraws%20support%20for%20Trump%20after%20lewd%20remarks%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fclinton-critic-jason-chaffetz-withdraws-support-for-trump-lewd-remarks-republicans-video&media=>
Clinton critic Jason Chaffetz withdraws support for Trump after lewd remarks – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/08/clinton-critic-jason-chaffetz-withdraws-support-for-trump-lewd-remarks-republicans-video>
Joe Heck, Nevada representative: “I can no longer look past the pattern of 
behavior and comments that have been made by Donald Trump. Therefore, I cannot 
in good conscience continue to support Donald Trump, nor can I vote for Hillary 
Clinton.”

Mike Crapo, Idaho senator: “His repeated actions and comments toward women 
have been disrespectful, profane and demeaning.”

Deb Fischer, Nebraska representative: “It would be wise for him to step aside 
and allowMike Pence <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> to serve 
as our party’s nominee.”

Lisa Murkowski, Alaska senator: “I cannot and will not support Donald Trump 
for president. He has forfeited the right to be our party’s nominee.”

Dan Sullivan, Alaska senator: “I’m calling on Trump to step aside for Gov. 
Pence. Trump can’t lead on critical issue of ending dom violence & sexual 
assault.”

Ann Wagner, Missouri representative: “I must be true to those survivors and 
myself condemn the predatory and reprehensible comments of Donald Trump. I 
withdraw my endorsement and call for Governor Pence to take the lead so we can 
defeat Hillary Clinton.”

Brian Sandoval, Nevada governor: “This video exposed not just words, but now 
an established pattern which I find to be repulsive and unacceptable for a 
candidate for president of the United States. I cannot support him as my 
party’s nominee.

Martha Roby, Alabama Representative: “Donald Trump’s behavior makes him 
unacceptable as a candidate for president, and I won’t vote for him.”


Shelley Moore Capito, West Virginia senator: “Women have worked hard to gain 
the dignity and respect we deserve. The appropriate next step may be for him to 
re-examine his candidacy.”

Cory Gardner, Colorado senator: “If Donald Trump wishes to defeat Hillary 
Clinton, he should do the only thing that will allow us to do so – step aside.”

Tom Rooney, Florida representative: “If I support him for president, I will be 
telling my boys that I think it’s OK to treat women like objects – and I’ll 
have failed as a dad. Therefore, I can no longer support Donald Trump for 
president and will not be voting for him or Hillary Clinton.”

Frank LoBiondo, New Jersey representative: “I will not vote for a candidate 
who boasts of sexual assault. It is my conclusion that Mr Trump is unfit to be 
President.”

John Boozman, Arkansas senator: “If I ever heard anyone speak this way about 
[my daughters and granddaughters] they would be shopping for a new set of teeth 
… I am focused on saving the US Senate.”

Rodney Davis, Illinois representative: “The abhorrent comments made by Donald 
Trump are inexcusable and go directly against what I’ve been doing in 
Washington to combat assaults on college campuses. Because of this, I am 
rescinding my support for Donald Trump.”

Rob Portman, Ohio senator: “While I continue to respect those who still 
support Donald Trump, I can no longer support him. I continue to believe our 
country cannot afford a Hillary Clinton presidency. I will be voting for Mike 
Pence for President.” (Portman did not disavow Trump in his initial statement 
Friday night.)

Nevada representative Cresent Hardy, Utah representative Chris Stewart, and 
Nebraska representativeJeff Fortenberry have also rescinded their support of 
Trump but not released statements.

Republicans who condemned remarks but still officially support Trump

Mike Pence, Indiana governor and Trump’s running mate: “I do not condone his 
remarks <https://twitter.com/betsy_klein/status/784798219704213504> and cannot 
defend them. I am grateful that he has expressed remorse … we pray for his 
family and look forward to the opportunity he has to show what is in his heart 
when he goes before the nation tomorrow night.”

Paul Ryan, speaker of the House and most powerful Republican in Washington: “I 
am sickened by what I heard today. Women are to be championed and revered, not 
objectified. I hope Mr Trump treats this situation with the seriousness it 
deserves and works to demonstrate to the country that he has greater respect 
for women than this clip suggests.”

Mitch McConnell, Kentucky senator and Senate majority leader: “As the father 
of three daughters, I strongly believe that Trump needs to apologize directly 
to women and girls everywhere, and take full responsibility for the utter lack 
of respect for women shown in his comments on that tape.”

Ted Cruz, Texas senator and failed presidential candidate: “These comments are 
disturbing and inappropriate. There is simply no excuse for them. Every wife, 
mother, daughter – every person – deserves to be treated with dignity and 
respect.

Marco Rubio, Florida senator and failed presidential candidate: “Donald’s 
comments were vulgar 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/784566254271094788?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Etweet>
, egregious & impossible to justify. No one should ever talk about any woman in 
those terms, even in private.”

Reince Priebus, chair of the Republican National Committee: “No woman should 
ever be described in these terms or talked about in this manner. Ever.”

Rand Paul, Kentucky senator and failed presidential candidate: “His comments 
are offensive and unacceptable.”

Bob Dole, former senator from Kansas and 1996 presidential nominee: “It was 11 
years ago. He shouldn’t have said it, but there’s nothing he can do about it 
except to do well in the debate.”

Joni Ernst, Iowa senator: “The comments DJT [Donald J Trump] made are lewd & 
insulting. There is no excuse, and no room for such reprehensible and 
objectifying talk about anyone, ever.”

Bob Corker, Tennessee senator and chair of the foreign relations committee: “
These comments are obviously very inappropriate and offensive and his apology 
was absolutely necessary.”

Richard Burr, North Carolina senator and Trump national security adviser: “I 
am going to watch his level of contrition over the next few days to determine 
my level of support.”

Jon Cornyn, Texas senator: “I am disgusted by Mr Trump’s words about women: 
our daughters, sisters and mothers.

Phil Bryant, Mississippi governor: “Donald Trump’s remarks are unacceptable … 
They do not square with the man I have gotten to know the past few months. He 
has done the right thing and apologized.”

Ryan Zinke, Montana representative: “The language is shocking and wrong and 
should never be used ever. Lola and I have talked about it and we pray he has 
grown from this mistake.”

Asa Hutchinson, Arkansas governor: “While he has acknowledged it as wrong and 
apologized, it is important that he demonstrate in the debate on Sunday and in 
the future that he understands and respects the value of women.”

Chris Collins, New York representative: “There is no change in my support of 
Mr. Trump as our nominee because he remains the only candidate who will bring 
our jobs back, secure our borders and stand up to our enemies.”

Dan Coats, Indiana senator: “Donald Trump’s vulgar comments are totally 
inappropriate and disgusting, and these words have no place in our society.”

Greg Abbott, governor of Texas: “Deeply disturbing rhetoric by Trump. An 
insult to all women & contrary to GOP values. Absent true contrition, 
consequences will be dire.”

Republicans who have never supported Trump

Who supports Donald Trump? The new Republican center of gravity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/may/14/who-supports-donald-trump-the-new-republican-center-of-gravity>
John Kasich, Ohio governor and failed presidential candidate: “Nothing that 
has happened in the last 48 hours is surprising to me or many others … It’s 
clear that he hasn’t changed and has no interest in doing so. As a result, 
Donald Trump is a man I cannot and should not support. The actions of the last 
day are disgusting.”

Mitt Romney, former governor of Massachusetts and 2012 presidential nominee: “
Hitting on married women? Condoning assault? Such vile degradations demean our 
wives and daughters and corrupt America’s face to the world.”

Jeb Bush, former governor of Florida and failed presidential candidate: “As 
the grandfather of two precious girls, I find that no apology can excuse away 
Donald Trump’s reprehensible comments degrading women.”

Ben Sasse, Nebraska senator: “Character matters 
<https://twitter.com/BenSasse/status/784726683920297984>. @realDonaldTrump is 
obviously not going to win. But he can still make an honorable move: Step aside 
& let Mike Pence try.”

Susan Collins, Maine senator: “It was comments like these, including the 
statements he made aboutJohn McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>, a disabled reporter, the 
family of a fallen soldier and more, that caused me to decide this summer that 
I could not support his candidacy.”

Mike Lee, Utah senator : “Your conduct, sir, is the distraction … I 
respectfully ask you, with all due respect, to step aside. Step down. Allow 
someone else to carry the banner of these principles.”

Mark Kirk, Illinois senator: “DJT [Donald J Trump] is a malignant clown – 
unprepared and unfit to be president of the United States 
<https://twitter.com/SenatorKirk/status/784537632856477696>.”

Jeff Flake, Arizona senator: “America deserves far better than @realDonaldTrump
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>.”

Arnold Schwarzenegger, former governor of California 
<https://twitter.com/Schwarzenegger/status/784803865723965440>: “For the first 
time since I became a citizen in 1983, I will not vote for the Republican 
candidate for president. Like many Americans, I’ve been conflicted by this 
election – I still haven’t made up my mind about how exactly I will vote next 
month … But as proud as I am to label myself a Republican, there is one label 
that I hold above all else – American. So I want to take a moment today to 
remind my fellow Republicans that it is not only acceptable to choose your 
country over your party – it is your duty.”

Mia Love, Utah representative: “Mr Trump has yet to clear that bar and his 
behavior and bravado have reached a new low. I cannot vote for him.”

Mike Coffman, Colorado representative: “For the good of the country, and to 
give Republicans a chance of defeating Hillary Clinton, Mr Trump should step 
aside.”

Fred Upton, Michigan representative: “I urge him to think about our country 
over his own candidacy and carefully consider stepping aside from the ticket.”

Erik Paulsen, Minnesota representative: “For months I have said Donald Trump 
has not earned my vote. The disgusting statements revealed last night make it 
clear he cannot. I will not be voting for him.”

Justin Amash, Michigan representative: “Character matters. @realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> has been saying outrageous, offensive 
things the whole time. He should have stepped aside long ago.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Frobert-de-niro-id-like-to-punch-donald-trump-in-the-face-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20De%20Niro%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20like%20to%20punch%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20the%20face%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Frobert-de-niro-id-like-to-punch-donald-trump-in-the-face-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20De%20Niro%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20like%20to%20punch%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20the%20face%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Frobert-de-niro-id-like-to-punch-donald-trump-in-the-face-video&media=>
Robert De Niro: ‘I’d like to punch Donald Trump in the face’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/oct/08/robert-de-niro-id-like-to-punch-donald-trump-in-the-face-video>
Pat Tiberi, Ohio representative: “Donald Trump’s comments and behavior were 
reprehensible, vulgar and extremely disrespectful. He was not my choice for our 
nominee and I never endorsed him. I have always said that I want to see a 
positive message and winnable strategy against Hillary Clinton from the 
Republican nominee. It is disappointing, especially for Americans who are 
looking for real leadership and integrity in their presidential candidate, that 
Trump has not been able to clear that bar. Americans deserve better choices for 
the highest office in the land. Trump should consider stepping aside. 
Otherwise, this will continue to consume the remainder of the campaign and help 
Clinton become the next president.”

Never committed for or against Trump

Pat Toomey, Pennsylvania senator: “Donald Trump’s comments were outrageous and 
unacceptable.”

Rob Portman, Ohio Senator: “As I said yesterday, Donald Trump’s comments were 
offensive and wrong. I had hoped to support the candidate my party nominated in 
the primary process. I thought it was appropriate to respect the millions of 
voters across the country who chose Donald Trump as the Republican Party 
nominee. While I continue to respect those who still support Donald Trump, I 
can no longer support him. I continue to believe our country cannot afford a 
Hillary Clinton presidency. I will be voting for Mike Pence for President.”

Barbara Comstock, Virginia representative: “No woman should ever be subjected 
to this type of obscene behavior and it is unbecoming of anybody seeking high 
office. In light of these comments, Donald Trump should step aside.”

Will Hurd, Texas representative: “I never endorsed Trump and I cannot in good 
conscience support or vote for a man who degrades women, insults minorities and 
has no clear path to keep our country safe.”

Condoleezza Rice, George W Bush’s secretary of state: “Enough! Donald Trump 
should not be President. He should withdraw.”

Susana Martinez, New Mexico governor: “That’s why I have withheld my support 
from the very beginning, and will not support him now.”

Bill Haslam, Tennessee governor: “I want to emphasize that character in our 
leaders does matter.…It is time for the good of the nation and the Republican 
Party for Donald Trump to step aside.”

Kay Granger, Texas representative: “Watching that video is disgusting. Mr 
Trump should remove himself from consideration as commander in chief.”
 