
That the situation in Afghanistan is grim is not exactly news. It has always 
been dire and remains so. But 2015 has been a very bad year indeed. The Taliban 
now control more of the country, about 30%, than at any time since 2001 when 
they were pushed from power by western and Afghan forces after the Twin Towers 
attacks. Government forces have lost 19,000 dead and injured in the past 12 
months. In October, President Barack Obamaannounced 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/16/world/asia/obama-troop-withdrawal-afghanistan.html?_r=1>
, clearly with a heavy heart, that American soldiers will stay until 2017.

And not only stay but, it has become increasingly obvious, stay to fight 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/28/world/middleeast/more-and-more-special-forces-become-obamas-military-answer.html?mtrref=www.google.co.uk&gwh=64EBD60496BC2BC470758E5B32AD02F1&gwt=pay>
, not just to train and monitor. The man whose promise had been that he would 
see all American troops out of both Afghanistan and Iraq by the end of his time 
in office has been forced to break that promise.

The news that some al-Qaida training camps 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/30/us/politics/as-us-focuses-on-isis-and-the-taliban-al-qaeda-re-emerges.html>
 have been established in several parts of the country, as well as the 
emergence of Islamic State offshoots, underlines the irony. American and other 
western armies were sent to Afghanistan to make sure it could never again be a 
haven for those plotting terrorist attacks against the United States and 
Europe. But now they are back.

Yet to simply conclude that it is all just a dismal full circle is probably 
wrong. Afghanistan is an obstinately fragmented country, divided by ethnicity 
and religion, and one that has always displayed a pronounced split between its 
more modern, urbanised side and its rural provinces. Monarchs, Marxists, 
Islamists and western-style democrats and technocrats have all failed to weld 
it into anything like a single coherent state. President Ashraf Ghani, its 
latest leader, has so far achieved few of the things that his impressive 
qualifications and ideas for development seemed to promise. His “side” is riven 
by rivalries, quarrels and competitive corruption. His relationship with his 
partner in power, Abdullah Abdullah, is uneasy, he has still to appoint a 
full-time minister of defence, and he has recently come under attack from a new 
opposition council which seems to be mainly a front for the ex-ministers, 
warlords and businessmen associated with his predecessor, Hamid Karzai. This 
week he acceded to their demands to hold parliamentary and district elections, 
which he had earlier postponed, next year. The power struggles on the 
government side have undermined all its policies, including defence, according 
tocritics 
<http://tribune.com.pk/story/1017362/reconciliation-with-taliban-afghan-opposition-leader-opposes-pakistans-role/>
.

The other side, however, also has its troubles and disputes. The new Taliban 
commander, Mullah Akhtar Mansour, wasrecently criticised by religious leaders 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/25/world/asia/taliban-chief-rebuked-by-religious-leaders-in-sign-of-turmoil.html?mtrref=www.google.co.uk&gwh=4F884A97F4BF6C924378ADC01A33B2BD&gwt=pay>
 associated with the movement in Pakistan for his aggressive pursuit of rivals 
within the movement. The Taliban’s internal splits have given an opening to 
both Isis and al-Qaida. They may well also be driving the Taliban effort in 
Helmand, since control of the opium-rich province would hand a major political 
advantage to whichever leader achieved it.

There is perhaps some reason to think that weakness on both sides could be a 
positive factor. At some point in these chaotic developments peace may look 
like a real option to elements on the Taliban side, which is why the effortsto 
revive the peace talks 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/world/world-news/general-raheel-sharif-meet-afghan-leaders-agree-to-revive-peace-talks-with-taliban/>
 now under way, involving Pakistan, China, and the US, as well as Afghanistan 
itself, must be welcomed. It has to be said that the prospects are not hopeful, 
but nor are they entirely hopeless.
 