
The Proms <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/2009/>. So soon? Tomorrow's first night 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/2009/whatson/1707.shtml> is classical music's 
Groundhog day – you can't believe it's that time again.

The Albert Hall is gearing up for another onslaught of prommers: that bloke 
with the cycling shorts who always manages to bag a place in the front row 
prepares his Lycra; that other bloke who always claps first at the end of the 
great transcendental symphonies (it's always the same guy – I had the 
misfortune to sit next to him, once) is readying his lightning-fast reactions 
to ruin everyone else's rapture after Bruckner and Mahler's great finales. And 
the management team of the hall's bars rub their hands in glee at the chance to 
jack up their already over-inflated prices for interval drinks (four quid for a 
can of Carlsberg!) for another season of suckers and saps.

Meanwhile, there's the music to look forward to. And there's a special climax 
to the first prom: Anton Bruckner'sPsalm 150 
<http://open.spotify.com/artist/2SaWWxEKPo18VohLFIsHyA>, one of the last pieces 
he completed. If you don't know it, you're in for a revelation. Bruckner 
creates a micro-choral symphony – complete with fugues, soprano and violin 
solos, and gigantic choral perorations – that distils the exaltation and 
grandeur of his huge symphonies into nine minutes. It's also a piece that, 
belatedly, marked a brief rapprochement in Bruckner's relationship with his 
symphonic nemesis in Vienna, Johannes Brahms.

Johannes's oft-quoted witticism on Bruckner's attempts in the form was that 
they were "symphonic boa constrictors"; Anton, for his part, said that he 
didn't understand Brahms. But in 1891, Brahms recommended that the Singverein 
in Vienna commission Bruckner for the piece that would end up as Psalm 150. And 
as Richard Heuberger recalls (in Stephen Johnson's brilliant bookBruckner 
Remembered 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Remembered-Composers-remembered-Stephen/dp/0571170951>
), Brahms said of his rival, "I certainly wouldn't go through thick and thin 
for Bruckner, but the fellow is damnably serious about what he does, and he 
deserves to be honoured for it." Psalm 150 shows exactly why – and if you think 
you haven't got time for Bruckner's symphonic forms, it's the perfect place to 
start.
 