
Poor old Henry Paulson. It's been a tough month to be in charge of the 
American economy. But after a series of screeching U-turns, he isn't exactly 
inspiring confidence among the country's big-brained financiers.

Paulson's bald head and uncompromising manner have gained him the nickname 
Hammer. Since his appointment two years ago, he has seemed like a breath of 
pragmatism in the ideologically evangelical Bush administration.

But the pugnacious former school football star has struggled to stay on top of 
the fast-moving credit crunch. Who would have thought the swashbuckling one-time
Goldman Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> chief would 
be suffering unfavourable comparisons with the dour Scottish solicitor running 
Britain's Treasury, Alistair Darling?

Paulson's approach has been inconsistent, confused and reactive. In March, he 
organised a bail-out of Bear Stearns on the grounds that the failure of a major 
investment bank would have a "systemic" impact, with implications reverberating 
around the financial system. But he felt differently about Lehman Brothers, 
allowing it to go bankrupt last month.

Stung by a subsequent plunge in the stockmarket, Paulson hurriedly went back 
into intervention mode by rescuing the insurer AIG. Days later, the authorities 
cajoled JP Morgan to step in when Washington Mutual collapsed.

There's no real logic in that chain of events. The Federal Reserve chairman, 
Ben Bernanke, this week offered a rather confusing explanation of the decision 
to allow Lehman to collapse.

"A public-sector solution for Lehman proved infeasible, as the firm could not 
post sufficient collateral to provide reasonable assurance that a loan from the 
Federal Reserve would be repaid," said Bernanke. "And the treasury did not have 
the authority to absorb billions of dollars of expected losses to facilitate 
Lehman's acquisition by another firm."

That doesn't make much sense. The Fed has been willing to buy debt on the 
commercial paper market without solid collateral. And the authorities have 
opted to give unlimited guarantees on liabilities to secure takeovers of Bear 
Stearns and Wachovia.

The debacle of America's banking bail-out has been another saga of jangled 
nerves and sweaty palms. Paulson started out with a $700bn plan to buy banks' 
distressed debts — a proposal which went down like a glass of sour milk on 
Capitol Hill. Paulson was adamantly opposed to a more radical approach of 
purchasing stakes in leading banks, citing negative precedents in Japan.

"The right way to do this is not going around and using guarantees or 
injecting capital, but to use market mechanisms," he told the Senate banking 
committee. It took weeks to get politicians to agree to this. But after all the 
political battling, it quickly became clear that the plan wasn't sufficient.

This week, Paulson changed his mind by copying Britain with a $250bn fund to 
buy stakes in leading banks. As befits a Goldman Sachs alumni, he hasn't 
attached very stringent conditions. There is some mealy-mouthed language about 
forbidding executive bonuses that encourage "excessive" risk, and banks aren't 
allowed to raise their dividends (although they can maintain them at present 
levels).

Quite how we got into this muddle is a mystery. Why didn't Paulson opt for 
stake purchases in the first place? It is tempting to conclude that he was 
deterred by the administration's ideological wariness of public ownership. 
Irrespective of motive, it was a serious error which contributed to a 
slow-motion stockmarket crash.

In the New York Times the Nobel prize winning economist Paul Krugman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/22/opinion/22krugman.html?scp=2&sq=krugman%20AND%20paulson%20AND%20smart%20guy&st=cse>
 has been scathing: "What, exactly, in the experience of the past year and a 
half — a period during which Mr Paulson repeatedly declared the financial 
crisis 'contained' and then offered a series of unsuccessful fixes — justifies 
the belief that he knows what he's doing?"

It wasn't that long ago that Paulson was being lauded in affectionate terms. 
Barrons analysed his choice of mobile phone 
<http://blogs.barrons.com/stockstowatchtoday/2008/09/18/paulson-saving-the-free-world-on-an-aging-cell-phone>
 (a Motorola Razr) under the headline "Saving the world on an ageing cellphone".

In August, there were even suggestions  that Paulson might stay  
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/washington/2008/08/paulson-wont-st.html> on to 
work his ministerial magic under the next president, whether it be Barack Obama 
or John McCain. I think we can now safely declare that possibility to be dead.

Paulson has worked day and night to try to save the economy. At times, the 
62-year-old has looked pale and drawn, and his voice has been hoarse. According 
to the Washington Post,he suffered a dizzy spell 
<http://voices.washingtonpost.com/livecoverage/2008/09/treasury_confirms_paulson_fain.html>
 at one point and had to be supported by New York's Democratic senator, Chuck 
Schumer.

In three months' time, a new president will be inaugurated and Paulson will 
almost certainly be heading for retirement. When he leaves office, he can 
comfort himself with the proceeds of his Goldman Sachs shares, which he sold in 
2006 for almost $700m. It's a good job he offloaded the stock on entering the 
government. The bank's share price has fallen by 27% under his stewardship of 
theUS economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy>.
 