
It is a hard thing to admit that the state to which you belong was founded on 
a crime and that the history taught in your schools is full of lies. Yet there 
is no redemption without repentance and, on the centenary of the beginning of 
the genocidal campaign against the Armenians, it is sad to record thatTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has still not faced the facts about 
what happened in 1915. The answer is quite simple in outline, if complex in its 
dreadful detail. The Armenians, who had lived in Anatolia since long before 
Turks arrived from central Asia, were killed, deported, or forcibly converted 
to Islam. Estimates suggest that at least 600,000 perished, while hundreds of 
thousands were expelled from or fled the Turkish lands, never to return.

For a shamefully long time the world was complicit in Turkey’s insistence that 
the suffering of the Armenians, and of Assyrian Christians as well, was not 
different in kind from that of other peoples, including ethnic Turks, during 
the convulsions caused by the first world war across Europe, and, in 
particular, that it was unfair to call it genocide. But scholarship, including 
somedistinguished Turkish work <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xf5igXFiRDA>, 
has increasingly ruled out the “bad things happen in war” thesis, while an 
extraordinary effort among Armenians of the diaspora to rescue and deepen their 
own national memory of events and to pass that on to others has gradually 
changed public opinion in Europe and America. The United States still avoids 
the word genocide,as does Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2015/apr/23/britain-sidesteps-armenian-genocide-recognition-a-century-after-killings>
. But legislature after legislature has passed resolutions using the word, with 
Austria and Germany, which had long resisted its use, the latest to do so. The 
German formulation is still equivocal, and so is the position of Pope Francis 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-eu-32418286>, who pronounced on the issue 
earlier this month. But the battle over the name has essentially been won.

This struggle has mattered intensely to Armenians and Turks, but it has also 
sometimes stood in the way of a more historically grounded understanding of 
events. The Armenian-American writer William Saroyan has a character in one of 
his plays say: “The world is amok … Life is on fire; caught in hurricanes; 
submerged in deep and blind waters …” He might have coined those words to 
describe the Ottoman empire as it drifted towards a final shipwreck in the late 
19th century. It is not too much to say that those who were in charge of the 
empire were for most of the time in a state of despair, or that they hardly 
understood the forces that were changing their once multiethnic state into 
something else.

By the middle of the world war “a government had come to believe that among 
its subject peoples whole nations presented an immediate threat to the security 
of the state,” the historian Ronald Suny writes. “Defence of the empire and of 
the nation became the rationale for mass murder.” And there was tinder 
available: Armenians and Kurds had for a long time been in competition for 
power and land in territory they both thought was theirs. The empire, when it 
worked, had kept that rivalry, in which the Kurds were the persistent 
aggressors, below a certain level of violence. But when the reins were slipped, 
the Turkish government had eager executors of its will to hand.

The Kurds, ironically, then suffered from Turkish ethnic chauvinism in their 
turn. There was no attempt to physically destroy them as a people, but their 
language was suppressed and their identity denied. They were supposed to turn 
into Turks, but refused to do so, a refusal that recent Turkish governments 
have reluctantly come to accept. The Kurds now, after their own bitter 
experience, arewell to the fore 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2013/09/turkey-kurds-seek-armenian-forgiveness.html#>
 in recognising and regretting their role in 1915. Some, perhaps many, ethnic 
Turks also know that the national narrative is problematic.

But the official Turkish state remains wedded to its threadbare myth, 
fulminating and recalling ambassadors whenever the word genocide is pronounced. 
This year it has even moved the anniversary of the Gallipoli campaign so it 
coincides with the Armenian anniversary, hoping to obscure one remembrance with 
another. Ministers will attend some other, tamer ceremonies. But the Erdoğan 
government, which in earlier years gave some cause for hope on this issue, has 
essentially decided that its distorted version of the origins of the state will 
remain in place.
 