
Well Block me sideways and Block the Blockie: Nine’s The Block 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/theblock/episodes/triplethreat/> has finished, 
in case you hadn’t Blocked it. And cor blimey, if watching buildings get sold 
for money is your kind of thing, this was definitely a good example of that 
thing happening.

The Block brings the house down for Channel Nine's ratings and advertisers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/30/the-block-brings-the-house-down-for-channel-nines-ratings-and-advertisers>
Lining up in literally their tens of tens, eager fans waited to look inside 
the apartments with all the hysteric fervour usually reserved for Elon Musk
farting out a Star Wars trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-celebration-trailer>
. I couldn’t get quite as enthused. The apartments looked stunning, in a 
clinical, Dexter’s murder room kind of way, but why would I want to see that 
while sitting in my own coffee-ringed and toast-crumbed decor (paint tone: 
Memories of Breakfast)? I don’t hole up in a hotel room watching TV shows about 
more attractive people than me enjoying better holidays. They might as well 
rename The Block “What the F**k Have You Done With Your Life Recently?”

If you weren’t excited enough by the fan-zombies and their undead hunger for 
posh light fixtures, then the auction finale ramped things up still further 
with the usual reality TV manipulation of tense music, well-placed cliffhanger 
ad breaks, and crash zooms on people’s shocked faces. Facing this dizzying 
montage of cartoonish faces loudly repeating increasingly large numbers felt 
like I’d caught the count from Sesame Street in the middle of a nervous 
breakdown.

Unlike last year, when the contestants walked with enough money to rent a 
Happy Meal house between them, this year’s contestantsbroke records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/30/the-block-brings-the-house-down-for-channel-nines-ratings-and-advertisers>
, with winners Dea and Darren earning $935,000 (including prize money), enough 
to put down a deposit on a Melbourne avocado. I’m sure they’re happy, though 
given the stalagmite-forming length of the series, D&D might have made more 
interest by depositing a dollar back when the show started just before the 
birth of Christ.

The Block finale once again took the ratings top spot, proving there’s still 
an audience for the reno show. When will they (please!) have had enough? Not 
only do we have Seven’sHouse Rules <https://au.tv.yahoo.com/house-rules/> to 
look forward to on Tuesday, but also Nine’sReno Rumble 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/reno-rumble/>, which is just people from The 
Block and House Rules on the same show!

For shows about renovation, it doesn’t seem very ... renovatory; as much a new 
TV format as Frankenstein’s monster cobbled together out of other people’s 
rotting dead bits is a newborn baby. I only hope this cross-network 
contamination doesn’t spread, otherwise how long until we’re confronted with 
MasterBlock, the show where contestants have to cook an entire house?

Logies lurgy

Logie awards 2015: frocks and frolics on the red carpet – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2015/may/04/logie-awards-2015-frocks-and-frolics-on-the-red-carpet-in-pictures>
The Block also scooped at the Logies, the Australian awards ceremony proudly 
sponsored by Why Everyone Torrents. This year’s do was an overlong labour push 
unconvincingly disguised as a celebration, like someone with constipation 
holding a sparkler. The chemistry on stage was as inert as a brick in a fridge 
with the funniest, warmest on-stage moment coming from Julia Morris going 
completely off-script after accidentally announcing the winner for outstanding 
entertainment program without even mentioning the nominees.

Bizarrely, The Voice – very much a reality TV show, in my opinion – ended up 
winning a category that also featured Mad As Hell (surely a comedy?) and The 
Checkout, proving the Logies aren’t really a considered appreciation of 
Australian television as much as a pat on the back for tired reality guff. 
What’s that you say, commenters? Like this column? Well, someone’s got to 
google the box.

Carrie Bickmore was touching, genuine, and a deserving winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/04/gold-logie-winner-carrie-bickmore-uses-speech-to-draw-attention-to-brain-cancer>
, as was Miranda Tapsell, and I’m sure you can read all about their speeches 
somewhere online among all the copy and paste articles about plunging necklines.
 