
A Highly Unlikely Scenario, or a Neetsa Pizza Employee's Guide to Saving the 
World is about real people. Historical figures who, with varying degrees of 
befuddlement, arrive in a world in which Pythagoreans, Whigs, and Dadaists seek 
converts through evangelical fast-food chains; armed followers of scientist and 
theologian Roger Bacon battle with powerful Cathars for rights to the 
untranslatable Voynich manuscript; and everyone is under threat from renegade 
"book groups" that hope to radicalise the middle classes.

What hubris to insert real people into works of fiction, what folly! An author 
can only fail: devotees despise the result, on principle; others dismiss the 
work, believing it relies too much on the words, and personalities, of greater 
minds.

Still, this is not the first time I've engaged in such folly, and it won't be 
the last. I gain comfort from other authors, some of them favorite authors, who 
share my writerly fascination with "real people" (real writers, to be specific).

I offer, then, 10 writings – novels, mostly – featuring writers from history.

1. Siegfried Sassoon in Regeneration by Pat Barker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141030937/regeneration>

Pat Barker's justly celebrated Regeneration concerns WHR Rivers, the 
innovative psychiatrist who found new ways to treat first world war officers 
suffering shell shock, among them the poet Siegfried Sassoon. In fact, Sassoon 
has been declared mentally unsound because, although a decorated officer, he 
has publicly declared that he is "finished" with the war, unable to continue 
supporting its aims. Playing a supporting role: the poet Wilfred Owen, with 
whom Sassoon exchanges poems. "'Owen, for God's sake, this is War Office 
propaganda.' 'No, it's not.' 'Read that line.' Owen read. 'Well, it certainly 
isn't meant to be.'"

2. John Clare in The Quickening Maze by Adam Foulds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099532446/the-quickening-maze>

John Clare <https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-clare> actually is mentally 
ill. At the age of 44 he is admitted to a private asylum on the edge of Epping 
Forest. There he suffers delusions but still writes poetry and is allowed to 
wander the grounds more or less freely. Staying at the asylum for a few weeks 
with his brother is Alfred, Lord Tennyson, who mourns the death of a close 
friend. Both are consumed by loss; they do not meet. While Clare visits with 
gypsies, Tennyson takes long walks and is convinced to invest (disastrously) in 
an automated wood-carving device.

3. Novalis in The Blue Flower by Penelope Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780006550198/the-blue-flower>

Another Romantic poet. Novalis is Friedrich von Hardenberg (or "Fritz"), a 
brilliant student of history and philosophy. He is 22 in 1794 when he falls in 
love with 12-year-old Sophie. His brother is blunt: he calls Sophie 
"empty-headed" and wonders that already she has a double chin. Too young to 
attend public balls, Sophie is "afraid" of marriage, but nonetheless becomes 
engaged to Fritz two days before her 13th birthday, only to [spoiler alert] die 
at the age of barely 15.

4. Heinrich von Kleist in No Place on Earth by Christa Wolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780860683681/no-place-on-earth>

What is it about the Romantics? Here it's an 1804 meeting between Kleist and 
the now-forgotten poetKaroline von Günderrode 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karoline_von_G%C3%BCnderrode>. "Happiness," 
thinks Kleist, "is the place where I am not"; she feels "no urge to do anything 
which maintains the world," its demands and laws being too "perverted". When 
they meet at a literary gathering, Karoline makes Kleist "uneasy," and 
immediately on meeting her he forgets her name. But soon "she seems to him the 
only person who is truly real in a horde of spectres," and she can read his 
thoughts.

5. Walt Whitman in Gob's Grief by Chris Adrian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847085818/gobs-grief> 

Gob survives the Civil War, unlike his brother Tomo, who ran off to join the 
army at the age of 11 and died during his first battle. Walt Whitman, 
meanwhile, dreams his brother has been lost in the war, only to find him at a 
hospital just slightly wounded. When brother George is moved elsewhere, Walt 
lingers, making himself useful to doctors and nurses, first at this hospital, 
and then another, and another. He chats with wounded soldiers, reads to them, 
distributes oranges, writes letters, or just sits, watching "with excited 
worry". It is Whitman Gob turns to when he needs a man full of emotion to power 
a machine he has built to bring the Civil War dead back to life.

6. Gertrude Stein in The Book of Salt by Monique Truong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099455455/the-book-of-salt>

In this sensuous, language-drunk novel, Bính has answered an advertisement: 
"Two American ladies wish to retain a cook." The two American ladies are 
Gertrude Stein and Alice B Toklas. Like his "Mesdames," Bính is an outsider on 
many counts – a Vietnamese exile in Paris, a servant, a homosexual. While he is 
aware of Stein's disdain for punctuation and her affection for rhyme, he is 
perhaps more interested in the details of their daily life – the two days it 
took Miss Toklas to cut off Stein's billowing hair, her unwillingness to answer 
the door, and Miss Toklas's glorious mustache.

7. Henry James in The Master by Colm Tóibín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330485661/the-master> 

Tóibín's novel covers just five years of James's expatriate life – from the 
disastrous debut of his play Guy Domville in London in January 1895 to January 
1900, when his brother William leaves Henry's home in Rye. Henry writes, he 
travels, he recalls various losses. Asked on the cusp of the new century what 
he intends to write next, Henry says, "'I am a poor storyteller … a romancer, 
interested in dramatic niceties … Once I wrote about youth and America and now 
I am left with exile and middle age and stories of disappointment …'"

8. Franz Kafka in Kafka's Leopards by Moacyr Scliar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780896726963/kafkas-leopards>

It is 1916, and Mousy, a Russian Jew on a Trotskyite mission, leaves his 
village to obtain a coded message. He's not a very able spy, and ends up 
believing Kafka to be the bearer of this message. He tries to visit him at the 
Workers' Accident Insurance Institute, where an officious secretary informs him 
that Dr Kafka cannot be seen without an appointment. Mousy arranges for Dr 
Kafka to leave the text at his hotel. Unable to make sense of the missive, 
Mousy considers a reprimand: "Can what is out of the reach of the majority of 
readers be revolutionary?" Indeed!

9. Franz Kafka in A Friend of Kafka by IB Singer 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1968/11/23/1968_11_23_059_TNY_CARDS_000292851>

Kafka's presence here is even more attenuated: he doesn't appear at all except 
in the (frequent) reminiscences of Jacques Kohn, one-time actor and now a "sick 
and broken man". Broken and also broke: the narrator, a self-effacing writer, 
is always willing to lend Jacques a zloty to hear his marvellous stories. The 
centerpiece involves a bejeweled countess who pounds on the ancient Kohn's door 
in the wee hours, desperately trying to escape her murderous boyfriend; her 
eventual presence in Jacques' bed inspires a miracle. But always Kohn returns 
to Kafka: meeting him in Vienna; ("he spouted aphorisms and paradoxes"); his 
genius; his writings; his illusions about women; the advice he gave him; Kohn's 
attempt to bring the virginal Kafka to a brothel …

10. Marco Polo in Invisible Cities by Italo Calvino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780099429838/invisible-cities>

Perhaps I cheat again, since Marco Polo's Travels was written by a 
ghostwriter, the romance writer Rustichello. In Invisible Cities, however, 
there is no Rustichello, only Polo, who enchants the Great Khan with tales of 
his travels to cities at the furthest reaches of the emperor's realm – thin 
cities, trading cities, continuous cities, hidden cities. There is, for 
example, Octavia, the spider-web city, its foundation a net suspended over an 
abyss. You haven't yet described Venice, Kublai Khan says toward the end of the 
book, and Marco replies, "What else do you believe I have been talking to you 
about?"
 