
There is a particular house in the Arkansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> hills that embodies the 
political and cultural complexity of the state. To consider this house – which 
will take a moment – is to consider a place that defies easy understanding.


The home sits on a ridge overlooking highway 412, in Carroll County in 
north-west Arkansas. From the road it is visible mainly thanks to an enormous 
Confederate flag that covers the entire front door.

After a knock at that door, Rose Dow, 27, stepped out on to her porch. 

The flag, she said, wasn’t hers. It belonged to her husband, Albert. By way of 
explanation, she said: “He is from south Arkansas.”
 The new south, day 2: Irving, Texas to Fayetteville, Arkansas Photograph: 
MapBox/OpenStreetMap 
Rose doubted Albert would like to talk about the flag, but she stepped inside 
to ask him. Then she returned. “He doesn’t like to talk. He’s one of 25 
children,” she said. She held out her hand, about four and a half feet high. 
“He’s small of stature, but he grew up cutting cotton and picking peaches.”

Would she say she leans more Republican? Or Democratic?

“Well, I don’t know what those mean,” she said. “But I know the government 
isn’t going to do anything for me either way.”

Arkansas, along with five other southern states, will flex its political 
muscle on 1 March, in the first ever southern “Super Tuesday”, the busiest 
single day of the 2016 primaries. Any candidate who performs well in Arkansas 
will understand there was a lot more than first appears in the exchange on Rose 
Dow’s porch.

First, she noted that the Confederate flag was her husband’s, and that he grew 
up in southern Arkansas. The state is split, topographically. On a road trip it 
becomes starkly apparent: dropping out of the mountainous northern half into 
the flat south feels like falling off a cliff.

Janine Parry, a political professor at the University of Arkansas, explained 
why that’s crucial: “In the southern half, there’s good soil,” she said. “There 
were slaves there. So those counties leaned toward the Confederacy.”

After the American civil war ended, the southern half of Arkansas tilted 
heavily toward the Democratic party. At the time, this was in line with the 
rest of the southern states, which were also deeply Democratic.

During the war, some of the northern counties were outright Unionists – they 
were poor people who eked out their lives on hard soil in tiny, mountainous 
plots of land. They had no slaves and therefore no stake in the Confederacy’s 
fortunes. They were Republican, the party of Lincoln.

Across the rest of the south this order flipped, at about the middle of the 
20th century. As Democratic president Lyndon B Johnson signed into law more 
rights for black citizens in the 1960s, the Republican party undertook its 
so-called southern strategy, driving a wedge between white voters and their 
Democratic roots by appealing to racism. It worked, and over the decades that 
followed the south shifted from blue to a deepening red.

But not Arkansas.

Rose Dow’s disaffection for political parties – when she said “I don’t know 
what those mean” – isn’t trivial. It is born of isolation that began a century 
ago, when railroads and telegraph lines bypassed the rocky Arkansas highlands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fthe-new-south-arkansas-republicans-democrats-clintons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e5c76ada1da6b8276b777b7501e049d67756db%2F0_15_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20south%3A%20once%20Clinton%20country%2C%20Arkansas%20makes%20a%20%E2%80%98swift'%20lurch%20to%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fthe-new-south-arkansas-republicans-democrats-clintons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20south%3A%20once%20Clinton%20country%2C%20Arkansas%20makes%20a%20%E2%80%98swift%27%20lurch%20to%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fthe-new-south-arkansas-republicans-democrats-clintons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e5c76ada1da6b8276b777b7501e049d67756db%2F0_15_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Arkansas became a relatively unreachable place for politicians, as railroads 
and telegraph lines bypassed the rocky, rural highlands. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
Politicians would complain about Arkansas because so much of it was 
unreachable; to run campaign ads on television they had to buy airtime in 
larger markets around the edges of the state – in Missouri, Oklahoma, 
Louisiana, Tennessee – and hope they overlapped somewhere in the middle.

“That isolation was real, and it meant Arkansas stayed Democratic for decades 
longer than the rest of the south,” Parry said. “And the ‘southern strategy’ 
wasn’t as effective because there was such a lower African American population 
here.” The state’s black population today is 15%, compared with more than 30% 
in neighboring Louisiana and almost 40% in Mississippi.

All of which meant that when Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> moved to Arkansas as a 
young law professor in the mid-1970s, she and Bill Clinton were Democrats 
working inside thoroughly Democratic machinery.

“They were part of the set of young couples in Fayetteville who wanted to make 
a difference,” said Kate Johnson, director of the Clinton House Museum in 
Fayetteville. It is the house on California Boulevard where the Clintons lived 
as young professors. They were married in the living room, and plotted Bill’s 
campaign to become the state’s attorney general on the kitchen table. So the 
museum has an intimacy that is lost from their story once they moved into the 
governor’s mansion in Little Rock; it houses Hillary Clinton’s $59 wedding 
dress, and the Scrabble game they played in what they called the “war room” for 
politicking. Above a heart-shaped sink in the bathroom, a heart-shaped picture 
frame holds the young newlyweds.


Today the young Clintons would find Arkansas unrecognizable. As recently as 
2008, the governor, both US senators and three of the four US House members 
were all Democratic. TodayRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> hold the governorship, the 
state legislature and every US Senate and House seat.

“It’s breathtaking,” said Parry, the political professor. “The change was 
deep, and swift.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fthe-new-south-arkansas-republicans-democrats-clintons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b1efd0f238bb0f202d903b824b326c971f5ffc1%2F3_334_4997_2998%2F4997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20south%3A%20once%20Clinton%20country%2C%20Arkansas%20makes%20a%20%E2%80%98swift'%20lurch%20to%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fthe-new-south-arkansas-republicans-democrats-clintons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20south%3A%20once%20Clinton%20country%2C%20Arkansas%20makes%20a%20%E2%80%98swift%27%20lurch%20to%20the%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fthe-new-south-arkansas-republicans-democrats-clintons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b1efd0f238bb0f202d903b824b326c971f5ffc1%2F3_334_4997_2998%2F4997.jpg>
 Janine Parry, a political professor at the University of Arkansas, is trying 
to quantify Arkansas’s shift from blue to red: ‘It’s breathtaking.’ Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
Parry’s current project, she said, is to try to quantify the shift in Arkansas 
power from blue to red. She thinks it’s the fastest in the country’s history. 
It happened suddenly, starting with the rise of President Barack Obama to the 
White House. Along with his arrival came a new style of political campaigning, 
in which powerful national organizations focused their might and money in 
previously unaddressed corners of the nation, including Arkansas. One of them 
was Citizens United, a non-profit advocacy group that saturated Arkansas with 
advertising that accomplished what the southern strategy had never been able to 
do: in a relative instant, Arkansas flipped its party allegiance to Republican.

It happened so fast, Parry said, that there’s a sense of something like 
embarrassment among people who have swapped. “When we make polling calls, 
people will say: ‘Yep, I’m a member of the Democratic party,’” she said. “But 
if you really push with second and third questions, they’ll say they plan to 
vote for the conservative candidate. And I always want to ask: ‘Why don’t you 
just call yourself a Republican?’”

Asked whether Hillary Clinton could win the state where she built her 
political foundations, Parry shook her head. “It would be tough. A presidential 
election would be tough.” People still vote Democratic in small, local 
elections in which they personally know and like the candidates. But none of 
that applies to Hillary Clinton, today.


Like everything else in Arkansas, her role has flipped upside down. When she 
was in Fayetteville, she strove to tear down the opposing establishment. Now 
people here see her as its leading figure.
 