
Although it is still and barely a metre across, I have a small disc of water 
in the garden that keeps me feeling grounded. It sits in an old copper I bought 
for the first-ever garden I built at the Chelsea Flower Show in 1992, and in 
its reflection the changeable London sky is brought down to earth. If you look 
closely you can see to the bottom, past the water snails, through the algae and 
air bubbles rising from the rotting foliage and mud that the water lily roots 
delve into. The sediment stinks when I pull the lily out for an annual 
overhaul, but I like the mud and the murk. It is a world in itself and one from 
which I accumulate hours of pleasure.

I like my little flash of water because it is a reminder of the first summer I 
charted through observing the natural world, which I spent flat on my stomach 
in the orchard aged five or six. Dad had made a pond there with a polythene 
liner. It was just a few feet square. He had folded the turf back over the 
sides and I would lie there every day with my chin in the sward, my eyes inches 
from the water for what seemed to be hours, soaking in the changes. On no two 
moments was it ever the same; its stillest day was the day we filled it, the 
liner and its creases clean and visible. We lowered the plants into the water 
in their baskets soon afterwards and immediately the pond bloomed with algae, 
which rendered it an incredible primeval green. I was not deterred and carried 
on staring until the yellow flags started to spear their way through the mud at 
the sides and the waters began to clear.

Looking into the depths, I could see that in just a fortnight things had 
changed. The liner was green and coated in mud. Miraculously water boatmen were 
oaring their way through the shafts of light that penetrated to the bottom. 
Where could they have come from? The oxygenating weed that we had weighted down 
with a stone on the bottom had corrected itself, its new growth fanning out and 
fingering its way out into space, and the handful of ammonite-shaped snails 
that we had been given by a neighbour had already laid eggs, which glistened in 
a gelatinous mass when I brought them to the surface. In no time at all there 
thousands were making their mark on the algae. The ecology and the balance that 
comes with it had begun.

The dragonflies and damselflies arrived as soon as the flowering rush and iris 
at the margins were tall enough to sway, and I watched them breaking the skin 
on the water as they dipped their abdomens to lay their eggs. The water lilies 
rose in a silent and archaic-looking movement, one limb at a time from the knot 
of root that we had pushed into the mud. Dad put their baskets on a stack of 
bricks that we reduced as they grew, slowly lowering them to their required 
depth only once the foliage broke the surface.

I have one plant of Nymphaea 'Marliacea Chromatella' in my copper now and the 
first water lily of the year still has me entranced as the bud rises to the 
surface. It swells - a rich, dark green, waxy in texture - and it finds its way 
to a gap among the flattened leaves on the surface. As it inflates, it pushes 
clear until, one morning, the flower opens. It is hard to believe that such a 
delicate thing can rise from the stink of mud, but over the summer it does so 
repeatedly, each flower lasting several days before it sinks back in on itself 
in a death throe that reduces it to mush in no time. The luxury of this pond in 
miniature is that I can reach down to the flowers and put my nose to the brim 
of their petals to pick up their perfume, which is delicate and sweet and 
usually out of reach to humans.

The restricted space is not a problem for this mid-sized range of water 
lilies, and pygmy lilies, too, can live in just a few inches. You know if their 
vigour exceeds the depth of the water because the foliage pushes above the 
surface. Depth is all important when you are cultivating nymphaea, and our 
native N alba is best in 2m metres of water, its pads extending by as much 
across to easily overwhelm the average garden pond. A client who has them 
growing loose in a pond that regularly silts up is forced to hire in the 
diggers from time to time to claw them out from the edge. This is a mud-pie 
moment on an enormous scale, but the years between, when the balance of lily to 
pond is perfect, are sublime. 'Chromatella's cousin N 'Marliacea Albida' would 
be more suitable in the 4ft of water in this pond. These lovely selections have 
other advantages, too, in their mottled foliage.

Planting water lilies, and indeed all aquatics, is something that is best 
carried out in the growing season, as they need mud warmed and light enough to 
stir growth in cold waters. If they are to bloom well, water lilies like plenty 
of light and re-potting every third or fourth year. They benefit greatly if you 
feed them by pushing a nugget of slow-release fertiliser into the clump once 
they start to move in the spring. Mine would flower better if I gave them more 
than the three hours of direct sunlight they get on the deck, but here I can 
sit beside and enjoy them and my stillest time in the garden. Reflective time 
in every sense.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk> 

Â· For regular updates on our allotment's progress, pictures and slideshows, 
and to share your gardening comments, questions, recipes and advice, visit
blogs.theguardian.com/allotment <http://blogs.theguardian.com/allotment>
 