
The beat of the World's Most Dangerous Polka Band bursts through the swing 
doors of the Polka Lounge. Lu Sneider takes her place at the piano. She's 
played every evening of the 40 years that Nye's Polonaise Room, Minneapolis, 
has been open. She knows more than 500 songs and anyone can sing along with her 
if they feel up for it. A couple of Polish granddads in anoraks join her. They 
beam beatifically as they wail and wander through a tune. It may be Delilah. 
Red swirls of carpet flow wall-to-wall like molten lava. The furniture is vinyl 
chesterfield - gold sparkle booths and burgundy wing-backed bar stools. Most of 
the waiting staff are over 50 and wear black bowling shirts, but the wooden 
wall panelling feels more bowling club than bowling alley. Heavy, dark 
glass-studded lampshades hang from antique-effect beams jutting from the 
ceiling tiles. It's extremely atmospheric, as if David Lynch, Mike Leigh and 
Krzysztof Kieslowski built a place to shoot movies together.

The most striking waitress leans against the bar. Her hair is a bouffant puff 
of white candyfloss with a midnight black fringe. Oversized specs magnify her 
eyes to massive pools that survey the room with mildly amused detachment. 
David, our waiter, brings us Polish appetisers: pierogies (filled dough 
parcels), a mound of sauerkraut, a jumbo sausage and dense potato dumplings. 
The star bite is the kluski pasta: thick egg noodles with poppy seeds and sour 
cream that have a texture that is as satisfying to bite as bubble-wrap is to 
pop. Minneapolis is a brewing city and we all order pints of Grain Belt Premium.

I don't pay enough attention when I order my main course and choose a 
medium-sized rib. Medium size is 24oz. That's a pound and a half of cow hanging 
off a bone. It looks like the ribs that tip over Fred Flintstone's Stone Age 
buggy in the title sequence. The tastiest bit is the crunchy black stuff 
crusted around the bone. Wading through the spongy pink flesh begins to feel 
like I'm lost in a Dartmoor bog searching for an end with a creeping sense of 
resignation as I realise that this is where I'll sink. I stuff a couple more 
forkfuls into my mouth, but it's too much. It doesn't feel like food any more. 
I give up. So do the singing granddads. Lu Sneider starts Making Whoopee.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 