
The New European <https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-new-european> has 
landed a genuine political scoop by securing the serial rights to the latest 
volume of Alastair Campbell’s diaries.

Today’s issue carries the first instalment in which Campbell reveals that Tony 
Blair wassounding out the possibility of leaving No 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/blair-harboured-hopes-of-top-eu-job-amid-brown-turmoil-campbell>
 and becoming president of the European commission three years before hestood 
down as prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/19/tony-blair-gordon-brown>.

It occurred during a period of tension with Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>, the chancellor, in 2004. 
Blair got as far as asking Campbell, who had left his post as communications 
director in 2003, to consider returning in order to mastermind a campaign to 
secure the European job.

In the end, nothing came of the venture, but it remained a secret and Blair 
did not resign until 2007, as Campbell records in Outside, Inside, 2003-2005, 
the fifth volume of his diaries, which is due to be published by Biteback next 
week.

Biteback’s managing director, Iain Dale, believes they offer “an incredible 
insight into an extraordinary period of political history.”

The New European’s editor, Matt Kelly, called the diaries “extraordinary” and 
spoke of it being “a great coup for us to serialise them.”

As part of the serialisation deal, The New European 
<http://www.theneweuropean.co.uk/home> is offering a free copy of Campbell’s 
book to people who sign up for a new a 13-week subscription package.

As Campbell remarks on his blog 
<http://www.alastaircampbell.org/blog/2016/09/29/whats-not-to-like-a-free-copy-of-my-new-diaries-for-every-new-subscriber-to-the-new-european/>
, with due modesty, the deal is “good for me, good for the publisher” and “good 
for the world.”

It also means that the life of the so-called pop-up paper has been extended 
beyond the original expectations of its publisher, the Norwich-basedArchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>.

When the national weekly was launched on 8 July, with a cover price of £2, it 
was thought to have a four-week lifespan. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/brexit-paper-new-european-new-day-profit>
 Now it has reached its 13th issue.

The paper is aimed at the 48% of British people who voted to remain in the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> in the referendum on 23 
June.

It is the second Alastair Campbell exclusive obtained by The New European. Its 
second issuecontained the former spin doctor’s open letter to prime minister 
Theresa May. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jul/15/the-new-european-lands-alastair-campbell-brexit-scoop>
 