
Some of my friends and family might roll their eyes if they see this – they’ve 
heard my spiel about The Remains of the Day too many times. Some have already 
had a copy thrust upon them as a gift. Over the years since I read it, I’ve 
turned into a Remains of the Day evangelist. It’s not my fault.Kazuo Ishiguro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kazuoishiguro>’s subtle masterpiece about 
the private agonies of an ageing butler is hardly unknown – it won the 1989 
Booker prize, after all – but sometimes you find a piece of writing so well 
executed, so moving and so perceptive about the lives many of us lead that you 
can’t help praising it to anyone not quick-witted enough to look busy.

A lack of restraint is perhaps the best response to Ishiguro’s novel, which is 
the tale of a man so burdened by propriety that he lets the love of his life 
slip through his fingers. Mr Stevens is chief of staff at an English stately 
home; as the novel opens, in the summer of 1956, he is set to undertake a 
motoring trip to visit Miss Kenton, a housekeeper who left 20 years earlier to 
get married. The butler says he wants to ask her if she’d consider returning to 
work: “Miss Kenton, with her great affection for this house, with her exemplary 
professionalism, was just the factor needed to enable me to complete a fully 
satisfactory staff plan for Darlington Hall.” But Stevens isn’t fooling anyone, 
especially when he lets slip that a letter (“her first in seven years, 
discounting Christmas cards”) contains hints her marriage is falling apart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fthe-remains-of-the-day-by-kazuo-ishiguro-book-to-share%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0010711a47d3e14f7eace89ff87a0917ae09f1e8%2F0_0_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Remains%20of%20the%20Day%20by%20Kazuo%20Ishiguro%20%E2%80%93%20a%20subtle%20masterpiece%20about%20what%20is%20not%20said&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fthe-remains-of-the-day-by-kazuo-ishiguro-book-to-share%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Remains%20of%20the%20Day%20by%20Kazuo%20Ishiguro%20%E2%80%93%20a%20subtle%20masterpiece%20about%20what%20is%20not%20said&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fthe-remains-of-the-day-by-kazuo-ishiguro-book-to-share%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0010711a47d3e14f7eace89ff87a0917ae09f1e8%2F0_0_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Kazuo Ishiguro, author of the Booker-winning novel The Remains of the Day. 
Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Unreliable narrators – those mysterious figures the reader must try to work 
out – are ten a penny in fiction. Ishiguro, instead, likes to give us unwitting 
narrators: speakers who remain trapped in self-preserving fictions, mysteries 
even to themselves. Bit by bit, you learn to look for the real emotions running 
beneath the buffed surface of the prose. Stevens reminisces grandly about his 
former employer, Lord Darlington, an aristocrat who aligned himself with the 
Nazis and eventually died in disgrace. He sifts through memories of his father 
– a butler himself, who was aloof to the point of abuse – and holds forth about 
“dignity”, a concocted ideal that has to do “with a butler’s ability not to 
abandon the professional being he inhabits”.

Each journal entry becomes a mannered exercise in avoidance and projection. 
When Stevens reaches a sensitive subject – such as whether Miss Kenton was 
driven away by his refusal to admit his feelings for her – he veers off into 
self-protective prattling, carrying on for pages before he feels able to 
continue. “All in all,” he writes tellingly, “I cannot see why the option of 
her returning to Darlington Hall and seeing out her working years there should 
not offer a very genuine consolation to a life that has come to be so dominated 
by a sense of waste.”

Kazuo Ishiguro: how I wrote The Remains of the Day in four weeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/06/kazuo-ishiguro-the-remains-of-the-day-guardian-book-club>
We get a picture of a man trying desperately to keep a lid on his emotions – 
and what a complete picture it is. The Remains of the Day does that most 
wonderful thing a work of literature can do: it makes you feel you hold a human 
life in your hands. When you reach the end, it really does seem as if you’ve 
lost a friend – a laughably pompous, party-hat-refusing, stick-in-the-mud 
friend, but a good friend nonetheless. You want to give him a hug, except he’d 
be outraged.

The Remains of the Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/17/rereading-remains-day-salman-rushdie>
 is a book about a thwarted life. It’s about how class conditioning can turn 
you into your own worst enemy, making you complicit in your own subservience. 
It’s probably quite an English book – I can’t imagine readers in more 
gregarious nations will have much patience with a protagonist who takes four 
decades to fail to declare his feelings. “Hanging on in quiet desperation is 
the English way,” as Pink Floyd sang. It’s a book for anyone who feels they’ve 
ever held themselves back when something that truly mattered was within their 
grasp.

Most of all, though, it’s a book about love. Stevens is forced to let go of 
his illusions about Lord Darlington, his filial pride, his cherished “dignity”, 
until all that remains is Miss Kenton and what might have been. The story 
reaches its low-key climax in the quiet surroundings of a Cornish tea-room. I 
won’t spoil it for you, except to say that, here as elsewhere, what is not said 
makes all the difference.

I once heard that, to make the reader cry, a writer should try to keep the 
characters dry-eyed. There are some tears in this novel – yet perhaps not 
enough, because the tale of the steadfast, hopelessly mistaken Stevens gets me 
every time. If you haven’t read The Remains of the Day, I hope you’ll let me 
park my professional dignity and beg you to get hold of a copy pronto. And if 
you’ve read it and loved it, then – whatever you do – don’t keep your feelings 
to yourself.

 * Kazuo Ishiguro on The Remains of the Day – Guardian books podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2015/jan/16/kazuo-ishiguro-the-remains-of-the-day-books-podcast> 