
The Chelsea hotel, on West 23rd Street, is still standing. But it is much 
diminished from the glory days when it hosted the likes ofDylan Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas>, Sid Vicious and Warhol’s 
Chelsea Girls. The halls are dusty from sheetrock; the doors are plastic sheets 
taped to the wall. Developers are hoping to turn the place into a luxury hotel 
or condos. But there are still some people still clinging to the place.

Ed Hamilton always wanted to be a short-story writer. He arrived in New York a 
little over two decades ago, at the age of 30, moving with his wife from the 
Maryland suburbs. “I always wanted to come to New York, my wife always wanted 
to come toNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, and our jobs 
ended so we decided to just go ahead and do it,” Hamilton told me on a recent 
afternoon, sitting in a large, worn red armchair in the room he shares with his 
wife at the Chelsea. He’s only recently published his first book of short 
stories, titled The Chintz Age.

Is gentrification inevitable – and inevitably bad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/16/gentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change>
One of Hamilton’s favourite writers is Thomas Wolfe, he said. Wolfe had once 
lived at the Chelsea. But when Hamilton first approached Stanley Bard, the 
hotel’s landlord – known to take paintings in lieu of rent – Bard turned 
Hamilton down for a room, saying there was nothing available. Hamilton had to 
take a sublet from another tenant instead, for $500 a month.

“It was a room about a half or a third of this size and it had, like, lofts 
for all your stuff, just a really crap place,” Hamilton said. “So we stayed 
there for a year and then Stanley Bard gave us our own place because he hates 
subletting. In fact, he can’t even say the word, he hates it so much.” They’ve 
been living in the hotel ever since.

Hamilton eventually wrote a blog <http://www.chelseahotelblog.com/> and a book 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/28/books/review/Giles-t.html?_r=0> about all 
the legends of the Chelsea hotel. But his work of nostalgia was written as the 
conditions of the hotel crumbled. He and his wife have survived the onslaught 
of the developers who gradually took over the hotel and ousted Bard. It has 
been a rocky ride since then; the hotel was first sold to one developer,then 
another 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20130827/chelsea/hotel-chelsea-sold-luxury-hotelier>
. They began extensive renovations, which costa vast sum 
<http://ny.curbed.com/2015/6/23/9947202/hotel-chelseas-money-sucking-renovation-is-taking-forever>
. In the process, theyevicted many of the artists  
<http://thevillager.com/villager_351/atchelseahotel.html>living there. Hamilton 
made it past those hurdles, but it’s not clear how much longer everyone will 
hold out. I asked Hamilton if there was any amount of money he’d leave for. “I 
don’t know,” he said. “I’m sure they could come up with some number.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fnew-york-chelsea-hotel-artists-bohemia-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de88e64f3ff51aca393b0b445bd446c19b7cce3%2F73_285_4369_2620%2F4369.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20bohemia%3A%20can%20the%20dream%20survive%20in%20gentrified%20New%20York%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fnew-york-chelsea-hotel-artists-bohemia-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20bohemia%3A%20can%20the%20dream%20survive%20in%20gentrified%20New%20York%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fnew-york-chelsea-hotel-artists-bohemia-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de88e64f3ff51aca393b0b445bd446c19b7cce3%2F73_285_4369_2620%2F4369.jpg>
 Ed Hamilton, author of The Chintz Age. Photograph: Rita Barros 
What happened to the Chelsea hotel has been replayed all over New York. There 
are few, if any, landlords left like Stanley Bard. Today, for a young, aspiring 
artist, it’s best to show up to New York with a credit report and a massive 
security deposit in hand. Even then, you probably won’t settle in Chelsea, or 
Manhattan, or even the more accessible parts of Brooklyn. (The average rental 
in Manhattan is hoveringaround $4,000 a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/01/manhattan-new-york-apartment-rent-prices-record-high>
.)

The complaint that New York is getting too expensive is, of course, not new. 
Hamilton himself remembers being told by the artists he met all the way back in 
1995 that he had missed out on New York’s heyday. “Oh yeah, the 80s were so 
great, the 70s were so great. You haven’t seen anything, this place is being 
all gentrified. It’s not like it used to be,’” he remembered them saying. Maybe 
it was something “old timers” always did, he said. “Although I must say that 
things seem to have really accelerated in the past few years.”

The stories in The Chintz Age are a monument to the New York he moved to and 
wanted to keep living in. It isn’t the successful artists that seem to interest 
him; instead, his stories follow people who are more like himself. In Fat 
Hippie Books, for example, the protagonist, Greg, is a bookstore owner who once 
had literary ambitions but has settled into the business. It’s a struggle to 
keep the doors open due to a greedy landlord.

“It wasn’t written in the stone of the buildings that neighbourhoods had to 
crumble and become shabby for Bohemians,” Hamilton writes, “but Greg had always 
been a believer and he was comfortable with that. His resolution was that he 
had to hold on in some way or the other and wait for the cycle to come back 
around.”

There are many statements like that in Hamilton’s stories. His characters 
aren’t usually stratospheric successes. They’re more like the people who, 
hearing of the louche adventures ofJack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac> and the other beats, moved to 
New York to try to emulate their lives. Some of his characters briefly make a 
living at what they love – Martha of the titular story briefly succeeds as a 
photographer – but on the whole, they are people who do their art for pleasure, 
not the money or the acclaim. That particular form of New Yorker – call it the 
demimonde or Bohemian or whatever you like – is vanishing as these people leave 
the last of the rent-stabilized apartments.

Hamilton idolized people who never really sought the approval of bourgeois 
authorities, people who were happy to earn only a couple hundred bucks a month. 
He admired their ingenuity. “I’ve seen that with the people that lived here [at 
the Chelsea hotel] too,” Hamilton said. “They’re just hustlers – they know how 
to do anything for a buck. If they don’t have money, they’ll go sell their 
books or they’ll sell their furniture. That’s one of the things you learn,” 
Hamilton said, “that artists just live basically from paycheck to paycheck.”

A paycheck from a gallery show every six months, or a book contract every two 
years, is no longer enough to cover even the tiniest room’s rent. Even a few 
nights of bartending won’t really cut it anymore. For Hamilton, this is an 
incalculable loss. “I remember in the space of a week, there was a punk rocker 
and a blues guitarist and a classical violinist and they all practiced in their 
rooms,” Hamilton told me. But the glorious “cacophony” that such musicians 
produced together is gone, because no one can afford the rent.

“Rents so high that if you’re, like, a young person coming from the sticks or 
whatever, you can’t really afford it,” Hamilton said.

 * The Chintz Age is out now from Cervena Barva Press
 