
Even by the standards of rock and roll in the late 50s, Johnny O’Keefe’s The 
Wild One is a fairly innocuous song. Its structure and melody bears more than a 
passing resemblance to many well-known staples of the genre that made up the 
charts during that era, particularly Let’s Have A Party as sung by bothWanda 
Jackson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ksBcV-qrgo> and Elvis Presley 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5HiXhE5AcSs>. It lacks the sonic adventure of 
other O’Keefe singles such asShe’s My Baby 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ThTdwyTawk>, with its low, percussive hum of 
saxophone.

Even The Wild One’s message was no more than teenage libido in lyrical form, 
with its line: “Well give me a chick that’s-a all of my own/Shake her till the 
meat-a comes off-a the bone.” But as a blunt declaration of youthful, even 
outlaw, spirit at a time of stultifying drabness across Australian culture 
under prime minister Robert Menzies, its impact was significant.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZF9rS90U3-U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZF9rS90U3-U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZF9rS90U3-U&media=>
The Wild One was released on 5 July 1958, and while it did not reach higher 
than 20 in the charts, Sydney-born O’Keefe became the first homegrown rocker to 
achieve a national chart placing. The track is driven by a pounding Jerry Lee 
Lewis-style rhythm, with guitarist Lou Casch further defining the song with a 
simple but perky riff, and the chugging saxophone of many O’Keefe hits.

While rarely hailed for his vocal ability, O’Keefe’s performance on The Wild 
One serves the song beautifully. He hardly soars, but the attitude of a 
flailing, testosterone-fuelled young man is encapsulated perfectly, with his 
inevitable growls and whoops all delivered with restraint and timing.

According to Casch, the song was inspired by an incident that occurred when 
O’Keefe and his band the Dee Jays, which Casch played in, performed a concert 
at a venue in Newtown, Sydney. They played upstairs as a wedding took place 
downstairs, with guests from the respective events coming to blows in the 
bathroom, leading to a dramatic brawl that spilled out to the street.

There is some doubt as to how much input O’Keefe had in the songwriting 
process (the song is officially credited to O’Keefe and fellow Dee Jays Johnny 
Greenan and Dave Owens as well as radio DJ Tony Withers, who helped with 
airplay). But The Wild One’s allure had much to do with its performer.


O’Keefe’s stature as the godfather of Australian rock’n’roll (and this single 
marking its apparent birth) is overstated. But don’t underestimate how 
rebellious a figure O’Keefe cut amid the grey landscape of Australian suburbia 
in the late 1950s. He did, after allcrash cars on the Pacific Highway 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-07-29/okeefe-car-crash/5618814>, raunchily 
hump microphones when performing andturn up drunk to promotional events 
<http://rockonvinyl.blogspot.com.au/2014/06/johnny-okeefe-shes-my-baby-1969.html>
.

In a recent interview, Australian poet Robert Adamson – a one-time wild one 
himself – spoke about the music of his adolescence:“Johnny O’Keefe was the 
wildest thing I’d heard, he had a croaky voice which I liked, and he was 
rebellious, he drove [Ford] Customlines and smashed into walls and stuff. He 
was outstanding to me, because he was so different. My friends said he couldn’t 
sing, but he sang better than anyone else.”

The Wild One went on have a long and storied recording life. The most famous 
reincarnation of the song was Iggy Pop’s Real Wild Child (Wild One) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=def3ob2h-1s> in 1986, while others to cover 
the song include The Crickets, Albert Lee, Status Quo, Lou Reed, Joan Jett and 
Jerry Lee Lewis himself. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=inb1z-qjxIU> Such is 
the song’s status that an extended version of Iggy Pop’s version became the 
famous theme music for the great music institution that is the ABC’s Rage.

O’Keefe did not exactly live up to The Wild One. Like many slick rock and 
rollers of the 50s, he found himself bewildered by changes in music and fashion 
as the 60s progressed, and would not allow “long-hairs” on his television show 
Sing, Sing, Sing. His last hit was the schmaltzyShe Wears My Ring 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_UXJhbqc3E0> in 1964, but however much he may 
have drifted out of the spotlight until his death in 1978, The Wild One remains 
a crucial release in Australian pop history, the moment when one of our own 
proved he could admirably reproduce the devil’s music.
 