
Where have you eaten your favourite meal?

In Melbourne, Australia, I had an incredible meal at The Flower Drum - it's a 
Chinese restaurant of excellence. It's great food cooked and presented in a 
wonderful way. I also discovered a lovely French Alain Ducasse restaurant in 
Paris called Au Lyonnais which has the best, best, best black pudding I have 
ever tasted! I usually go on personal recommendations and look for local food. 
I like simple restaurants where they cook well - not these places where they 
mix things up. We were in Turin in a restaurant where we were served a fresh 
oyster with chocolate on top! My wife called the chef and asked why did you do 
this? He said: 'You have to shock people.' Well, he succeeded. Bloody hell!

Is travel important in your life?

I've had a desire to travel since I was a child. We had one of those old 
radios that you had to tune with a dial and I would press my ear to the radio 
and tune between stations - I would drive my family mad. I was fascinated by 
all those stations with their different languages that I couldn't understand. I 
grew up with a wish to travel and to meet people, learn customs and taste new 
foods. I had always wanted to learn other languages so, when I was about 21, I 
moved to Vienna to study. I have been living away for about 47 years now. From 
Vienna I moved to Berlin, then to Hamburg where I became a wine salesman 
importing and selling wine. I arrived in London in 1975 and have been here ever 
since.

Did you travel a great deal as a child in Italy?

My father was a stationmaster and we used to move a lot. That was probably the 
reason I wanted to go round the world. I was born in 1937 in the south and at 
the age of seven months we moved to Piedmont, then after nine years we moved 
further north.

Has food been a major incentive to travel?

Fifteen years ago I was sent by the BBC to investigate Czech, Bulgarian, 
Egyptian, Moroccan, Turkish and Greek food. It was very interesting to see that 
in the lower part of the Mediterranean the food is fairly similar. Their 
cuisine - mezes and so on - has been the same for thousands of years, 
especially when compared with the food of Italy. I've just written a book on 
the 20 regions in Italy and visited all of them as the food is very different 
throughout the country.

'Italian' food doesn't really exist, there are so many different types. They 
can be very parochial in the regions - they look only to their local cuisine 
and ignore the others. As we moved my mother used to cook all the dishes she 
encountered so I got to taste the food of many regions. While I was living in 
Vienna I cooked my mother's dishes to remind me of home.

What about further afield?

I love to cook, but my interest lies not only in personal pleasure of food but 
how it works in other cultures. I know Japanese food, I know Indian... Food can 
accommodate everybody; it's like a world language. I've been to Australia a few 
times and the Italians there are more Italian than the Italians in Italy! Being 
so far away from home they want to preserve their customs, like killing the pig 
traditionally, which they don't bother with now in Italy as they have good 
salami factories.

Â· Antonio Carluccio owns the Neal Street Restaurant and Carluccio's Caffes 
<http://www.carluccios.com>
 