
Nickelodeon broke a lot of ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/19/childrens-television-lgbt-characters-nickelodeon-loud-house>
: it was the first offering of its kind on television, it attracted (and 
maintains) a huge audience of children, and since the late 1980s it’s been a 
hive of high-concept game shows, unusual animation and clever visual gags. In 
August 1991, the network debuted Nicktoons,an incubator for talented, eccentric 
artists who had gross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/15/nickelodeon-spongebob-squarepants-kids-code-programming>
, heartwarming or just plain weird ideas about what would make good kids’ TV. 
In 2002, Nicktoons became its own channel.

This month, that incubator celebrates its 25th anniversary. Some of its ideas 
were very good and some were too strange to live for very long, and sometimes 
they were the same ideas. For pure creativity, here are our picks for the best 
five shows that came out of the program. Some of them didn’t survive in the 
wild, but all of them changed the way we think about animation.

SpongeBob SquarePants
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fnickelodeon-nicktoons-spongebob-squarepants-doug%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff236f129bcc2e85bb5f599f54580ac4e588bf53%2F54_31_2781_1669%2F2781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20best%20Nickelodeon%20shows%3A%20from%20SpongeBob%20SquarePants%20to%20Doug&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fnickelodeon-nicktoons-spongebob-squarepants-doug%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20best%20Nickelodeon%20shows%3A%20from%20SpongeBob%20SquarePants%20to%20Doug&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fnickelodeon-nicktoons-spongebob-squarepants-doug%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff236f129bcc2e85bb5f599f54580ac4e588bf53%2F54_31_2781_1669%2F2781.jpg>
 SpongeBob SquarePants Photograph: Nickelodeon/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
SpongeBob SquarePants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/31/sponge-out-of-water-review>, like 
the Simpsons, is hard to define. It’s a domestic sitcom, a workplace comedy, a 
fantasy series and pretty much everything else that crosses the minds of its 
creator, Stephen Hillenburg. It’s phenomenally successful and is currently in 
its ninth season with no end in sight and responsible for some $8bn in 
merchandising dollars. In many ways, it’s the show toward which the whole 
Nicktoons project was built.

Part of the success is a visual sensibility that is somehow uniquely 
Hillenburg’s own and perfectly of a piece with the rest of the network’s 
offerings. Another part of it is that the show is very funny no matter who you 
are. “I’d sure like to go to this party, but I can’t read the invitation!” says 
SpongeBob to his starfish pal Patrick in an early episode, holding up a piece 
of paper with ink that has run terribly. “Whoever sent this has no idea about 
the physical limitations of living underwater. Welp, might as well throw these 
in the fire.”

Much of the credit due also goes to Tom Kenny, whose inimitable laugh has 
scraped the eardrums of millions of tired parents; it’s a characterization up 
there with Mel Blanc’s Bugs Bunny, in whom a Brooklyn accent most Brooklynites 
haven’t heard in decades lives on. SpongeBob also stays surprisingly fresh: 
it’s hard to find a bad episode in the lot and 16 years into its run, that 
means that the series’ admirers span two generations.

Ren & Stimpy
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlmJrvzyEwWc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlmJrvzyEwWc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlmJrvzyEwWc&media=>
One of the unusual features of Nicktoons, certainly among kids’ TV and 
probably in television as a whole, is how thoroughly it let its artists do 
whatever popped into their heads. The inside of John Kricfalusi’s head, as it 
turned out, was filled with stranger things. His creations Ren Hoek, a very 
angry chihuahua, and Stimpy, a rotund red cat that looks nothing like a cat, 
never seemed to take the same shape twice. Kricfalusi got a lot of attention 
for the show’s gross-out gags and cringe comedy, and the show’s excessive 
violence led to an episode, which featured Ren beating his owner with an oar, 
being banned. Kricfalusi left the show after only a couple of seasons and it 
suffered for his absence, but the shows he worked on retain their puerile charm.

Your next box set: The Ren and Stimpy Show Unleashed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/feb/11/the-ren-and-stimpy-show> 
The series pioneered a lot of things that work in future Nick cartoons: Bob 
Camp’sreliably disgusting 
<http://renandstimpy.wikia.com/wiki/Gruesome_close-ups> painted closeup panels, 
the occasional complete alteration of a character’s face to resemble another 
face entirely and the general absurdity of the whole enterprise. It’s one of 
the best shows ever broadcast on the network, despite – or perhaps because – 
it’s also a fantastically disturbing one.

Invader Zim
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO6hnEoobO1A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO6hnEoobO1A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO6hnEoobO1A&media=>
Let’s see here: there’s Zim, the smallest and least competent alien invader, 
and then there’s Dib Membrane, the antisocial conspiracy-theorizing grade 
schooler who’s somehow the only one who notices when Zim, say, replaces 
people’s organs with a radiator.

Invader Zim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/30/weeks-best-podcasts-you-must-remember-this-embedded-radiolab>
 hit airwaves 10 years into the Nicktoons project. It consistently blew through 
its budgets, annoyed censors and tried (without success) to get Nick to agree 
to a finale in which both its main characters die; thus it lasted a mere 27 
episodes, though it did manage to win an Emmy over that brief course. The 
show’s sense of humor is somehow dark without being bleak; even when the show 
takes its cues from horror movies – it’s often quite scary – it’s somehow never 
too much.

Created by Johnny the Homicidal Maniac cartoonist Jhonen Vasquez, Zim’s plans 
to destroy earth are always at least a little adorable, and the series’ bizarre 
palette of greens and pinks is among the most visually interesting on 
television. Invader Zim didn’t last nearly long enough, but it did spawn a cult 
following almost immediately and became a password for alienated millennial 
teenagers everywhere.

Doug
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHygi3PlZI0Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHygi3PlZI0Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHygi3PlZI0Y&media=>
With the possible exception of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, no TV show in the 90s 
examined the lives of schoolkids with as much pathos and insight as Jim 
Jinkins’ Doug. Like Matt Groening and The Simpsons, Jinkins drew on his own 
life experience to create Doug’s memorable cast of animated characters, and his 
drawing style was (as with everything on this list) inimitable.

He also had a softer touch than most of the eccentric geniuses at Nicktoons 
HQ. Doug is about loneliness and hurt feelings as much as it’s about anything, 
and while Doug’s flights of fantasy – especially as his superheroic alter-ego, 
Quailman – are beautifully rendered, they’re always ways of working out 
real-life, down-to-earth problems in his relationships.

Actually, Doug was so individual within the Nicktoons pantheon of mostly 
oddball animals and supernatural craziness that it didn’t quite fit the mold. 
In 1996, after Nick passed on further seasons,Disney snapped up the series 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1999/mar/09/business/fi-15344> and Jinkins and 
eventually made a theatrical film adaptation of it, optimistically titled 
Doug’s First Movie.

Rocko’s Modern Life
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_HmEGRVUcR0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_HmEGRVUcR0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_HmEGRVUcR0&media=>
Gen Xer ennui was everywhere on TV in the 1990s; nowhere did it look quite 
like Joe Murray’s offbeat cartoon Rocko’s Modern Life, the tale of a 
disconsolate wallaby who works at a comic book store and lives with his 
roommates in a house with no straight lines. His friends Heffer the (nominal 
<http://rockosmodernlife.wikia.com/wiki/Heffer_Wolfe>) cow and Filburt the 
turtle keep him company on his couch, but the modern life of the title is very 
different from Bugs Bunny’s or even SpongeBob’s. Rocko has a job and friends 
like everybody else on a sitcom, and he also has surprisingly regular commerce 
with the forces of darkness, like the time a demon tries to get Heffer’s soul 
for satan by offering him a spot on a game show. Rocko was also a great 
training ground for Stephen Hillenburg, who would go on to create SpongeBob, 
and a great many of the animators and writers who would work on that show’s 
staff.
 