
New formats in literature are rare, and disruptive. They usually accompany a 
change in technology.Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> was 
the first big player to realise that digitisation would allow for a new 
literary format. In January 2011, it quietly launched a substore on its US 
website to sell something it called a Kindle Single: Compelling Ideas Expressed 
At Their Natural Length, as a press release headline blandly put it.

"Typically between 5,000 and 30,000 words, Kindle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kindle> Singles are editorially curated 
and showcase writing from both new and established voices – from bestselling 
novelists and journalists to previously unpublished writers."

Those lines may not sound like a call to revolution. But they are. Writers can 
seldom express ideas "at their natural length", because in the world of 
traditional print only a few lengths are commercially viable. Write too long, 
and you'll be told to cut it (asStephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> was when The Stand came in too 
long to be bound in paperback). Worse, write too short, and you won't get 
published at all. Your perfect story is 50 pages long – or 70, or 100? Good 
luck getting that printed anywhere.

Hence the revolution. Because the new length exploits this hole in traditional 
publishing.

The hole has existed for 500 years; it's baked into the print model. The high 
fixed overheads of book production – printing, binding, warehousing 
and distributing a labour-intensive physical object – have tended to make 
books of fewer than 100 pages too expensive for the customer. (And print 
magazines and newspapers can take works of only 10, maybe 15 pages, max.)

But although commercial print publishers have never liked novellas 
or novelettes, authors always have. Indeed, many writers have done their best 
work at that length, despite the difficulty of finding publication (Melville's
Bartleby, the Scrivener; Kafka's The Metamorphosis). However brilliantly 
written, though, they have often been disrespectfully published, awkwardly 
bundled up with other stories to pad out a commercially viable print book.

Worse, many writers have taken a strong 70-page idea and stretched it into a 
weak 300-page book because that was what the industry demanded.

I know an excellent young author who feels she ruined her second novel because 
her contract demanded 100,000 words; the story should have been told at half 
that length. And I know several short-fiction writers who have wasted painful 
years writing bad novels instead of superb short stories and novellas.

Digital pricing can vary smoothly with length, as physical print pricing 
cannot. The hole in the heart of publishing has been fixed. And the Single is 
now being embraced.

In the US, writers such as Chuck –Fight Club – Palahniuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chuckpalahniuk>, Susan Orlean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/02/rin-tin-tin-life-susan-orlean-review>
,Amy Tan <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/mar/24/fiction.reviews2>, 
George Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/12/george-saunders-interview-tenth-of-december>
 andAnn Patchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/10/ann-patchett-life-writing-interview>
 are writing Kindle Singles.Niall Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/niall-ferguson> had a big transatlantic hit 
in April with his short biography of Margaret Thatcher,Always Right. The Booker 
prizewinner Howard Jacobson has released a Kindle Single. And Margaret Atwood 
(the only winner of both the Man Booker and the Arthur C Clarke award) is 
publishingPositron, a long work of erotic science fiction, Single by Single.

Given that Kindle Single is a trademark, it would be useful to have an 
open-source word for the format. I suggest adding the affectionate Irish 
diminutive suffix -een to the sturdy Anglo-Saxon "book".

Writers have been publishing bookeens for years, of course, but they were seen 
as oddities, fragments lost among the big books. Without a name, they couldn't 
fully exist. But Amazon, in giving the format a formal identity, has put the 
bookeen on a solid commercial footing. Kindle Singles have sold "only" 4m or 5m 
copies thus far, but they are coming from a base of zero. Crucially, the Kindle 
Singles programme is not a closed shop: Amazon both publishes its own signings 
and distributes curated works by other publishers under the Kindle Singles 
brand. Many of the most successful Singles come from small, nimble new digital 
publishers such as Byliner, Atavist, DailyLit and TED Books. It was DailyLit, 
run by the literary novelists Yael Goldstein Love and Jennifer 8 Lee, who 
commissioned my own bookeen. I wrote it; they showed it to Amazon; it was taken 
on.

Any writer can approach Amazon directly, as Stephen King did in January with 
Guns, a nonfiction essay too long, at 8,000 words, for most newspapers or 
magazines. If King had givenGuns to his usual publisher, it might have come out 
in a hardback collection of essays in about eight years' time. He offered it to 
Kindle Singles on a Friday; they read it over the weekend, and it was published 
within the week. It has 1,654 reviews on Amazon.

And King may have made significantly more money per word from his Kindle 
Single than he makes from his mainstream published novels. Amazon pays authors 
who go directly to it 70% of revenue on Singles. It pays promptly every month, 
and allows you to retain the rights to your work.

A traditional print publisher will pay you, at best, 15% of retail on hardback 
books and 8% on paperbacks. For Kindle Singles? At best, a disgraceful 25% of 
the 70% Amazon gives. (The new digital startups often split that 70% 50/50 with 
authors.) A traditional publisher pays those royalties only twice a year, six 
months in arrears, and will potentially own the rights until you've been dead 
for 70 years.

The attractions for authors are powerful: more freedom and more money. But 
even a small swing towards Singles could prove damaging to Waterstones, Barnes 
& Noble and the independent bookshops. Soon they will have the albums of the 
industry – the novels, the big non-fiction books – but they won't have the hit 
singles; they will have the books but not the bookeens. And a bookshop that 
can't stock the new one by Stephen King, Amy Tan,Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood> … Ouch.

Well, that's just the way it is: technology changes art, and then art changes 
retail. And now, if you'll excuse me, I must go back to work on my next piece 
of fiction. I reckon it'll be about 20,000 words long.

 Julian Gough is the author of the Kindle Single "CRASH! How I Lost A Hundred 
Billion And Found True Love <http://www.crashbyjuliangough.com>"
 