
TOP OF THE POPS

An intriguing idea, surprisingly not tried before, is given an outing on BBC 
iPlayer on Saturday, in the form of Jessica Ennis-Hill’s Training Tunes. Hosted 
by Trevor Nelson, this first in an occasional series is rather like a sporting 
Desert Island Discs but with the emphasis on the part music has played in 
helping the participant achieve their goals. Ennis-Hill shares the music that 
inspires her and the playlist of her favourite training tunes. The Olympic and 
world heptathlon champion, who isgearing up for the Rio Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/jessica-ennis-hill-sets-sights-crowning-glory-rio-olympics>
, cites tunes from the Spice Girls to Jay-Z and Stormzy among her selections. 
It is a pleasingly different way of gaining what is an unusually personal 
insight.

AMERICA’S CUP

The build up to the 2017 America’s Cup continues on Saturday with the fourth 
round of the World Series in Oman (BT Sport 9.30am). The series began last year 
with rounds in Portsmouth, Gothenburg and Bermuda and the winners will carry a 
points advantage into the round robin qualifiers in May next year that will 
decide the right to challenge Team Oracle USA for the title they have 
successfully defended once. Britain’s Ben Ainslie was brought in as tactician 
during that defence in 2013 when Oracle came from 8-1 down to defeat Team New 
Zealand 9-8.Ainslie now leads the Royal Yacht Squadron challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/25/sir-ben-ainslie-americas-cup-bermuda-portsmouth>
, with the Land Rover BAR team. The four-time Olympic champion, who is based on 
the Solent and has Formula One’s Adrian Newey working on design and 
engineering, is third in the table behind New Zealand and Oracle with six 
rounds to come.

CHAMPION ON COURT

Angelique Kerber will compete in her first tour event since winning the 
Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-angelque-kerber-australian-open-final-tennis>
 at the WTA Qatar Open (begins Monday, BT Sport 1, 12.30pm). It is a chance to 
assess her chances of converting the victory over Serena Williams into further 
grand slam success. How she copes with the new-found fame, attention and 
expectation is likely to play a part. She had reshaped her game in the close 
season, shifting to a more aggressive style from the baseline and it paid off 
in Melbourne, where she also beat Victoria Azarenka. She has a great chance in 
Doha with Williams out due to illness and Maria Sharapova absent with an injury.

BIKES BACK ON GRID

Northern Ireland’s Jonathan Rea begins the defence of the World Superbike 
Championship hewon so emphatically last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/northern-irelands-jonathan-rea-world-superbike-title-jerez>
 with 14 wins and 23 podium finishes. The opening meeting is at Phillip Island 
in Australia, which has hosted the series since 1990, and the 29-year-old 
continues as a factory rider for Kawasaki. He comes into this season on the new 
ZX-10R which has been impressively quick in testing but will also face stiff 
competition from his Kawasaki team-mate, the 2013 champion Tom Sykes. This year 
the format has changed with a championship race on both Saturday and Sunday. 
(Eurosport, Saturday, Superpole and race one, 2.15am; Sunday, race two, 2am).

T20 FINALE

Having won the ODI series against South Africa 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/england-women-cricket-south-africa>
, England’s women go into the final T20 match against the Proteas with the 
score level at 1-1. Until this series they had not lost a T20 against South 
Africa, with a record from 12 meetings of 11 wins and one no-result, the 
decider (Sunday, Sky Sports 2/5 Live, 7.55am) will doubtless be hard-fought. 
Another win for England would be the perfect preparation before the World 
Twenty20 (running alongside the men’s in India next month) at which they can 
expect to build on an impressive record, having won the inaugural World T20 in 
2009 and reached the final of the two subsequent events.
 