
Shepherding the Muppets through a post-Henson world must be such a high-wire 
act. In retrospect, what Jim Henson achieved in his time was little short of 
alchemy. He managed to be anarchic and sincere, postmodern and moral, smart and 
dumb, all at the same time, without so much as breaking a sweat.

This, one might suspect, is why the last 25 years of Muppetry have been so 
patchy. With the notable exceptions of The Muppet Christmas Carol, Muppets 
Tonight and Jason Segel’s 2011 movie, every new Muppet project has struggled to 
capture the right tone. They’ve either been too cute (The Muppets’ Wizard of 
Oz), too knowing (Muppets Most Wanted) or too bizarrely in thrall to whatever 
the zeitgeist happens to be (Lady Gaga and the Muppets’ Holiday Spectacular) to 
work.

The hottest TV shows of autumn 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/10/tv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets>
Sadly, on the basis of its first two episodes, new series The Muppets is yet 
another misstep. It’s aspoof documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/08/the-muppets-return-to-tv-documentary-abc>
 full of cutaway character interviews, which would have been a sophisticated 
touch had this been made in 2005, but now just comes off as grimly rote. The 
biggest crime that The Muppets commits, however, is what it’s done with the 
Muppets themselves.

Keeping with the grand backstage tradition of all the best televised Muppets 
shows,The Muppets <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/the-muppets> takes place 
behind the scenes of a late-night talkshow called Up Late with Miss Piggy. This 
immediately makes it a weird cousin of The Larry Sanders Show, where Miss Piggy 
is Garry Shandling, Kermit is Rip Torn, Fozzie is Jeffrey Tambor and Gonzo is 
Jeremy Piven (back when people still liked him).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Ftvandradioblog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fkermit-the-frog-miss-piggy-breakup-muppet-show-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438762497020%2FKP_382151_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kermit%20the%20Frog%20on%20Miss%20Piggy%20breakup%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20not%20easy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Ftvandradioblog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fkermit-the-frog-miss-piggy-breakup-muppet-show-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kermit%20the%20Frog%20on%20Miss%20Piggy%20breakup%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20not%20easy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Ftvandradioblog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fkermit-the-frog-miss-piggy-breakup-muppet-show-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438762497020%2FKP_382151_crop_640x360.jpg>
 An early look at the show. 
It desperately wants to be Larry Sanders, too. Episodes are full of clawing 
and backbiting and Hollywood egotism and godawful musical performances by 
real-life bands that exist as nothing other than flabby filler. The whole thing 
so desperately wants to mimic the edginess of Sanders, but this is achieved at 
the cost of everything you ever loved about the Muppets.

What were previously sly winks to a grownup audience are now grotesque 
full-body grimaces, delivered with depressing sledgehammer brutality. In one 
scene, Animal laments his consequence-free promiscuity. In another, Zoot from 
The Electric Mayhem is outed as an alcoholic. And then, most heartbreakingly of 
all, there’s Kermit.

This version of Kermit is absolutely unrecognisable from anything that’s ever 
come before. This Kermit badmouths fellow celebrities, openly discusses his sex 
life and, at one point, describes his life as “a living hell”.That’s not who 
Kermit is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/01/kermit-denise-muppets-miss-piggy>
. Kermit is the perennial wide-eyed optimist, the figure who grounds the chaos 
around him in sincerity. Kermit is the dreamer who believes in the power of 
people. He’s the one who sings The Rainbow Connection. He is most definitely 
not the stress-eating, coffee-drinking executive that The Muppets paints him 
as. It physically hurts to see what ABC have done to him.

Kermit the Frog's new girlfriend is younger, thinner – and blander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/01/kermit-denise-muppets-miss-piggy>
The Muppets isn’t a total write-off. A handful of asides manage to capture the 
spirit of old, and Laurence Fishburne pops up in a second-episode cameo so 
unstoppably game it manages to single-handedly overshadow everything that came 
before it. And we need to remember that it’s still early days; given time, The 
Muppets might eventually nail the proper Henson tone.

But for now, there’s nowhere near enough emotion. At their best, the Muppets 
tended to peddle the sort of all-encompassing Technicolor joy that made your 
eyes prickle with tears. That’s nowhere to be seen here. This is a cynic’s 
version of The Muppets, plain and simple. If it makes you cry at all, it’s 
because it broke your heart.
 