
On Monday, about 100 employees stormed an Air France management and union 
official meeting that was discussing dramatic job cuts. As the negotiations had 
been making no progress, the staff became angry, and tussled with some company 
officials. Two Air France executiveshad their shirts torn off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/05/striking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video>
. Xavier Broseta, the airline’s head of human resources,escaped the scene by 
climbing a chain-link fence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/air-france-workers-storm-meeting-protest-executives-job-losses-paris>
, bare-chested, while Pierre Plissonnier, the head of long-haul flights, was 
escorted away by security guards with his suit and shirt in tatters.

The spectacular images were shown around the world and provoked dismay and 
outcry in the media. Protesters were presented as a “mob”. Manuel Valls, the 
Socialist prime minister, declared that he was “scandalised” by the 
“unacceptable violence”. He unequivocally backed AirFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> management, still a partially 
state-owned company. Emmanuel Macron, the finance minister, tweeted that the 
violence was “irresponsible” and “nothing can replace social dialogue”. Fearing 
a media backlash, most trade unions condemned the violence.

Air France management have set conditions which are impossible for the unions 
to accept

Air France management are planning to cut 2,900 jobs in the next two years. 
The rationale is to reduce costs to compete with low-cost companies. Several 
weeks of “negotiations” have proved fruitless because Air France management 
have set conditions which are impossible for the unions to accept. The company 
demands from their pilots that they work an extra 200 hours a year for the same 
salary; several routes will be closed; and 400 pilots will be made redundant. 
To defeat the well-organised pilot union is only the first part of the attack 
against workers’ rights. Then the hostesses and stewards will be asked to work 
more for the same pay and will get fewer resting days, and the cabin crews will 
be downsized.

Alexandre de Juniac, the Air France-KLM chief executive, has announced that 
the company would go ahead with the cuts and redundancies regardless of the 
outcome of the negotiations. De Juniac is even by Anglo-American business 
standards apatron voyou (rogue boss). In a jaw-dropping talk he gave 
<http://www.francetvinfo.fr/france/travail-des-enfants-35-heures-droit-de-greve-l-intervention-cash-du-pdg-d-air-france_852497.html>
 in front of businesspeople in December 2014 , he condemnedthe 35-hour working 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/30/35-hour-week-french-say-no-to-changes-reform>
 (a popular reform among salaried workers in France), questioned whether there 
should be a legal retirement age at all, and wondered whether the ban on 
underage workers should not be lifted. Worst of all, he found it amusing to 
share with the audience a conversation he had with his Qatar Airways 
counterpart. The latter confided to him that there could never be any strikes 
in Qatar as pilots would be sent to jail. This is a rather chilling story when 
one knows that cost reductions are implemented in order to compete with Gulf 
rivals.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fstriking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444053882971%2FKP_516469_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Striking%20Air%20France%20employees%20rip%20shirts%20off%20managers'%20backs%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fstriking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Striking%20Air%20France%20employees%20rip%20shirts%20off%20managers%27%20backs%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fstriking-air-france-employees-rip-shirts-managers-backs-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444053882971%2FKP_516469_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Striking Air France employees rip shirts off managers’ backs - video 
Under these circumstances, it is no surprise that the workforce are fed up and 
combative: their basic working conditions and underlying rights are under 
attack. The airline workers have embraced the roots of French trade unionism: 
anarcho-syndicalism (syndicalisme means trade union in French). In the late 
19th century, it was a workers’ movement that advocated direct action by the 
working class. This type of trade unionism was anti-parliamentarian, as 
professional politicians could not be trusted to represent the interests of the 
working people (this included social democratic parties). It remained an 
influential force amongst workers until the first world war. In the 1890s, the 
Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT) – then and still today the main French 
union – promoted this type of direct action (notably the general strike) and 
“revolutionary unionism”, organising its members around Fédération des Bourses 
du Travail (Labour Exchanges).

Air France workers rip shirts from executives after airline cuts 2,900 jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/air-france-workers-storm-meeting-protest-executives-job-losses-paris>
Jean-Claude Mailly, leader of Force Ouvrière (Workers’ Strength), declared 
that “you can fight a management without being violent. This is not part of our 
traditions.” But does he really know the traditions of French syndicalism in 
the first place? It is ironic that the tearing of a couple of shirts and of a 
suit should provoke an international outcry when hardly anyone points to the 
symbolic violence of Air France management. Why would the media and some of our 
politicians not hold Air France management to account for their assault on the 
lives of thousands of people? There is a wealth of academic literature showing 
that unemployment or poor working conditions can lead to poverty, depression, 
divorce, suicide and the destruction of entire families.

This is not free violence on the part of the strikers: people genuinely fear 
for their future and the future of their families. The attack on the Air France 
workforce should be placed in the wider context of the constant undermining of 
workers’ rights under the François Hollande presidency. When workers start 
holding managers hostage, or “boss-napping”, they do not do it for fun or 
because they are a “violent mob”. They do it as a last resort to draw attention 
to their desperate cause.
 