
On occasion my thoughts turn, as thoughts often do, to Angus Deayton and what 
could have been. The poor man's Paul Merton; the satirical (scape)goatherd; the 
tall man's Clive James; the snide man's muse. It's been over six years since
Deayton's dismissal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/oct/29/broadcasting.bbc6> from Have I 
Got News For You following the disclosure of drug-fuelled trysts. His temporary 
replacements - Church, Young, Chiles and evenCharles Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/nov/28/broadcasting.bbc1> - have given 
it their all, but they still cloy in comparison.

After Deayton's disgrace the Beeb <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
claimed they could no longer cast him as a satirical commentator, as his own 
mugshot was now suitable for the programme's odd one out grid. So imagine my 
excitement when last Friday's news stork carried with it a bundle of televisual 
comfort: Deayton is tohost this year's British comedy awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/21/british-comedy-awards-angus-deayton>
! Calloo callay, Cyril Sneer has returned. I celebrated until my sudden joy was 
popped by the realisation that he was in fact replacing Jonathan Ross, who had 
of course decided to stand down following Sachsgate.

It put a sort of Leno v Letterman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/16/arts/television/16stan.html?partner=rssnyt&emc=rss>
 spin on the situation. Two successful presenters, both punished by the BBC, 
but who's the better frontman? I'd plump for Ross. I'm confident that, even 
taking into account hiswhopping great salary 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/5159328.stm>, he's still far superior 
to Deayton. So, in what feels like the most natural way to channel this news 
into a debate, I have created a jaunty face-off.

Crime

Deayton: The Oxford-educated presenter whiles away a spring weekend with one 
lady of the night and a whole load of class A drugs.

Ross: You're doubtless familiar with this one: floppy-haired fop and equally 
revered/derided comedian leave obscene messages on the answerphone of 
half-forgotten TV actor Andrew Sachs.

Winner: Ross, hands down. Who wasn't a little bit sick in their mouth when 
they pictured Deayton, a single eyebrow raised, over a dusty white buttock?

Support

Deayton: Largely from peers. Stephen Fry offered support by boycotting future 
appearances <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/tv_and_radio/2953181.stm> 
on the show.

Ross: Beyond Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2008/oct/29/russell-brand>, support 
has been thin on the ground.

Winner: Deayton

Ban/suspension time

Deayton: Booted off HIGNFY. He's done the odd bit of presenting, most notably 
on Would I Lie to You? and Hell's Kitchen. But presenting the televised sidebar 
of a show hosted by a celebrity chef is hardly stardom.

Ross: Three-month unpaid suspension.

Winner: Ross. Ban, schman. It was his decision to pull out of the comedy 
awards anyway. We're the losers here.

What they said

Deayton: "Angus is simply one of the best," Guy Freeman, controller of ITV 
music & events.

Ross: The press roared its front-page fury, joined by more than 30,000 
Britons, among them ministers - prime, cabinet, junior and religious. And then
the director general was recalled from holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/21/russell-brand-jonathan-ross2>.

Winner: Deayton. Time is a healer.

Comic CV

Deayton: Witty, sardonic, lord of the autocue.

Ross: He has natural charm and the ability to deliver an insult without 
actually being insulting. Sometimes confuses humour with vulgarity and is 
dallying with the age-specific peril of lech-dom.

Winner: A draw. Both irredeemably flawed.

Overall winner

I still say Jonathan Ross <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross>. 
He's just funnier.
 