
Tap the words “African food” into a search engine and something unexpected 
happens: nothing. Not quite a blank page but it feels like the internet is 
shrugging its shoulders and murmuring, “Dunno.” None of the heavyweights – the 
BBC, New York Times, the Guardian – appear to have covered the subject with any 
serious intent; Wikipedia has an entry titled “List of African dishes” but it 
looks and reads like a B-minus school project. In an age where regional foods 
are everywhere, where kimchi is already over, it is baffling that we perverse, 
contrapuntal food snobs seem to have overlooked an entire great continent.

Three friends from south London – Duval Timothy, Jacob Fodio Todd and Folayemi 
Brown – certainly think so. Before they started working on theGroundnut Cookbook
, their new collection of recipes, they went round bookshops to assess the 
competition. “We went to a fair few and couldn’t find anything,” recalls 
Folayemi, 26, who co-runs an African music project calledMogaDisco 
<http://mogadisco.co.uk/homepage/events/> on the side. “In one shop – which I 
won’t name – there was an African subsection in the cookery section and there 
wasn’t a single book on the shelf.”


Perhaps we are intimidated by the size: where do you start with a continent of 
more than a billion people, 54 countries and over a thousand languages? But 
this hasn’t fazed the Groundnut boys. Folayemi’s parents are from Nigeria; 
Duval, his best friend since primary school, has family from Sierra Leone; 
Jacob, meanwhile, spent large parts of his childhood in Mozambique, Swaziland 
and Tanzania. They can’t claim to offer a definitive guide to African food, but 
they can share their experience of the sub-Saharan countries they know – which, 
with so little information out there, will be a start and potentially much more.

The Groundnut began in January 2012 as a bi-monthly supper club 
<http://www.thegroundnut.co.uk/GROUNDNUT/HOME.html> in south London. It was 
originally the idea of Duval, a 25-year-old artist and designer, but he had 
little trouble convincing Folayemi and Jacob, a friend of Duval’s brother at 
Goldsmiths, University of London.

When they sat down to create their first menu, the centrepiece of the feast 
was settled quickly: groundnut stew, a West African dish made with peanut 
butter, chicken and Scotch bonnet pepper. Duval’s grandma made a killer 
version, while Jacob had been obsessed with those flavours since he’d eaten a 
similar dish called caril de amendoim in Mozambique as a child. Only Folayemi 
wasn’t sure, but then he’s allergic to peanuts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsupper-club-south-london-via-nigeria-sierra-leone-mozambique%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434458966406%2Fb4eae9c7-4220-4a84-a58e-4ef180d802b4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20supper%20club%20from%20south%20London%20-%20via%20Nigeria%2C%20Sierra%20Leone%20and%20Mozambique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsupper-club-south-london-via-nigeria-sierra-leone-mozambique%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20supper%20club%20from%20south%20London%20-%20via%20Nigeria%2C%20Sierra%20Leone%20and%20Mozambique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsupper-club-south-london-via-nigeria-sierra-leone-mozambique%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434458966406%2Fb4eae9c7-4220-4a84-a58e-4ef180d802b4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Folayemi, Duval and Jacob Photograph: Alex Lake for Observer Food Monthly 
The first Groundnut was mostly friends and family; it was a success in every 
sense except financially. They slipped into some patterns that have stuck ever 
since: all three would cook, but on the evening Folayemi would mostly look 
after front of house, while Jacob and Duval – who have both cooked in the 
Franco-British café Rose Bakery – would ensure the food came out efficiently. 
Many of the dishes would be traditional, even old family recipes, but they 
would be balanced by lighter, fresher sides, maybe a mango kohlrabi salad or 
orange juice drunk – as they do in West Africa – from fruit that is ingeniously 
both the drink and the cup.

“The ceremony of eating is very important in African food,” explains Duval. 
“So we wanted everyone eating at a long table, at the same time, sharing the 
same food. And one of the aspects is tactility: eating with your hands is done 
across all of Africa.” Folayemi laughs, “That might be a step too far for some 
people, but we felt confident that one person would be a catalyst and then the 
whole table would do it. And it went down well. No one said, ‘Can I have some 
cutlery?’”

After three years of supper clubs, the Groundnut Cookbook brings their food to 
a wider audience; home cooks who have never quite known what to do with a 
plantain or a yam – or couldn’t even pick them out of a line-up.

“We do feel that African food is some of the best food on the planet,” says 
the 30-year-old Jacob, who has left his job as a research and development 
practitioner for theRift Valley Institute <http://www.riftvalley.net/> [a 
non-profit that works in east and central Africa] to work full-time on the 
Groundnut. “The flavours and tastes are so brilliant that you think, 
‘Everyone’s got to be excited about this!’ That’s what gives us a lot of 
confidence.”

This confidence is shared by the publishers Penguin, which paid a six-figure 
advance, it’s said, for global rights to theGroundnut Cookbook. If this is a 
gamble, it is not a reckless one: Duval, Jacob and Folayemi are smart, handsome 
and charismatic; it’s easy to see them on television or opening their own 
restaurant, should they desire. Moreover, they have created a fun, vibrant 
cookbook that also evokes a powerful sense of their collective memories and 
diverse upbringings. But most of all, the time just feels right for African 
food, a cuisine too long ignored or dismissed.

“When we were making it, we always had this idea that it was not just a 
cookbook,” says Duval. “It should be an important book for people because it’s 
a new reference point to a whole continent of food.”
 