
Imagine life without ownership. You own nothing. You rent everything. You do 
this because it’s cheaper: you pay pennies or fractions of pennies per day to 
have a bed to sleep in, or a winter coat to keep you warm. You scale up or down 
as needed: maybe your partner moves in, so you swap your single bed for a 
queen, or winter ends, so you return your coat. You are always optimizing. You 
pay for precisely what you use, when you use it – and nothing more.

This is the consummate “sharing economy”, and it might be closer than you 
think.

By now, the sharing economy is nearly a decade old. The term first surfaced 
sometime after 2007, the year that brought us both the iPhone andthe Great 
Recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/great-recession-recovery-stories>
. The iPhone helped put the internet and GPS in people’s pockets. The Great 
Recession helped make them desperate and broke. These two developments 
dovetailed to sow the seeds of the sharing economy: consumers were looking for 
new ways to save, workers were looking for new ways to earn, and smartphones 
gave them both new ways to transact.

These days, however, the sharing economy feels a bit past its prime. After an 
initial wave of investor enthusiasm, a few “sharing” startups such as Uber and 
Airbnb have hit it big, but many more have fallen flat. It turns out, people 
are happy to pay for rooms or rides but are less thrilled about renting 
PlayStations or power tools. “The ‘Sharing Economy’ is Dead,” Fast Company
declared 
<https://www.fastcompany.com/3050775/the-sharing-economy-is-dead-and-we-killed-it>
 last year, summarizing a general sense of fatigue with what now feels like a 
wildly oversold idea.

But what if the postmortems are premature? New paradigms usually don’t arrive 
all at once, but by fits and starts. The first phase of the sharing economy 
might have fizzled out, but new technologies may soon resurrect it in a far 
more radical form. And if they do, the result won’t just be a new app for 
renting power tools. It’ll be the biggest revolution in property ownership 
since the birth of capitalism.

The sharing economy: a whole new way of living
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/04/internet-technology-fon-taskrabbit-blablacar>
Smart contracts

One of capitalism’s core requirements is a stable property regime. Capitalism 
needs a reliable, enforceable record of who owns what. This means everything 
that is owned has several layers of lawyers, legislators, judges and police 
standing behind it. I own a piece of land, you trespass, I call the police. If 
necessary, we go to court.

The system works, but it’s slow. If you own real estate in the United States, 
it’s typically recorded by a county records office. If you own a car, it’s 
typically recorded by a state agency. As you might expect, these institutions 
involve a lot of paperwork and labor. And that’s just to record the fact that 
you own something. Actually enforcing ownership requires even greater 
quantities of paperwork and labor, from the sheriff who carries out the 
eviction notice to the repo man who tows away your car because you’re late on 
your payments.

The high fixed costs of the traditional property regime presents the sharing 
economy with certain challenges. Let’s say instead of buying a house, you want 
to buy the right to use a house for a night. Or instead of buying a car, you 
want to buy the right to use a car for an hour. The official system isn’t set 
up for that. So sharing companies end up keeping that information themselves: a 
database atAirbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> or Zipcar 
holds the record of your rental instead of the government. But these databases 
require plenty of labor of their own to build and maintain, and they don’t 
scale easily to a wider range of assets. Any attempt to expand the sharing 
economy runs up against the same problem: how do you record and enforce who 
owns what when the thing being owned is so granular and fast-moving?

“A blockchain is very precisely designed to solve that problem,” Steve Randy 
Waldman tells me. A programmer, blockchain expert and widely known economics
blogger <http://www.interfluidity.com/>, Waldman is the rare technical 
specialist who is used to talking to a non-technical crowd. He knows that 
blockchain is one of those words that confuse and intimidate people, so he 
explains it as simply as he can. “It’s a different way of keeping track of a 
normative set of information,” he says. Instead of storing the information in 
one central location – the county records office, say, or Airbnb’s database – 
blockchain makes multiple copies and distributes them across all the nodes of a 
network.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe939cf12cc6c4d8a2d866b3888ffe69b3a67358c%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%3A%20where%20borrowing%20is%20the%20norm%20and%20ownership%20is%20luxury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%3A%20where%20borrowing%20is%20the%20norm%20and%20ownership%20is%20luxury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe939cf12cc6c4d8a2d866b3888ffe69b3a67358c%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 A few ‘sharing’ startups such as Airbnb have hit it big. Photograph: Martin 
Bureau/AFP/Getty Images 
These nodes don’t have to be people. They can be things. This is what makes 
blockchain such a potentially powerful accelerant of the sharing economy: it 
gives property the ability to know who its owner is. Anything with an internet 
connection can hook up to a blockchain, which means anything with an internet 
connection can have a perfect record of who owns what. To return to our home 
rental, what if the front door knew that you had paid for the place for one 
night and only opened for you during that interval?

This happens to be the business model of a German startup called Slock.it, 
which builds “smart locks” that run on an advanced blockchain called Ethereum. 
In their demos, they present the following scenario. The homeowner posts a 
price for the rental. The renter sends the money through her smartphone. Inside 
the front door is a very small computer connected to the internet. The computer 
knows when the renter is allowed to enter and unlocks the door for her when she 
pushes a button on her phone.

The mechanism that makes this work is something called a “smart contract”. A 
smart contract is simply a computer program that performs certain actions when 
the right conditions are met. Think of it as a series of if-then statements. If 
the renter pays up, the door opens. If the rental ends, the door locks.

What’s extraordinary about a smart contract is that it gives blockchain the 
power to not only record property rights but enforce them. Once deployed, a 
dozen lines of computer code can fulfill the same role as the county records 
office, the courts and the police. You can have “the function of a trusted 
bureaucracy without the expense of putting together a trusted bureaucracy”, 
Waldman explains. You can also cut out the middleman who extracts a fee for 
coordinating the transaction: theoretically, your home rental could now involve 
only the homeowner and the renter, bypassing Airbnb.

The uber-loneliness of the sharing economy driver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/04/uber-protest-app-zello-sharing-economy>
By automating away these expenses, smart contracts make a lot more goods 
“shareable”. Humans have always been the sharing economy’s weakest link. The 
more they’re involved, the higher the cost of each transaction. By getting rid 
of them, smart contracts make it extremely cheap to create and enforce 
agreements. The result is that it suddenly becomes practical to sell access to 
virtually anything.

In a talk late last year, one of Slock.it’s co-founders offered 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=49wHQoJxYPo> a few examples. Let’s say you 
want to rent out your washing machine to the other people in your building. You 
could link it to a “smart” power switch, which would activate the machine for 
however many minutes a user purchases. Or you could use the same kind of switch 
to create an impromptu charging station for electric cars: drivers would pull 
up, plug into an outlet and buy your electricity.

These examples only scrape the surface of what’s possible, however. In a world 
where property is networked and programmable, and ultra-fast micro-payments can 
happen automatically, and software records and enforces who owns what, the pool 
of possible transactions is potentially infinite. If the premise of the current 
sharing economy is that you can turn your car into a taxi or your house into a 
hotel, the premise of the next sharing economy is that you can turn any idle 
asset into a productive piece of capital. All you have to do is set your price, 
and the robots will take care of the rest. What could possibly go wrong?

Unbundling ownership

Almost 50 years ago, Philip K Dick foresaw a future filled with things that 
charge you for using them. The protagonist of his 1969 novel Ubik lives in a 
crummy apartment where everything is coin-operated – the coffee machine, the 
fridge, even the front door. One running punchline is that he’s always too 
broke to come up with the nickel he needs to open the door and leave his 
apartment. At one point he even gets into an argument with the door, which 
tells him that the five-cent fee is part of the contract he signed when he 
bought the place. When he starts unscrewing the bolt, the door threatens to sue 
him.

Dick’s scenario is funny, frightening and may someday cease to be science 
fiction. It’s easy to imagine how today’s experiments with blockchain and 
internet-enabled devices might lead to a world where borrowing is the norm and 
ownership is a luxury. The sharing economy’s advocates like to talk about 
efficiency: why own a car, for instance, when the average American automobile 
getsused 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2016-merging-tech-and-cars/?utm_content=business&utm_campaign=socialflow-organic&utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=social&cmpid%253D=socialflow-twitter-business>
 only 4% of the time? But the sharing economy’s future profits aren’t likely to 
flow merely from the things we rarely use – they’ll come from the things we use 
all the time. And it seems probable that most us won’t be renting those 
essential items simply because we’re trying to be efficient. Like Dick’s 
protagonist, we’ll be renting them because we’re too poor to own them.

When I put the question to Waldman, he gives me the economist’s view. “From a 
financial perspective, the way to think about ownership as opposed to renting 
is that if you own something, you’re pre-purchasing the future services and 
therefore hedging the future risk of not having the use of those services,” he 
says. When you own a door, for instance, “you’re pre-purchasing the continual 
right to open it”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267a19e63317554fbcb4c0c7f5008529d87d7801%2F0_97_2470_3765%2F2470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%3A%20where%20borrowing%20is%20the%20norm%20and%20ownership%20is%20luxury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%3A%20where%20borrowing%20is%20the%20norm%20and%20ownership%20is%20luxury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267a19e63317554fbcb4c0c7f5008529d87d7801%2F0_97_2470_3765%2F2470.jpg>
 Imagine having to pay every time you want to open your front door. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Most of us don’t think about it that way, of course. But we might have to, if 
the sharing economy succeeds in unbundling ownership into a stream of services 
that we purchase a minute or a millisecond at a time. “That should be all gravy 
in a world of informed optimizers,” Waldman adds. “But we obviously don’t live 
in a world of informed optimizers.”

Dystopian or not, this future probably won’t arrive right away. Everyone I 
spoke to, whether an entrepreneur or an academic or an engineer, cautioned 
against expecting too much too soon. “It’s the Precambrian age,” Stephan Tual, 
a co-founder of Slock.it, told me. “The fish don’t have legs yet.”

Neha Narula, the research director of the MIT Media Lab’s Digital Currency 
Initiative, agrees. “This technology is still in its infancy,” she said. “We’re 
still in the early days.”

Currently, the biggest growing pain is security. In June, a hacker exploited a 
vulnerability in the Ethereum blockchain tosteal 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/06/50-million-hack-just-showed-dao-human/> $50m 
worth of digital money from an investment fund set up by Slock.it. Before the 
technology can go mainstream, these are the kind of rough edges that need to 
get smoothed out.

Big business is watching closely. Last year, the world’s largest financial 
institutions came together to form a consortium called R3 devoted to blockchain 
research and development. If the prospect of gigantic banks joining forces to 
engineer a powerful new financial weapon fails to unleash your inner Dickian 
paranoiac, consider this: at least one of R3’s members, Toyota Financial 
Services, has beenexperimenting 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-25/this-is-your-company-on-blockchain>
 with a way to use blockchain to punish people who fall behind on their car 
payments. If you miss an installment, a smart contract kicks in and your car 
won’t start. No pleading conversations with your lender, no fist-fights with 
the repo man. Just code, quietly killing your engine.

Waldman shares my queasiness about the Toyota project – “a shitty 
arrangement”, he calls it – but warns against technological determinism. Unlike 
many blockchain enthusiasts, who are prone to a soldierly faith in the 
righteousness of their cause, he accepts the possibility of non-utopian 
outcomes – but stresses that there is nothing inevitable about them. “The 
optimistic case is possible, too,” he explains, “and probably worth checking 
out.”

Here is the optimistic case: blockchain could help democratize the sharing 
economy by making it cheaper to create and operate a platform. In a 
blockchained world, many of the things that a company such as Uber does to 
coordinate a transaction could be performed by self-executing smart contracts; 
others could be performed at lower cost by a variety of small competing 
providers. This might make it easier for workers to form cooperatives that have 
the capacity to compete against the VC-backed behemoths that dominate the 
sharing economy. Then you might get something resembling the “socialized Uber”
proposed <https://www.thenation.com/article/socialize-uber/> by economist Mike 
Konczal: a viable worker-owned alternative, run for the benefit of the people 
who actually perform the work and not for a handful of rich investors.

A cooperative commonwealth or a hypercapitalist nightmare of extortionary 
smart property: we might get one or the other, or even a bit of both. What 
seems clear is that the next phase of the sharing economy is just as likely to 
magnify today’s inequalities as to alleviate them. As always, technologies can 
be put to a range of purposes: a hammer might be a murder weapon or a home 
improvement tool depending on who is holding it. Whether we get our head bashed 
in or a slightly better place to live won’t be a technical question but, as 
always, a political one.

•An earlier version of this story misspelled the name of economist Mike 
Konczal. This version has been corrected
 