
The phrase 'economic development' has bad associations in Latin America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/09/the-phrase-economic-development-has-bad-associations-in-latin-america>
Development. Poverty. Africa. These are just three words on a page – almost no 
information at all – but how many realities did our readers just conjure? And 
how many thoughts filled the spaces in-between? Cover yourselves. Your biases 
are showing.

In the last few decades, groundbreaking work by psychologists and behavioural 
economists has exposed unconscious biases in the way we think. And as the World 
Bank’s2015 World Development Report 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2015> points out, development 
professionals are not immune to these biases. There is a real possibility that 
seemingly unbiased and well-intentioned development professionals are capable 
of making consequential mistakes, with significant impacts upon the lives of 
others, namely the poor. The problem arises when mindsets are just that – set.

Systems of thinking

As the work of Daniel Kahneman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/feb/16/daniel-kahneman-thinking-fast-and-slow-tributes>
 and Amos Tversky has shown, development professionals – like people generally 
– have two systems of thinking; the automatic and the deliberative. For the 
automatic, instead of performing complex rational calculations every time we 
need to make a decision, much of our thinking relies on pre-existing mental 
models and shortcuts. These are based on assumptions we create throughout our 
lives and that stem from our experiences and education. More often than not, 
these mental models are incomplete and shortcuts can lead us down the wrong 
path. Thinking automatically then becomes thinking harmfully.

So what can be done? Awareness and acknowledgment of these problems must be 
followed by carefully-designed mechanisms and measures for counteracting these 
unthoughtful thought patterns. In other words, we need to combat this 
unintentionalism with intentionalism. But how? There is, perhaps, no system 
more explicitly dedicated to the business of (re)shaping mindsets than the 
educational system. This seems like the best place to begin trying to tackle 
this issue.

Underpinnings of behaviour

Take the four cognitive biases 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Publications/WDR/WDR%202015/Chapter-10.pdf>
 (pdf), identified by the World Development Report, which have surfaced from 
recent findings on the psychological and social underpinnings of behaviour:

 * Thin simplification – when the number of policy options increases, the 
ability of people to evaluate them decreases critically, leading to greater 
influence of framing effects for the sake of simplification. In other words, 
the more options with which people are presented, the harder it becomes to make 
a decision and the more susceptible they are to being influenced by information 
– depending on how that information is presented.

 * Confirmation bias – when individuals selectively gather (or give 
differential weight to) certain information in order to support a previously 
held belief.

 * Sunk cost bias – when individuals tend to continue a project once an 
initial investment is made, and stopping a project would mean acknowledging 
that previously-allocated resources have been wasted.

 * The influence of context – when development practitioners do not fully 
understand the mindset and circumstances of those they are trying to help and 
fill the gaps with their own assumptions and perceptions.

If we take the issue of thin simplification, it is evident that when dealing 
with complex issues and problems development agencies often apply standardised 
management tools and certain uniform approaches. But this behaviour discourages 
the kind of regular re-examination of the underlying assumptions about problems 
that a constantly evolving world necessitates.

Does the west really care about development?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/05/does-west-care-development>
To combat this bias, development professionals need to learn how to identify a 
problem correctly, perhaps by working in a space where all assumptions and 
perspectives can be heard and challenged. This should be followed by the 
creation of a set of manageable goals with “small wins” that contribute to the 
overall solution.

Classrooms should be stressing collaborative techniques for identifying 
problems and thinking them through. In Columbia University’sdevelopment 
practice lab 
<https://sipa.columbia.edu/news-center/article/new-mpa-dp-lab-enhances-learning-environments>
, for example, students are taught to create problem trees and then turn them 
into solution trees, before they work through how interventions might be 
measured and evaluated. In the course of 16 labs, high priority skills in the 
field of development are experimented and piloted in real world contexts to
enhance the role of practice 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/andre-correa-dalmeida/the-meaning-of-practice-i_1_b_7479860.html>
.

What about confirmation bias? Placing students into situations in which they 
are exposed to multiple and divergent viewpoints, large data sets, and new 
information and communication technology, forces them to produce the best 
versions of their arguments. When this is done in groups, it provides the 
social pressure to debate in an articulate and compelling way. For instance, 
orchestrating intentionally adversarial setups, known as “red teaming”, through 
role play or by introducing people with different viewpoints, prompts 
perspective shifts.

Too often, solutions are designed by people who don't understand the cultural 
norms of the people they seek to serve

The battle of the sunk cost bias is one of changing attitudes. Under the 
watchful eye of donors, there is a pressure to not recognise failure. It might 
not be covered up, but failure is not broadcast or shared alongside best 
practices, where such stories might actually be useful. While most people would 
agree that failure is part of life, there seems to be a pretence that the 
development world should somehow be immune, that colourful vignettes of 
successful projects should be shared the widest. Acknowledging that resources 
have been wasted – even if that decision means redirecting them towards 
programmes and projects where they could make a real and positive impact – is 
seen as something to be ashamed of.

Educational programmes and respected instructors might fight this notion by 
setting the example of openly discussing failures in their own work, as well as 
what they gleaned from these failures. As Einstein once observed: “The 
definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again, but 
expecting different results.” If we are only sharing the successful half of 
what we are doing (and half may be a generous estimate), we allow the entire 
unsuccessful half to repeat itself, without caveat. How can we expect different 
results when there is a culture of hiding some of them? It’s time to restore 
sense, not perpetuate insanity.

Lastly, we come to context. There urgently needs to be a recognition of the 
two-way street whereby mindsets not only shape poverty, but where poverty 
shapes mindsets. The manner in which development practitioners perceive the 
poor and their problems greatly affects how development interventions are 
created, implemented and assessed. Too often, solutions are designed by people 
who do not share or understand the cultural norms, dispositions, history, or 
mindsets of the people they seek to serve.

Intelligence training

Secret aid worker: buzzwords are killing development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/08/secret-aid-worker-buzzwords-are-killing-development-human-centred-grassroots>
Immersion programmes 
<http://www.aud.ac.in/academic/programs/masters_programmes-2/mphil_programme_in_development_practice-594>
 are useful for practitioners to walk a mile in the shoes of the poor, 
internalise their problems, and motivate more contextually driven solutions – 
though they may be time intensive and require significant travel resources. 
However, this kind of social and emotional intelligence training in an 
institutional system that seems to place a pre-eminence on conventional 
intelligence (IQ) is arguably worth the investment. Educational programmes 
should therefore make it their priority to sponsor their students to travel and 
work in developing country settings for a set period of time, as is done at 
Columbia’ssummer placement programme 
<https://sipa.columbia.edu/academics/programs/MPA-DP/summer-placement-profiles> 
at the School of International and Public Affairs’ masters in development 
practice.

The educational system can be a powerful lever of change for building the 
support systems needed to tackle the unconscious biases development 
professionals face while addressing monumental global development challenges. 
With three billion people, nearly half the world’s population, living on less 
than $2.50 (£1.90) per day, the case is urgent. It’s time to rethink the way we 
think.

André Corrêa d’Almeida 
<http://new.sipa.columbia.edu/faculty/andr-corr-a-dalmeida> is professor of the 
Development Practice Lab, Columbia University.Amanda Sue Grossi 
<https://www.linkedin.com/in/amandasuegrossi> is serving as a United Nations 
Association summer scholar fellow with Plan International Senegal.
 