
Fanning out across the barren altiplano  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Altiplano>at 4,000 metres, the city is one of the 
fastest-growing in South America.El Alto 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Alto,_La_Paz> is going up so quickly it looks 
like it’s still in sketchbook form, as if no one had time to add any colour.

The streets are dusty and treeless. The houses and half-finished buildings are 
unpainted brick. A blinding sun blanches everything else.

“It’s so monotonous,” said architect Freddy Mamani, for whom this is clearly a 
problem and a personal irritant. “It’s depressing.”

Mamani wants to liven things up. You might want to reach for your sunglasses.

Walking into one of Mamani’s buildings is like coming out of a rabbit hole 
into an electric Bolivian wonderland. It’s a jolt to the rods and cones.

The interiors of his buildings feature two-storey ballrooms that are 
spellbinding tapestries of bright paint, LED lights and playful Andean motifs: 
chandeliers anchored to butterfly symbols, doorways that resemble owls and 
candy-coloured pillars that could hold up a Willy Wonka factory.

One soaring wedding hall evokes the inside of a reptile, with arching roof 
beams like dragon ribs and huge orange curlicue mouldings that could be 
alligator eyes.

“We use the colours of our textiles, colours that are alive,” said Mamani, who 
traces his inspiration to the elaborate shawls and other traditional garments 
made by his mother and fellow Aymara weavers.

Mamani, 42 and largely self-taught, is an architect with a rare privilege. 
It’s not often that a single artist or designer gets a chance to define the 
aesthetic of an entire city. Gaudi did it in Barcelona. Niemeyer in Brasilia. 
L’Enfant, to a degree, in Washington.

Mamani is turning cold, gritty El Alto 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Alto,_La_Paz> (population 1 million) into the 
world capital of “new Andean” architecture. This is in contrast to the old 
Andean architecture of theIncas <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inca_Empire> and 
Mamani’sAymara <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aymara> forebears, who left their 
designs and symbols in the ancient city ofTiwanaku 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/567>, between El Alto and Lake Titicaca, built 
more than 1,000 years ago.

Mamani has big dreams for El Alto’s plazas, bus stations and boulevards. But 
only recently have the Bolivian authorities begun warming to his work.

Critics dismiss his buildings as kitsch, or something worse: “decorative”. In 
architecture departments where Mamani said his instructors were only interested 
in copying European forms, his bold colours and extravagant designs were not 
well received. But in El Alto, Mamani is the Aymara version of Michelangelo. To 
his patrons – the city’s newly affluent – his works are a status symbol.

It is these traders who have changed El Alto from a slum into Bolivia’s 
throbbing hub of street commerce. La Paz, next door, has filled the bowl-shaped 
canyon below it and has no more space to grow. But El Alto, which translates 
roughly as “the Heights”, starts at the canyon rim and sprawls out across the 
flat desert plateau of the altiplano, with plenty of space for new arrivals, 
new money and unconventional architecture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbolivia-new-andean-architecture-freddy-mamani-el-alto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415380161269%2F890a2d93-db5e-436a-9716-c9b6c304b5b2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Bolivian%20architect%20whose%20%E2%80%9CNew%20Andean%E2%80%9D%20style%20is%20transforming%20El%20Alto&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbolivia-new-andean-architecture-freddy-mamani-el-alto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Bolivian%20architect%20whose%20%E2%80%9CNew%20Andean%E2%80%9D%20style%20is%20transforming%20El%20Alto&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbolivia-new-andean-architecture-freddy-mamani-el-alto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415380161269%2F890a2d93-db5e-436a-9716-c9b6c304b5b2-1020x612.jpeg>
 A worker cleans up on the building site of one of Freddy Mamani’s New Andean 
designs in El Alto, Bolivia. Photograph: Dominic Bracco II/Prime/Washington Post
Mamani moved to El Alto as a young man. His father, a bricklayer, taught him 
to build. He went to engineering school and began sketching his designs by 
hand. He still works that way – no computer, no office, just a battered pickup 
and a mobile phone that nags him every few minutes when one of his site 
managers needs something. Mamani’s five younger siblings work for him, too.

He has completed about 60 structures, known in El Alto as “chalets”. Mamani 
says their owners are typically well-to-do Aymaras who have been emboldened by 
the success of Bolivia’s most famous Aymara,Evo Morales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/evo-morales>, the country’s first indigenous 
president. Morales was re-elected to a third term last month by a wide margin.

“There have always been rich Aymara, but before Evo, they were timid. They 
didn’t want to draw attention to themselves,” Mamani said.

“Now they say, ‘This is where the successful Aymara live.’ They are proud of 
Evo, and they say, ‘I have wealth, I can show it off. I don’t have anything to 
hide.’”

Most of Mamani’s buildings are five or six storeys tall, with bold facades of 
Andean symbols, tinted glass and geometric patterns in relief. Each unique 
structure is an all-in-one compound to meet all the commercial, familial and 
aesthetic needs of the modern, urban Aymara.

The ground floor offers commercial space that the owner can use or rent. The 
second and third floors are exuberant ballroom spaces meant for weddings, 
parties and thequinceañeras, “Sweet 15” birthday celebrations that Bolivians 
wouldn’t think of having at home.

Covering the fourth and fifth floors are rooms for rent, or apartments for the 
owner’s family. At the top of the building, offset from the street, is a 
penthouse structure – the actual “chalet” typically with a gabled roof and huge 
windows to catch the sun and with views of snow-capped Andean peaks.

Most of his buildings cost between $300,000 and $600,000, Mamani said. Some 
even more.

The architect has a dozen or so under construction, dividing his 200 workers 
into two brigades: one for basic construction; the other for detail work. His 
interiors are almost entirely done with plaster and oil-based paints.

One building he debuted this summer with a ballroom for 700 has already become 
a destination for the curious. It has wall panels decorated with Andean 
pastoral scenes, stages for two bands and a giant glowing chandelier at the 
centre.

“People come from all over to see it,” said Alejandro Chino, a successful 
haberdasher, pleased by his decision to commission Mamani. “It’s the best place 
in all ofBolivia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia> to get married.”

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly> 
which incorporates material from the Washington Post
 