
“Photography is demonstrably the most contemporary of art forms; it is the 
most vital, effective and universal means of communication of facts and ideas 
between peoples and nations.” So saidCornell Capa 
<https://www.icp.org/browse/archive/constituents/cornell-capa?all/all/all/all/0>
, the founder of the International Centre of Photography, which opened in New 
York in 1974 with a remit to preserve the archives and exhibit the work of what 
he called “concerned photographers” everywhere.

The South Bronx of America: photographs by Mel Rosenthal – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jun/29/south-bronx-america-photographs-mel-rosenthal>
Forty-odd years later, the ICP has just opened in a new downtown location on 
the Bowery with abold exhibition, Public, Private, Secret 
<https://www.icp.org/exhibitions>, that attempts to take the measure of 
contemporary photography at a time when it is still undeniably the most 
contemporary of art forms, though in ways Capa would never have imagined. In 
the age of social media and insta-overload, photography not only reflects the 
fast-forward momentum of the hyper-digital age but drives and shapes it. Put 
simply, no other medium is so intertwined with digital culture as photography.
The medium, as Marshall McLuhan predicted, is very much the message. 
<http://www.marshallmcluhan.com/>

Today, the question that exercised Capa at a time when the moving image seemed 
the biggest threat to photojournalism – “whither concerned photography?” – 
seems oddly quaint in the contexts of the selfie, Instagram and Photoshop. A 
more apt question might be: “what is photography?” That question resounds 
throughoutPublic, Private, Secret, and, indeed, throughout contemporary 
photography from the proliferation of artists using found imagery – often 
downloaded from the internet or culled from obscure archives – to the 
widespread embrace of digital manipulation and photography that, to borrow a 
term beloved of curators, “interrogates the medium”.

If one wanted to measure the lunar distance photography has travelled from the 
work of a 1950s master such asHenri Cartier-Bresson 
<http://www.henricartierbresson.org/en/>, whose idea of the so-called “decisive 
moment” held sway for so long as a shorthand for the kind of authenticity that 
photography once seemed so desperate to attain, one need only compare his work 
to, say, the images produced – or reproduced – byDoug Rickard 
<http://www.dougrickard.com/>. For Rickard’s series in Public, Private, Secret, 
the source material is caught on smartphones and uploaded on to YouTube: often 
blurry citizen reportage of assaults and robberies collaged into a kind of 
meta-narrative that speaks of very contemporary anxieties – both about everyday 
American violence and the ways in which evidence of that violence is 
disseminated on social media sites without context or condemnation.

Cartier-Bresson’s work is perhaps the most emblematic example of what used to 
be called straight photography: an example of the art of going out into the 
world with a camera to take a great photograph. Now, though, photography tends 
to be made – and remade, remixed or recontextualised – rather than taken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5eb18ec831c0f796d6aaff86c4798fb8e3607e8%2F217_7_2509_3136%2F2509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20age%20reshapes%20our%20notion%20of%20photography.%20Not%20everyone%20is%20happy%20...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20age%20reshapes%20our%20notion%20of%20photography.%20Not%20everyone%20is%20happy%20...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5eb18ec831c0f796d6aaff86c4798fb8e3607e8%2F217_7_2509_3136%2F2509.jpg>
 Adam Broomberg and Oliver Chanarin, The Revolutionary, from Spirit Is a Bone, 
2013, at Public, Private, Secret at the International Center of Photography in 
New York. Photograph: © Adam Broomberg and Oliver Chanarin 
In Tate Modern’s recent exhibition, Conflict, Time, Photography 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/conflict-time-photography>
, for instance, the first room containedDon McCullin’s memorable image from the 
Vietnam war of a shellshocked American marine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/30/conflict-time-photography-review-tate-modern-emptiness-ruin-absence>
. On an adjoining wall hung an image byBroomberg & Chanarin 
<http://www.broombergchanarin.com/the-day-nobody-died/> that was made by 
exposing a sheet of photographic paper to sunlight just after a soldier was 
killed in Afghanistan in 2008. It, too, is war photography, but not as we know 
it: an absurdist response to the strictures of being embedded with the British 
army and also to the idea of reportage itself in an era when the mobile phone 
camera allows everyone to bear witness.

Bearing witness, of course, is what Cornell Capa dedicated his life to as a 
photographer as well as the founding director of ICP. It is what his more 
famous brotherRobert died doing in Indochina in 1954 
<https://pro.magnumphotos.com/C.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=MAGO31_10_VForm&ERID=24KL535353>
. What they would have made of Rickard’s borrowed images or Broomberg & 
Chanarin’s conceptual provocation is not hard to second guess.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe0979a0f2035856be948f6bd5fe5c523e12f71%2F0_218_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20age%20reshapes%20our%20notion%20of%20photography.%20Not%20everyone%20is%20happy%20...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20age%20reshapes%20our%20notion%20of%20photography.%20Not%20everyone%20is%20happy%20...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe0979a0f2035856be948f6bd5fe5c523e12f71%2F0_218_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Andrew Hammerand, The New Town, 2013, from Public, Private, Secret at the 
International Center of Photography, New York. Photograph: © Andrew Hammerand 
Public, Private, Secret, which moves uneasily between explorations of social 
media mores, surveillance and the dissolving of the space between public and 
private that occurs in both, is not a show for photography purists.It has, 
perhaps unsurprisingly, met with a mixed critical response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/27/international-center-of-photography-review-public-private-secret>
. The clutter of often conflicting social media-based imagery and, more 
problematically, the dilemma of how best to show work of this kind – on 
screens, projections, prints; randomly; or with a curatorially imposed order 
that possibly negates their fractured nature – is one that is now exercising 
the minds of institutions across the globe. Photography is no longer simply 
prints on the wall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf8663c395db2a8d60365468e6ca2fc654a4d0b9%2F0_352_2816_3521%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20age%20reshapes%20our%20notion%20of%20photography.%20Not%20everyone%20is%20happy%20...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20age%20reshapes%20our%20notion%20of%20photography.%20Not%20everyone%20is%20happy%20...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fphotography-no-longer-just-prints-on-the-wall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf8663c395db2a8d60365468e6ca2fc654a4d0b9%2F0_352_2816_3521%2F2816.jpg>
 Merry Alpern, Dirty Windows Series #19, 1994. From Public, Private, Secret at 
the International Center of Photography, New York. Photograph: © Merry Alpern 
Whatever else it is, though, Public, Private, Secret, is a very public, 
perhaps even foolhardy, statement of intent. One cannot imagine a British 
institution attempting the same. We remain as a nation, I think, inordinately 
suspicious of photography even though, on the ground, there is a vibrant 
contemporary photography culture of independent small galleries and exciting 
practitioners.

Outside that bubble it remains for most British people a mid-20th century 
form: black and white, deftly composed, documentary. And, even afterWalker Evans
 <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/evan/hd_evan.htm> and Andy Warhol 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/andy-warhol-2121>, Diane Arbus 
<http://www.atgetphotography.com/The-Photographers/Diane-Arbus.html> and Cindy 
Sherman <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/cindy-sherman-1938>, William 
Eggleston <http://www.egglestontrust.com/> and Andreas Gursky 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/andreas-gursky-2349>, not really art – 
witness theGuardian’s art critic Jonathan Jones’s recent provocation: “Flat, 
soulless and stupid: why photographs don’t work in art galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/nov/13/why-photographs-dont-work-in-art-galleries>
.” The British, it seems, don’t get photography in much the same way as they 
don’t get Europe – it simply isn’t British enough.

Ironically, when I interviewed Charlotte Cotton in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/oct/30/v-a-photographs-gallery-tate>
, she was the newly appointed creative director of the still-to-open Media 
Space in London, an adjunct to the Science Museum, which she described as more 
“akunsthalle than a museum”.

She continued: “We are at a point where everything is up for review, including 
the idea of what a cultural space should be doing at this moment of what you 
might call exhilarating crisis.”

Within months, though, she had departed the job 
<http://www.museumsassociation.org/museums-journal/news/09032012-national-media-museum-creative-director-quits-outpost-project>
, stymied, one sensed, by the Science Museum’s lack of faith in her vision for 
the new gallery.Now, as the newly revamped and relocated ICP opens under her 
aegis <https://www.icp.org/exhibitions/public-private-secret>, rumours abound 
about Media Space’s future and London still does not have a big, radically 
visionary exhibition space devoted to photography.

Perhaps we need a Cornell Capa for our times: someone who understands that 
photography is, perhaps more than ever, “demonstrably the most contemporary of 
art forms”. Don’t hold your breath, though.
 