
ABC

The ABC day of Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> 
Critics Association (TCA) panels began with Tyra Banks pushing her daytime talk 
show, FABLife, and ended with an ode to all things Shonda Rhimes. Both of those 
appearances, however, were upstaged by some familiar fluffy friends in the form 
of the Muppets, who grappled with the heartbreaking news that Kermit the Frog 
and Miss Piggy had broken up. Who was Team Kermit? Who was Team Piggy? Who was 
Team “They’re Not Real Anthropomorphic Animals”?

Can Doctor Who's Steven Moffat keep schtum? What we learned at the TCAs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/03/television-critics-association-panels-netflix-bbc-america-starz>
As for the rest of the day, the ABC panels provided a bit of a tease for the 
network’s other new series. The 80s-set Wicked Series (starring Ed Westwick and 
Erika Christensen, of Gossip Girl and Parenthood, respectively) became the 
target of questions about serial killer overload and the abundance of violence 
against women on television, but the line of questioning and answering never 
reached the level of acrimony thatthe Stalker panel did last year 
<http://deadline.com/2014/07/tca-panel-kevin-williamson-cbs-the-stalker-the-following-805971/>
. On the flip side, the Quantico panel was perhaps the most intimate affair, 
with only lead Priyanka Chopra and executive producers Mark Gordon and Joshua 
Safran answering questions. The panel was among the most delightful of the day 
– surprisingly, given the material covered – with Chopra confirming what 
millions of people in India already knew: she is a star. Safran also confirmed 
that this show “is not Alias”, so the comparisons between the two end at their 
both being female-led spy shows.

The panels for The Goldbergs and the upcoming, Ken Jeong-led Dr Ken maintained 
a general sense of humor forABC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> – and 
reminded everyone that the network wasn’t just about its sexy dramas and sexy 
muppets.

Fox
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Ftcas-muppets-tyra-banks-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20262ae95ba8abe13734f6b5933efc75946c8ae5%2F0_37_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Muppets%20upstage%20Tyra%20Banks%20%E2%80%93%20what%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20TCAs%2C%20week%20two&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Ftcas-muppets-tyra-banks-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Muppets%20upstage%20Tyra%20Banks%20%E2%80%93%20what%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20TCAs%2C%20week%20two&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Ftcas-muppets-tyra-banks-empire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20262ae95ba8abe13734f6b5933efc75946c8ae5%2F0_37_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Age of Empire: Taraji P Henson and Lee Daniels. Photograph: Jonathan 
Alcorn/Reuters 
The Empire panel was a reminder of how dynamic and surprising the series’ 
first season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/25/lee-daniels-taraji-p-henson-empire>
 was, especially with breakout star Taraji P Henson on the panel. Lee Daniels 
went on the record as saying that, “without question”, there will be an Empire 
spin-off, and he felt pretty confident in saying it would be a Cookie-centric 
prequel. In fact, Fox had no problem announcing upcoming programs, potential or 
otherwise – like an event series (and retconning of a main character death) for 
Prison Break, a television adaptation of the film Urban Cowboy (developed by 
Hustle & Flow director Craig Brewer), and a brand new music drama from Lee 
Daniels called Star.

Before moving on to the panels for Fox’s upcoming fall programs – which 
included Rosewood and the television adaptation of Minority Report – critics 
were treated to a never-before-seen clip from The X-Files event series. The 
clip was important for two reasons: first, it confirmed that Mulder and Scully 
would be broken up going into this series continuation. Yes, first Kermit/Miss 
Piggy and now Mulder/Scully. Secondly, the clip itself could be an absolutely 
terrible sign for the return of The X-Files, playing less like a serious and 
anticipated return to form for the series and more like a practical joke.

Crush of the week: Taraji P Henson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/13/the-crush-taraji-p-henson>
The panels for actual comedies The Grinder and Grandfathered inspired a lot of 
confidence, solely based on the charm and chemistry of their respective leading 
duos: Rob Lowe and Fred Savage in The Grinder, and John Stamos and Josh Peck in 
Grandfathered.

Scream Queens started the day of Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> 
series panels and, if nothing else, extolled the greatness that is the original 
scream queen, Jamie Lee Curtis (co-star Keke Palmer called her “cool as hell”). 
Scream Queens brings back the three-man creative power squad of Ryan Murphy, 
Ian Brennan, and Brad Falchuk, creators of Glee. It’s not even a little similar 
to MTV’s Scream, which has gone with a more low-key approach to the slasher 
genre than Scream Queens’ in-your-face style. But the buzzword of the panel was 
“satire”.

FX/FXX
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Ftcas-muppets-tyra-banks-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe66f731a624d6e7d6c2dca48653f628c7fe9d34b%2F0_0_2971_1782%2F2971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Muppets%20upstage%20Tyra%20Banks%20%E2%80%93%20what%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20TCAs%2C%20week%20two&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Ftcas-muppets-tyra-banks-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Muppets%20upstage%20Tyra%20Banks%20%E2%80%93%20what%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20TCAs%2C%20week%20two&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Ftcas-muppets-tyra-banks-empire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe66f731a624d6e7d6c2dca48653f628c7fe9d34b%2F0_0_2971_1782%2F2971.jpg>
 The Strain: infectious Photograph: Frank Micelotta/REX Shutterstock 
On the “bad news” front, Louis CK will be taking another long break before 
working on season six of Louie. Call it the struggle of auteurship if you must; 
FX boss John Landgraf acknowledged a comparison withHBO’s Curb Your Enthusiasm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/05/curb-your-enthusiasm-season-9-jeff-garlin-larry-david>
. But FX had good news in renewing The Strain for a third season and picking up 
the Pamela Adlon-starring, Louis CK-produced comedy Better Things. FX also 
announced a shake-up in scheduling, moving its animated spy comedy Archer to 
FXX, where The League and You’re The Worst live, to be paired up with new 
animated series Cassius & Clay (co-created by Megan Ganz and Archer’s Adam 
Reed). And as for The League, look forward to returning characters from the 
series’ seven-season run, including Leslie Bibb as Pete’s ex-wife Meegan.

Louie isn't a sitcom about nothing – it's a comedy about everything
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/10/louie-louis-ck-season-five-premiere>
The American Horror Story: Hotel panel was a chance for cast members to 
describe their “sexy” characters. But the big news from the panel was Ryan 
Murphy elaborating on the fact that every season of American Horror Story takes 
place in the same universe. In fact, “starting around episode six or seven” of 
Hotel, characters from past seasons will begin to check into the hotel. As for 
the vibe of the season, Murphy discussed how “it’s almost become a personality 
test when people come up and tell [him] ... their favorite season”. Each season 
brings a different tone, but Hotel will harken back to that first season, 
Murder House, which Murphy describes as the one “true horror fans” loved.

Wrapping up the FX panels were Kurt Sutter’s follow-up to Sons of Anarchy, The 
Bastard Executioner, and Fargo (season two), two period pieces for two very 
different times, with two very different tones. As John Landgraf started the 
day talking about just how much television programming exists right now – 267 
English-language, non-children’s programming scripted series, which he believes 
will easily surpass 400 by the end of the year – it became apparent throughout 
the day that FX is dedicated to making its every contribution wholly original.
 