
Just that title alone would get it into every year-end list going, but Roy 
Andersson’s sublime, baffling, utterly beguiling parable is one-of-a-kind 
cinema of the highest order. Filmgoers familiar with his earlier work, Songs 
from the Second Floor and You, the Living – released in 2000 and 2007 
respectively – will know something of what to expect: fixed camera positions, 
middle-aged men moving ponderously through miserably surreal tableaux, a 
bilious yellow-green pallor drenching everything, humour deadpan to the point 
of sclerosis.

A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence review – a unique 
hallucinatory trilogy | Peter Bradshaw’s film of the week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/23/a-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-review>
But this does scant justice to the “Beckettian loneliness and hyperreal 
drabness” – as Guardian critic Peter Bradshaw described it – that Andersson 
somehow conjures up; in fact, this is the poetry of the misshapen, the 
uncertain, and the ignored. Andersson sets up a series of (mostly) disconnected 
scenes, offering one episode after another of increasingly flamboyant 
desperation, criss-crossed occasionally by interconnected characters. A couple 
of the scenes have already become famous: one, where an anachronistic cavalry 
squadron – supposedly led by Sweden’s King Charles XII – takes over a 
modern-day cafe; and another, where a barkeep called “Limping Lotta” leads her 
customers in aslow, formal song and dance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jX87rVZ0Vag> to the tune of John Brown’s Body.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fpigeon-sat-branch-reflecting-existence-roy-andersson-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429803572907%2FKP_194417_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Pigeon%20Sat%20on%20a%20Branch%20Reflecting%20on%20Existence%20director%20Roy%20Andersson%3A%20'I%20feel%20friendly%20to%20pigeons'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fpigeon-sat-branch-reflecting-existence-roy-andersson-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Pigeon%20Sat%20on%20a%20Branch%20Reflecting%20on%20Existence%20director%20Roy%20Andersson%3A%20%27I%20feel%20friendly%20to%20pigeons%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fpigeon-sat-branch-reflecting-existence-roy-andersson-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429803572907%2FKP_194417_crop_640x480.jpg>
 A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence director Roy Andersson: ‘I 
feel friendly to pigeons’ 
Andersson says himself the film was inspired by the birds in Breugel’s Hunters 
in the Snow 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d8/Pieter_Bruegel_the_Elder_-_Hunters_in_the_Snow_(Winter)_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg>
, and that’s as good an explanation as any of the extraordinary parade of 
imagery that he has come up with. (It’s instructive also to compare Andersson’s 
feature films withhis prolific commercials output 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wzbQbHWrR3E>.) The tone of the film grows 
increasingly dark as it moves on; a departure, for sure, from the empathetic 
humiliations that dominate the first two parts of this Andersson trilogy. The 
director has some angry things to say about exploitation: there’s a 
particularly awful scene involving a monkey experiment which I was relieved to 
find out was accomplished with a very realistic looking puppet. For a film so 
apparently committed to observation, detachment and, yes, reflection, it’s an 
unexpected development.

The best films of 2015 in the UK: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/best-films-of-2015-uk>
Pigeon may not go on to win much on the awards circuit (though it did 
unexpectedly carry off the Golden Lion at Venice in 2014), but its 
unreplicatable oddness and imagist verve should ensure it will be remembered 
when other, more apparently palatable films, fall by the wayside. It really is 
something special.
 