
The week that Albert Einstein died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/apr/19/death-of-albert-einstein-1955>
 he endorsed with Bertrand Russell a declaration calling, in the name of 
science and common sense, for the renunciation of war in an age in which 
nuclear weapons are threatening “the continued existence of mankind.” On 
SaturdayLord Russell 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1950/russell-bio.html>
 published thetext of the declaration 
<http://www.ppu.org.uk/learn/texts/doc_russelleinstein_manif.html>, signed also 
by six other scientists. On the same day he posted letters to Sir Anthony Eden, 
President Eisenhower, Marshal Bulganin, Mr Chou En-lai, President Coty of 
France, and Mr St Laurent, the Prime Minister of Canada.


He asked them to consider the declaration and said: “It is my earnest hope 
that you will give public expression to your opinion as to the problem dealt 
with in this statement, which is the most serious that has ever confronted the 
human race.” The declaration concludes with a draft resolution. Lord Russell 
and his colleagues suggest that it could be adopted by a conference of 
scientists, summoned to determine impartially and without political prejudice 
the facts about the consequences of exploding nuclear weapons. The resolution 
says:

In view of the fact that in any future world war nuclear weapons will 
certainly be employed and that such weapons threaten the continued existence of 
mankind, we urge the Governments of the world to realise and to acknowledge 
publicly that their purposes cannot be furthered by a world war and we urge 
them, consequently, to find peaceful means for the settlement of all matters in 
dispute between them.

Two Reservations
The declaration has already been signed by six professors besides Albert 
Einstein and Bertrand Russell. They are Professor P. W. Bridgman of Harvard, 
winner of the Nobel Prize for physics , Professor L. Infeld of the University 
of Warsaw; Professor H. J. Muller of the University of Indiana, winner of a 
Nobel Prize for physiology and medicine, Professor C. F. Powell of Bristol 
University, winner of the Nobel Prize for physics,Professor J. Rotblat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/sep/02/obituaries.obituaries> of the 
University of London; and Professor Hideki Yukawa of the University of Kyoto, 
Japan, winner of the Nobel Prize for physics. Professor Joliot-Curie, the 
French nuclear physicist and another Nobel prize-winner, has also agreed to 
sign but has made two reservations. The more important concerns the suggestion 
that war should be abolished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Frussell-einstein-peace-manifesto-archive-1955%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4238a95c2338688222c3e6d4c44dc07bf77e7d51%2F0_0_1892_1135%2F1892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Russell-Einstein%20peace%20manifesto%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2011%20July%201955&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Frussell-einstein-peace-manifesto-archive-1955%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Russell-Einstein%20peace%20manifesto%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2011%20July%201955&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Frussell-einstein-peace-manifesto-archive-1955%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4238a95c2338688222c3e6d4c44dc07bf77e7d51%2F0_0_1892_1135%2F1892.jpg>
 Bertrand Russell at the Hague Conference, 1948. Photograph: Hulton Getty 
Explaining Professor Joliot-Curie’s reservation, Lord Russell said on Saturday 
that he thought the professor did not wish to renounce, on behalf of subject 
peoples, the right to revolt. As Lord Russell understood it, the professor’s 
view was that many injustices could be remedied only by revolution and that the 
right to revolt against tyranny must be preserved. Lord Russell made it clear 
that this was his interpretation of Professor Joliot-Curie’s opinion. It was an 
opinion that he (Lord Russell) did not share.


Nevertheless all the present signatories and Professor Joliot-Curie as well 
agree that modern nuclear weapons represent so grave a threat to the survival 
of the human race that it is now urgent that Governments should formally and in 
practice abolish warfare.


Explaining the declaration on Saturday, Lord Russell said that it showed that 
in a nuclear war neither side could hope for victory and that there was a very 
real danger that the human race would be exterminated by dust and rain from 
radioactive clouds. It pointed out that neither the Governments nor the public 
were aware of the true dangers, and that an agreement to prohibit nuclear 
weapons might be useful but would not provide a solution, since they would 
undoubtedly be manufactured and used if a war broke out. “The only hope for 
mankind is the avoidance of war. To call for a way of thinking which shall make 
such avoidance possible is the purpose of this statement.”


The Manifesto led directly to a conference of scientists, held in Pugwash 
<https://pugwash.org/>, Nova Scotia in 1957. The aim was to work towards 
reducing the danger of armed conflict and seek solutions to global security 
threats.
 