
2000 


January In the US, America Online merges with Time Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jan/11/qanda.patrickbarkham>; and in 
the UK Greg Dyke becomes 13th BBC director general, ending the eight-year John 
Birt era. Bolstered by a generous licence fee settlement, Dyke moves main news 
from 9pm to the 10pm slot vacated by ITV and allocates £115m extra a year to 
BBC1, a 15% increase.

May Radio Authority fines Virgin £75,000 
<http://www.ofcom.org.uk/static/archive/rau/newsroom/news-release/00/pr072.htm> 
for Chris Evans's on-air endorsement of Ken Livingstone as London mayoral 
candidate.

July Big Brother 
<http://video.google.co.uk/videosearch?hl=en&q=first+Big+Brother&um=1&ie=UTF-8&ei=jlsiS87QFJWJ4Qbjl5X5CQ&sa=X&oi=video_result_group&ct=title&resnum=5&ved=0CCAQqwQwBA#hl=en&q=first+Big+Brother&um=1&ie=UTF-8&ei=jlsiS87QFJWJ4Qbjl5X5CQ&sa=X&oi=video_result_group&ct=title&resnum=5&ved=0CCAQqwQwBA&qvid=first+Big+Brother&vid=2447976940033434381>
 ushers in a decade of reality entertainment shows after becoming an instant 
hit for Channel 4 with the final peaking at 9.9 million. It heralds a TV-led 
internet age, with live streaming. And also ensures the rise of Heat magazine, 
relaunched earlier in the year by its new editor, Mark Frith. BSkyB ends the 
year with4.6 million <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2000/jul/27/bskyb> 
subscribers while Carlton and Granada's challenger ONdigital has 1 million. 
Almost a third of the population have multi-channel TV.

2001


January E4 launches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/jan/19/channel4.broadcasting1> as a pay 
channel, with rights to Friends and ER.

April Condé Nast launches Glamour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/mar/05/pressandpublishing.mondaymediasection>
 magazine in pioneering "handbag" size, and it swiftly becomes the top monthly.

September 9/11 changes everything. The dotcom bubble bursts, destroying the 
value of companies such as AOL, checking Yahoo's rise, and denting confidence 
in online investments. UK TV advertising collapses by 10%.

Escapism rules – Pop Idol launches on ITV in October, making a star of Simon 
Cowell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell>, and starting a global 
phenomenon of the rise of "shiny floor" entertainment. The revolutionary Sky+ 
service launches. Access Radio pilot experiments pave the way to a rapid spread 
of community radio.

2002


March ITV Digital collapses, losing Carlton and Granada £1.2bn. Greg Dyke's 
consortium later recycles the digital proposition asFreeview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/freeview>, and Granada and Carlton reject 
opportunity to join it. Mark Thompson joins C4 as chief executive and, in an 
uncertain climate, opens talks with Channel Five on merger.

The free Metro <https://www.theguardian.com/media/metro> newspaper moves into 
profit. Robert Thomson replaces Peter Stothard as Times editor and the BBC 
presses ahead with bbc.co.uk website expansion.

2003 


July The communications act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/communications-act> creates one powerful 
regulator, Ofcom. The act allows US media companies to own broadcasters such as 
ITV, though European companies cannot own US networks. A new code of conduct 
hands programme rights to independent producers from broadcasters, which, 
together with the BBC "Window of Creative Competition", leads to a five-year 
boom in business.

May Andrew Gilligan broadcasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/jul/09/Iraqandthemedia.bbc> at 6am on 
Radio 4 about "sexed-up" WMD documents.

October Granada and Carlton are given permission, by the Competition 
Commission, to merge. The Independent turns from broadsheet to tabloid, with 
views on the front page, in a bid to rescue circulation, and theFinancial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes> starts charging for its 
website.

2004 


January the Hutton report <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidkelly> is 
highly critical of the BBC editorial system, prompting the departure of the 
chairman, Gavyn Davies, and Dyke. Michael Grade is appointedchairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/apr/02/broadcasting.bbc> in April and 
soon after Mark Thompson becomes director general. Luke Johnson is Ofcom's 
maverick choice as C4 chairman and he selects Andy Duncan, an architect of 
Freeview, as chief executive. Talks with Five end and a campaign for public 
assistance starts. Broadband becomes more widely available and cheaper after 
Ofcom forces through local loop unbundling on BT, making the web 2.0 era 
affordable.

May Piers Morgan is fired as Daily Mirror editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/may/17/iraqandthemedia.mirror>, after 
the paper's supposed photos of abuse of Iraqi prisoners are exposed as fakes; 
radio groups GWR and Capital announce they are to merge to form GCap – 
consolidation is favoured by Ofcom.

July The Barclay brothers buy Telegraph newspapers  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1465186/Barclay-brothers-buy-Telegraph-group.html>
for £655m from Conrad Black. Murdoch MacLennan becomes chief executive and Will 
Lewis is hired as City editor, then handed the editorship.

August Google 's IPO values it at $23bn. November The Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> goes tabloid-only, after a spell 
of printing tabloid and broadsheet versions.

2005


February Channel 4's Jamie's School Dinners 
<http://www.channel4.com/life/microsites/J/jamies_school_dinners/campaign/index.html>
, a powerful social campaigning series, sparks a national debate and reform 
over food quality and diet. Nora Sands becomes a celebrity dinner lady. Grazia 
magazine is launched.May Arianna Huffington launches the Huffington Post, her 
news website and blog.July Thinkbox is launched to promote mass-market TV 
advertising, as social networking sites such as MySpace – bought by Rupert 
Murdoch in the same month for $580m – divert younger people.September The 
Guardian is relaunched in Berliner format.

October ITV presses ahead with its 50th anniversary party at London's 
Guildhall, attended by the Queen. The broadcaster buys Friends Reunited for 
£120m.November Andrew Gowers is ousted as editor of the Financial Times and 
replaced byLionel Barber <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lionelbarber>. 
December The BBC starts nine ultra-local news pilots, to the consternation of 
the newspaper industry. The BBC Trust later pulls the service, and allocates 
£68m to improving existing services.

2006


March John Micklethwait is appointed editor of the Economist 
<http://www.economistgroup.com/our_news/press_releases/2006/john_micklethwait_appointed_editor_of_the_economist.html>
, with the goal of bumping up circulation from 1m globally, which duly happens. 
Charles Allen launches cITV but cuts regional news, halves regional programmes, 
and shunts off afternoon slots on ITV. He leaves ITV bySeptember amid 
shareholders' unrest over the weak share price. Greg Dyke leads a consortium of 
private equity bidders for ITV, at 135p a share. ITV directors reject the bid. 
BSkyB pounces, spending £920m on a 17.8% stake in ITV to block Virgin Media. 
News International launches the freeLondon Paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/aug/28/newsinternational.associatednewspapers1>
 and Associated responds withLondon Lite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/aug/23/newsinternational.associatednewspapers>
. Facebook becomes open to everyone over 13.

October Google begins acquisitions by buying YouTube for $1.65bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/oct/09/digitalmedia.googlethemedia>. 
November Michael Grade abruptly resigns as chair of the BBC Trust. The BBC 
licence fee settlement includes a ringfenced digital switchover fund.

2007


January Grade joins ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/nov/27/broadcasting.bbc> as executive 
chairman. His turnaround plan aims to boost production. Dawn Airey, director of 
global content, walks out six months later to return to Five. In the same 
month, Celebrity Big Brother is sullied by racism and bullying rows involving
Shilpa Shetty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jan/18/bigbrother.raceintheuk> and Jade 
Goody; and the BBC Trust replaces the governors, and then shuts down the online 
educational service Jam.

March Twitter sees a surge in tweet numbers at the South by Southwest 
festival, and becomes a freestanding company the following month.April Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> overtakes MySpace 
internationally in monthly unique users according to comScore.May Britain's Got 
Talent launches, attracting 11.6 million viewers and kicking off Paul Potts's 
singing career – Cowell has his second big hit.

July In a year of outrage over phoneline fakery, premium-rated quiz scams and 
worse,Blue Peter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jul/10/broadcastingethics.broadcasting> 
gets its first-ever fine of £50,000. Former Telegraph ownerConrad Black is 
fined and jailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/dec/10/conradblack.pressandpublishing>
 for diverting company funds for personal use.August Rupert Murdoch pays $5bn 
to acquire Dow Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/aug/01/citynews.pressandpublishing> and 
hence the Wall Street Journal.

September The culture secretary, James Purnell, announces the Convergence 
Think Tank <http://www.culture.gov.uk/Convergence/> to prepare for new digital 
legislation.

October BBC Worldwide buys Lonely Planet for £118m, provoking an outcry from 
rival publishers.Peter Fincham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/06/themonarchy.bbc> is ousted as 
BBC1 controller after doctored scenes of the Queen are used. Stephen Lambert of 
RDF, whose tape was to blame, resigns from RDF. Facebook is valued at $15bn 
when Microsoft takes a small stake.December Emap radio and magazines are sold 
to Bauer.

2008


January ITV reinstates News at Ten with Sir Trevor McDonald, but it struggles 
to reach its target of 3 million viewers. C4 cancels Celebrity Big Brother and 
Oneword digital radio channel is replaced by birdsong.March ITV's new-style 
dramas, The Palace and Moving Wallpaper/Echo Beach, flop and Simon Shaps is 
replaced by Fincham.April Roger Alton becomes the Independent's editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/apr/11/independentnewsmedia.theindependent>
 after quitting the Observer.May Jay Hunt becomes BBC1 controller and quickly 
revamps Countryfile into a Sunday night hit.GCap is fined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jun/26/gcapmedia.radio> £1.1m for 
irregularities in competitions.July Max Mosley wins £60,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/24/privacy.newsoftheworld2> in 
damages against the News of the World for breaching his privacy over 
Nazi-themed spanking sessions.

September Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> proposes divesting 
the BBC of some or all of BBC Worldwide, to assist C4, but has to back off.

October The BBC is rocked by Sachsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/29/russell-brand-jonathan-ross2> – 
broadcasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/03/russell-brand-jonathan-ross-bbc-fine>
 by Jonathan Ross and Russell Brand – which results in the resignation of Radio 
2's controller,Lesley Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/30/russell-brand-jonathan-ross1>, 
and a review of editorial controls. C4 pulls out of digital radio.November 
Janice Hadlow <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/01/bbc.television>
becomes BBC2 controller and promises a wider range of culture and history, and 
no more programmes about Nazis. Paul Dacre, editor-in-chief of the Mail,attacks 
Justice Eady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/10/pauldacre-dailymail?showAllComments=true>
, who awarded Mosley the damages, for constructing a creeping privacy law under 
the umbrella of the Human Rights Act.

2009


The latest culture secretary, Stephen Carter, begins the year with a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/organgrinder/2009/jun/16/digital-britain-report>
 of digital services. In unveiling his report six months later, he announces 
his own departure, leaving others to shepherd the proposals (a £6 annual levy 
on phone lines to fund broadband rollout, as well as pilots for independently 
funded news consortia in three areas) through parliament.

March ITV confirms cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/14/itv-more-programme-budget-cuts> 
to its programme budget from £1bn to £750m, and heavy redundancies and closures 
at its northern bases, Leeds and Manchester, and write-offs of £2.7bn. Jade 
Goody'slast days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/03/jade-goody-living-tv> are shown 
on Living TV.

June Criticised by the Public Accounts Committee, the BBC starts to implement 
a 25% cut to star pay as both the DG and theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> begin fierce opposition to any 
form of sharing the licence fee. Critics circle the trust, led by the 
opposition culture spokesman, Jeremy Hunt

August BSkyB – which had marked its 20th anniversary in February – cements its 
power by announcing turnover of £5.3bn, three times that of ITV, and 
subscribers approaching 10 million. With Freeview already in 10m homes, the 
decade will end with digital TV in 92% of households.

The same month's MacTaggart lecture from James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2009/aug/29/james-murdoch-edinburgh-festival-mactaggart>
, News Corp's Europe and Asia overlord, sees him attack Ofcom and the BBC. His 
assertion that "the only reliable, durable, perpetual guarantor of independence 
is profit" starts off industry debate about paying for content and the value of 
news and journalism.

November ITV chooses Archie Norman  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/23/archie-norman-itv>as chairman, 
with Grade leaving, and by the following month the network is enjoying a 
ratings boom thanks largely to The X Factor.December AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/dec/10/digital-media-aol-split-independent-official-new-launch-logo-content>
 resumes life as an independent internet company as it completes its spinoff 
from Time Warner Inc, thus closing the book on one of the most disastrous 
business combinations in history.

Additional reporting by John Dugdale
 