
Get Outkast carved on to Stone Mountain, demand fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/16/add-carvings-of-outkast-to-giant-confederate-monument-says-petition>


If the signatories of a recent petition 
<http://petitions.moveon.org/sign/georgia-add-outkast-to> end up having their 
way, Atlanta natives Big Boi and André 3000 will be immortalised in stone, 
riding in a Cadillac alongside the Confederate leaders Stonewall Jackson, 
Robert E Lee and Jefferson Davis. Creators of the petition want to see Outkast 
etched on to the face of Stone Mountain, and are looking for 7,500 signatures 
before taking the issue to Georgia state house, Georgia state senate and 
governor Nathan Deal. At the time of writing, they’re 33 signatures away from 
their goal.

A Scottish man trolled everyone after T in the Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/13/t-in-the-park-sos-tweet-a-riddle-wrapped-in-a-mystery-inside-a-tent-bag>

It all started with a tweet. Free-flowing and punctuation-less, Scott 
Johnston’s sentence described the horror of being trapped in a tent bag in a 
rapidly emptying festival field. Then, things got really weird. The Scottish 
police force and transport authority responded to the tweet, asking Johnston to 
get back in touch with them. Not long afterwards, another tweet announced he 
was free and had “never been so happy to see the rain”. All an elaborate ruse? 
Or some friends having a bit of fun while packing up? Even with this Scottish
newspaper story 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/park-prankster-who-sent-twitter-6057532>
, we may never know.
Scott Johnston (@ScottJohnston8) 
@Tinthepark <https://twitter.com/Tinthepark> hi im somewhere in green 7 
someone has packed me into a tent bag for a joke and I can't get out I don't 
have much battery left
 <https://twitter.com/ScottJohnston8/status/620520490860474369> July 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ScottJohnston8/status/620520490860474369> 
Ariana Grande won’t be charged for licking those donuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/13/ariana-grande-licking-doughnut-charges>

Finally, there may be an end in sight to the bizarre pop story gift that kept 
on giving. Last week, singerAriana Grande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariana-grande> apologised (twice) for 
licking display donuts in a shop and saying “I hate America”. Now, her sugary 
sins have been absolved, at least in the eyes of the law: the owner of the 
donut shop in question doesn’t want to press charges against Grande.

50 Cent was ordered to pay $5m in a sex tape case … 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/13/50-cent-ordered-to-pay-woman-5m-in-sex-tape-case>

50 Cent <https://www.theguardian.com/music/50cent> took the concept of revenge 
porn and potentially made it worse. Who knew that was possible? Last Friday, 
the rapper and entrepreneur was ordered to pay a woman named Lastonia Leviston 
$5m (£3.2m). He’d narrated a sex tape that she’d made with her partner and it 
was distributed online without her consent.

Leviston isn’t an ex-lover of 50’s, but she has a child with rapper Rick Ross, 
with whom 50 has been feuding for years. Apparently a great way for 50 to hit 
out at Ross involved making sexually explicit remarks about Leviston, in 
character as “Pimpin’ Curly”, and generally exhibiting nasty behaviour towards 
a woman.

… Before he suddenly filed for bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/13/50-cent-rapper-files-bankruptcy>

Three days later, 50 Cent filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy. That’s essentially an 
official title for a bankruptcy that protects your assets from liquidation, and 
gives you a chance to get your financial affairs in order. 50 Cent called the 
bankruptcy a “strategic business move”. It’s one that places him in the company 
of artists such as Tom Petty and Meat Loaf, according to ourbrief history of 
pop music bankruptcies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jul/15/a-history-of-bankruptcy-in-pop-50-cent-marvin-gaye-willie-nelson-tlc-mc-hammer>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2F50-cent-bankrupt-debt-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436835237021%2F50-Cent-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20Cent%20says%20bankruptcy%20filing%20is%20a%20'strategic%20business%20move'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2F50-cent-bankrupt-debt-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20Cent%20says%20bankruptcy%20filing%20is%20a%20%27strategic%20business%20move%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2F50-cent-bankrupt-debt-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436835237021%2F50-Cent-001.jpg>
 50 Cent explaining his bankruptcy in an interview 
Pharrell and Robin Thicke won back $2m in the Blurred Lines case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/15/pharrell-williams-wins-back-2m-in-blurred-lines-case>


I meant it when I said, back in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/20/paul-mccartney-3d-printed-kanye-glastonbury-adele-21-biggest-selling-album-week-in-music>
, that this case wasn’t really over. On Tuesday a judge shaved about $2m off 
the $7.4m in damages that Pharrell and Robin Thicke were ordered to pay Marvin 
Gaye’s family in the Blurred Lines copyright infringement case. Record label 
Universal, on the other hand, will still be considered liable for distributing 
Blurred Lines. The label is due to pay Gaye’s family 50% of the song’s future 
songwriting and publishing royalties revenue.

A newspaper sent a cartoonist to cover a Foo Fighters gig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/14/newspaper-challenges-foo-fighters-photo-policy-sending-cartoonist-cover-gig>

Gig photographers aren’t best pleased with Foo Fighters at the moment. The 
band’s controversial photography contracts have been deemed restrictive and 
disempowering for photographers, leading one paper touse fan-shot pictures 
<http://www.washingtoncitypaper.com/blogs/artsdesk/general/2015/07/10/we-couldnt-photograph-the-foo-fighters-heres-what-we-did-instead/>
 and another to send a cartoonist to sketch the band instead. If this is what 
it takes to start a conversation about photographers handing over the rights to 
their images after one use, and fighting for named credits, then so be it.

Taylor Swift brought more powerful women on stage  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/11/taylor-swift-1989-world-tour-womens-soccer-team>

Swift loves surrounding herself with other famous women. She did it in her 
cameo-filledBad Blood video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/18/taylor-swift-debuts-star-studded-video-for-bad-blood-single-remix>
. And she did it when she brought Serena Williams and models Cara Delevingne 
and Karlie Kloss onstage during her Hyde Park British Summer Time performance 
in London in June. Last Saturday, in New Jersey’s Metlife stadium, she was 
joined onstage by the US’s winning World Cup football team. Predictably, the 
audience chanted “USA” after the team left the stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Foutkast-stone-mountain-bankrupt-50-cent-t-park-ariana-grande-week-in-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437125278049%2F2ac43460-f0b1-4d65-bf77-f83a0eb63dc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20week%20in%20music%3A%20Outkast%20for%20Stone%20Mountain%2C%20bankrupt%2050%20Cent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Foutkast-stone-mountain-bankrupt-50-cent-t-park-ariana-grande-week-in-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20week%20in%20music%3A%20Outkast%20for%20Stone%20Mountain%2C%20bankrupt%2050%20Cent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Foutkast-stone-mountain-bankrupt-50-cent-t-park-ariana-grande-week-in-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437125278049%2F2ac43460-f0b1-4d65-bf77-f83a0eb63dc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Taylor Swift, the World Cup champs and, for whatever reason, Heidi Klum. 
Photograph: Larry Busacca/LP5/Getty Images for TAS 
Neil Young said he’d start pulling his music off streaming services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/16/neil-young-bans-his-music-from-streaming-due-to-worst-sound-quality>


Neil Young, creator of high-res audio player Pono, doesn’t believe in music 
streaming. According to two Facebookposts 
<https://www.facebook.com/NeilYoung/photos/a.10155641820845317.1073741825.21931600316/10155765667375317/?type=1>
 shared on Wednesday, “streaming is the worst audio in history 
<https://www.facebook.com/NeilYoung/photos/a.10155641820845317.1073741825.21931600316/10155765937670317/?type=1>
” and Young’s no longer interested in making his music available in such low 
quality. At the time of writing, several of his albums were still on Spotify, 
but he wrote that his tunes were “being removed from all streaming services”.

A tweet may have scuppered Maroon 5’s China tour plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/17/maroon-5-dalai-lama-tweet-may-have-led-to-cancelled-china-concerts>

So much for the band’s scheduled Beijing and Shanghai concerts in September. 
Fans have speculated that one of the band members’ recent tweets in support of 
the Dalai Lama may be linked to the gig cancellations, though the official word 
from promoter Live Nation mentions nothing of the sort. China’s ruling 
communist party has described the Dalai Lama as a “wolf in monk’s robes”. In 
the past, performers who appear to affiliate themselves with the spiritual 
leader have beenreprimanded 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/rock-tours-target-china-face-government-interference-rolling-stones-2008-feature-20110407>
by the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/04/china.musicnews> or temporarily 
banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/mar/03/oasis-china-banned-concerts-tibet>
.
 