
The fight for democracy in Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
is, these days, centred on the tiny, oil-rich country of Gabon. It is not a new 
fight, by any means. In 2009, after the death of longtime leader Omar Bongo – 
who had ruled the former French colony for more than 40 years – riots broke out 
in several cities when it was announced that his son, Ali Bongo, was slated to 
become the next president. Opposition leaders called foul after presidential 
election results were announced, and they attempted to organise a nationwide 
strike. Now, seven years on, Ali Bongo has run up against a new, wider wave of 
protests, after he claimed he had won re-election, on 27 August, with a lead of 
just over 5,000 votes in a nation of 1.8 million. Street clashes with police 
led to several deaths. Opposition supporters set fire to the parliament 
building. Yet Mr Bongo remains defiant. He has accused his critics of 
attempting a coup and he has rejected calls for a recount of votes and even for 
election results to be published in detail. At one point he had his main 
opponent, Jean Ping, who says the election is being stolen, placed under house 
arrest. There were also government efforts to impose a media blackout, 
including by cutting off the internet. The situation on the streets has since 
eased, but tensions still run high in this central African country.

Gabon’s crisis is watched closely by France and neighbouring African states. 
France has a key military base as well as important economic interests in the 
region and has called for a recount, but it wants to be careful not to appear 
to meddle directly for fear of being accused of neocolonial reflexes. Whether 
outside mediation can help resolve a situation where two men, Mr Bongo and Mr 
Ping,both claim to be the legally elected president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/both-sides-in-gabon-presidential-election-claim-victory-ahead-of-count>
 will now be put to the test: the African Union announced this week that it 
would send a delegation to Gabon.

None of this is made easier by the complex web of family ties that have long 
stood at the heart of Gabonese politics. Mr Ping, 73 years old, a former 
president of the African Union commission, was one of Omar Bongo’s closest and 
longest-serving ministers and married one of his daughters. He now describes 
Gabon as “a dictatorship pure and simple, run by a clan” – a “dynastic regime” 
that must be ended. But there is hardly any doubt that he has solid reasons to 
complain about vote manipulation. A mission of European Union observerssaid 
there were “obvious anomalies” 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-gabon-election-election-idUSKCN11C112?il=0>. 
Mr Ping hopes international pressure will bear down on Mr Bongo, who clearly 
believes time is on his side because no external player is ready to consider 
anything like outright intervention.

Many of Gabon’s citizens certainly want its political course to change. Its 
population is poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/16/gabon-yawning-poverty-gap-end-dependency-oil>
 and the economy has slumped with the fall of global oil prices. Families 
struggle for food day to day. Mr Bongo’s rule has been tainted by many 
allegations of corruption,not least the ownership of luxury cars and apartments 
in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/06/france-africa-autocrats-corruption-inquiry>
. Gabon has only had three presidents since its independence in 1960. Mr Bongo, 
57, may have tried to project the image of a younger leader, but his repressive 
methods are fast placing him in the same category as other strongmen who hang 
on to power as if mandates were for life. The unrest that has broken out 
reflects deep-seated popular anger. Gabon’s civil society, like those elsewhere 
in Africa, wants its voice to be heard, and democratic procedures to be 
respected. The votes should be recounted.
 