
The sides of the river Gelt glow with beech leaves, flat ovals of burnt orange 
sticking to wet ledges. We take the footpath into thewoods at Low Geltbridge 
<http://www.visitcumbria.com/car/gelt-woods/>, crossing the little Powterneth 
beck where it joins the main course. Vines of honeysuckle drape the trees, 
their scarlet berries vivid in the flat light. Acorns pummel our shoulders and 
lie splattered across the path. On hearing voices, adipper 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/dipper> skims downstream.

As the trees lose their cover it becomes clearer how the Gelt twists its way 
along the bottom of this U-shaped gorge. The very first river here ran as 
meltwater under ice, carrying with it boulders and debris as it funnelled its 
way down to the Solway, scouring out the bedrock known as theTriassic St Bees 
sandstone <http://www.bgs.ac.uk/lexicon/lexicon.cfm?pub=SBS>. During the last 
ice age there was a massive confluence in this area, with Scottish glaciers 
moving south, those forming theTyne Gap 
<http://www.northumberlandnationalpark.org.uk/about/conservation-enhancement/landscape/national-park-landscape/tyne-gap-hadrians-wall/>
 lumbering west and those creating the Eden valley pushing north.

A walk upriver … to the sound of goldcrests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/24/a-walk-upriver-to-the-sound-of-goldcrests>
The modern river has sunk down into a narrow channel, rushing down the gorge, 
carving the rock into strange shapes like rolling muscles or slumped candle 
wax. In places it has formed jutting shelves or scooped out shadowy niches. 
Where the Gelt bubbles and narrows, the force has washed the sandstone clean, 
revealing a rich terracotta colour. It makes us wish to trycanyoning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/29/scotland.extremesportsholidays>
, to slip and slide down the water chutes, exhilarating in the fast flow.


The beeches give way to alder, ash, oak and birch. As the path winds uphill it 
passes towering cliffs, made by quarrying the fine-grained stone. Ferns, mosses 
and saxifrages luxuriate along the vertical faces in Victorian garden 
abundance. The Romans were the first to work out this area during repairs to 
nearby Hadrian’s Wall. Their rhythmical chisel marks form herringbone patterns, 
zigzagging across the red walls. We search in dim light for their inscriptions, 
collectively known as theWritten Rock of Gelt 
<https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/the-list/list-entry/1014582>, 
frustrated not to find the crudely carved face we’d read about. It’s thrilling 
enough, though, to run our fingers along the damp grooves of chisel marks made 
so many centuries ago, their outlines barely blurred by time and weathering.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>






 