
Afro Celt Sound System – The Source

The group’s first album in a decade toned down the electronica of earlier 
incarnations for a more acoustic, but no less propulsive, approach.

What we said: It’s an often giddy mashup: nowhere else will you hear a female 
African chorus alongside Gaelic rap and jazz bagpipes. Yet the group also 
conjures moments of beauty likeMansani Cissé/Tàladh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8zFOuaBNYI>, where harp, kora and lyrical 
vocals entwine majestically.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/01/afro-celt-sound-system-the-source-review-daring-triumphant>
.

Anohni – Hopelessness


This protest album dared to tackle everything from Obama to climate change, 
and sparkled through the production ofHudson Mohawke <http://hudsonmohawke.com/>
 andOneohtrix Point Never <http://pointnever.com/>.

What we said: Perhaps that’s the most peculiar thing about Hopelessness: when 
Anohni <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anohni> sings about mass graves and 
drone strikes, it doesn’t feel like a lecture. It can be strangely empowering. 
For all its bleakness, Hopelessness leaves you feeling anything but.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/05/anohni-hopelessness-review-the-most-profound-protest-record-in-decades>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fus%2Fpost%2Fidsa.c9f49974-e62f-11e5-a769-f18b118b72da&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fus%2Fpost%2Fidsa.c9f49974-e62f-11e5-a769-f18b118b72da>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fus%2Fpost%2Fidsa.c9f49974-e62f-11e5-a769-f18b118b72da&media=>
Listen to Anohni’s Drone Bomb Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Pei4SnavUk>. 
David Bowie – Blackstar


Bowie’s swansong dazzled critics upon release, and seemed even more poignant 
when he died shortly afterwards – leaving messages of goodbye in his songs.

What we said: You’re struck by the sense of Bowie at his most commanding, 
twisting a genre to suit his own ends … It’s a rich, deep and strange album 
that feels like Bowie moving restlessly forward, his eyes fixed ahead: the 
position in which he’s always made his greatest music.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>


Be – One

An ambient drone album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/bee-band-the-hive-kev-bales-martin-bencsik-wolfgang-buttress-nottingham-arts-theatre-be-one>
 powered by 40,000 bees, this record transcended its roots as an art project to 
become something joyous and revelatory.

What we said: One is a transcendental drone symphony between man and bee that 
is surely one of the year’s most beguiling offerings.

Read more.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/bee-band-the-hive-kev-bales-martin-bencsik-wolfgang-buttress-nottingham-arts-theatre-be-one>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUevWXcSkiNg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUevWXcSkiNg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUevWXcSkiNg&media=>
Listen to Be’s Into <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UevWXcSkiNg>. 
Beyoncé – Lemonade

With this empowered sixth album, Bey turned the spotlight on the flaws in her 
marriage – with shocking and powerful results.

What we said: On much of Lemonade, Beyoncé sounds genuinely imperious. She’s 
not the only major pop star willing to experiment and push at the boundaries of 
her sound, but unlike efforts by others, Lemonade feels like it was made by 
someone very much in control. On Lemonade,Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> sounds very much like a woman not 
to be messed with.

Read more.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>

Christine and the Queens – Chaleur Humaine

A mainstream star in France, Héloïse Letissier showed the Brits how to do it 
with an album inspired by gender fluidity and avant-garde theatre.

What we said: Chaleur Humaine is a rich and rewarding album that works 
whichever way you slice it. If you want to take it as an extended musical 
treatise on queer identity and non-binary sexual orientation, there’s plenty 
here to keep you occupied. If you just want to treat it as a collection of 
beautifully wrought pop music, then it functions fantastically as that, too.

Read more.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/christine-and-the-queens-chaleur-humaine>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZzFYmz2lfT4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZzFYmz2lfT4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZzFYmz2lfT4&media=>
Listen to Sainte Claude, by Christine and the Queens 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZzFYmz2lfT4>. 
Drake – Views

The rapper could claim to be the defining pop artist of the moment with this 
eclectic – often humorous – collection of songs.

What we said: Views isn’t a perfect album – some judicious pruning of the less 
impactful tracks would make it more easily digestible, and there are certainly 
moments when you start to wishDrake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> 
would cast his gaze a little further afield than his own navel – but nothing 
about it suggests that his position is anything other than unassailable for the 
foreseeable future.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/drake-views-review-hip-hop-king-tightens-grip>

Fay Hield and the Hurricane Party – Old Adam

Stories of witchcraft and betrayal – not to mention a Tom Waits number – made 
upHield <http://www.fayhield.com/>’s first solo album in several years.

What we said: Hield is a folk scholar as well as a singer, and the new set 
offers an intriguingly varied selection of narrative songs that “help us 
explore rights and wrongs”. Classy and entertaining.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/fay-hield-and-the-hurricane-party-old-adam-review-folk>

James Blake – The Colour in Anything

The electronic producer’s third album was an accomplished portrayal of digital 
anxiety and millennial unease – wrapped in that gorgeous voice.

What we said: Nowadays, your vocal style is your calling card more than ever – 
and Blake’s is not only distinctive, it’s peerless. It’s magical in its 
evocative powers, and like Arthur Russell, he can summon a sort of joyful 
sadness that seems to transcend the song itself.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/james-blake-the-colour-in-anything-review>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsAJgs1P-uUE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsAJgs1P-uUE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsAJgs1P-uUE&media=>
Listen to James Blake’s I Need a Forest Fire (feat Bon Iver) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sAJgs1P-uUE>. 
Kanye West – The Life of Pablo 

Sprawling, inconsistent and with the tendency to make its creator look like a 
plonker, Kayne’s seventh album still had high points that only he could reach.

What we said: When The Life of Pablo is good, it’s very good indeed. What it 
isn’t is consistent. Perhaps it’s the sound of a man overreaching himself. 
Perhaps it’s the document of a mind coming increasingly unglued: you can find 
plenty of evidence here to support that interpretation.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/14/kanye-west-the-life-of-pablo-review-you-can-see-why-his-immodesty-rubs-people-up-the-wrong-way>

Knifeworld – Bottled Out of Eden

The prog-tinged psychedelia of Knifeworld’s third album was even more 
adventurous and cheerfully skewed than 2014’s stunningThe Unravelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/24/knifeworld-the-unravelling-review>
.

What we said: Students of this stuff will spot shades of Gong, Henry Cow, XTC 
andShudder to Think <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8mXJtgmGyE> lurking amid 
the angular rhythmic twists and elegantly perverse arrangements, but frontman 
and ex-Cardiac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jun/02/cult-heroes-tim-smith-led-the-cardiacs-in-the-face-of-hatred-and-much-love>
 Kavus Torabi’s greatest skill is his ability to cram incisive but wonderfully 
alien melodies into every misshapen sonic nook. This is a big, vivid, lysergic 
joy.


Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/28/knifeworld-bottled-out-of-eden-review-elegantly-perverse-psychedelia>

Margo Price – Midwest Farmer’s Daughter

Price poured her life story into this debut album – from losing her baby to 
her attempts to buy back the old family farm.

What we said: There’s an explicit debt to predecessors such as Loretta Lynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/loretta-lynn-full-circle-review-still-a-force-to-be-reckoned-with>
 and Dolly Parton, and it’s no surprise that the album has come out on Jack 
White’s Third Man records; it’s an album for whom “authenticity” is crucial, 
but it’s all the better for it.


Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/margo-price-midwest-farmers-daughter-review-debut>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3tPyBgysnCA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3tPyBgysnCA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3tPyBgysnCA&media=>
Listen to Margo Price’s Hands of Time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3tPyBgysnCA>. 

Megadeth – Dystopia

Megadeth <http://www.megadeth.com/>’s 15th album was a blistering return to 
form to the state-of-the-art bombast and refined technicality of past glories.

What we said: It’s the sense of conviction that seals the deal: MegaDave 
sounds fired-up and furious throughout, spitting venom on acerbic diatribes 
such as Post American World andFatal Illusion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MRtdd3tXI4>, and delivering The Emperor’s 
vicious hooks like a shrewd veteran with the wind very much back in his sails.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/28/megadeth-dystopia-review-a-fired-up-and-furious-return-to-form>

Parquet Courts – Human Performance


The Brookyln alt-punks spruced up their sound and embraced melody for this 
fifth album, yet retained their spiky edge.

What we said: Human Performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/10/parquet-courts-human-performance-review>
 wears its pre-punk to post-punk influences proudly. If guitar music is 
condemned to skulk in the margins for the time being, it might as well do so 
sounding as spiky and agitated as this.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/14/parquet-courts-human-performance-review>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlRG3R2FmGlY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlRG3R2FmGlY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlRG3R2FmGlY&media=>
Listen to Dust, by Parquet Courts <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lRG3R2FmGlY>.
PJ Harvey – The Hope Six Demolition Project

Polly Harvey travelled to Afghanistan, Kosovo and the grimmer parts of 
Washington DC to find inspiration for the follow-up to 2011’sLet England Shake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/10/pj-harvey-let-england-shake-review>
.

What we said: The Hope Six Demolition Project is full of moments where the 
experiments unequivocally work, to pretty devastating effect. Even when they 
don’t, it’s still a hugely enjoyable album, potent-sounding, stuffed with tunes 
great enough to drown out the occasional lyrical shortcomings.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/14/pj-harvey-the-hope-six-demolition-project-review-potent-beautiful-songs-and-minor-lyrical-missteps>

Radiohead – A Moon Shaped Pool 

The Oxford band’s string-addled ninth album proved they’re a group whose 
creative forces are in constant motion.

What we said: Radiohead’s previous attempts at creating a rousing call to arms 
have been hobbled by their innate pessimism. Here, however, the stuff about how 
the future is inside us and people have the power sounds authentically stirring.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyI2oS2hoL0k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyI2oS2hoL0k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyI2oS2hoL0k&media=>
Listen to Burn the Witch by Radiohead 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yI2oS2hoL0k>. 
Rihanna – Anti

Rihanna’s eighth album could be unsure of itself – but it was a rare instance 
of a mainstream star daring to experiment, and the results sometimes paid off.

What we said: In a risk-averse world, there’s something brave about Anti, and 
at its best, its daring pays off: it remains to be seen whether it represents a 
momentary swerve off-piste or what you might call a complete Ri-Ri-invention.


Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/28/rihanna-anti-album-review-brave-bold-and-confused>


Skepta – Konnichiwa

Packed with singles, Skepta’s fourth album embodied the thrilling UK grime 
revival – and had one eye on the other side of the Atlantic.

What we said: On the basis of Konnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/06/10-things-we-learned-from-skeptas-konnichiwa>
, any uneasiness Skepta feels about his current artistic position is unfounded: 
for a man apparently in limbo – and for all the complaints about his workload 
he relates on Text Me Back – he carries himself with real confidence throughout.

Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQOG5BkY2Bc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQOG5BkY2Bc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQOG5BkY2Bc&media=>
Listen to Skepta’s Shut Down <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQOG5BkY2Bc>. 
Vijay Iyer/Wadada Leo Smith – A Cosmic Rhythm With Each Stroke


US composer Wadada Leo Smith <http://www.wadadaleosmith.com/> and pianist 
Vijay Iyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/14/blindspot-vijay-iyer-teju-cole-review-ugly-america>
 combined for this charismatic, delicate meeting of trumpet and piano.

What we said: In his eighth decade, the pioneering US trumpeter/composer 
Wadada Leo Smith <http://www.wadadaleosmith.com/> is stepping even harder on 
the gas … this intimate conversation swells from interesting to enthralling as 
it unfolds.


Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/17/vijay-iyerwadada-leo-smith-a-cosmic-rhythm-with-each-stroke-review>


The 1975 – I Like It When You Sleep, For You Are So Beautiful Yet So Unaware 
of It

The 1975’s second album could be ludicrously over-ambitious, but there was no 
denying Matt Healy knew his way around a mainstream pop tune.

What we said: You’re left with an album that fancies itself as a challenging 
work of art, but turns out to be a collection of fantastic pop songs full of 
interesting, smart lyrics, but also peppered with self-conscious lunges for a 
gravitas it doesn’t really need. Whether that makes it a success or a failure 
depends on whose metric you use.


Read more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/25/the-1975-i-like-it-when-you-sleep-for-you-are-so-beautiful-yet-so-unaware-of-it-review-great-pop-if-not-great-art>
 