
Corruption is the cancer at the heart of so many of the world’s problems. It 
destroys jobs, traps the poorest in poverty, weakens security and even 
undermines the sports we love. The longer I have been in this job, the more I 
have come to the conclusion that the things we want to see – countries moving 
out of poverty, people benefiting from their nation’s natural resources, the 
growth of genuine democracies – will never be possible without an all-out 
assault on corruption.

I saw this for myself when I co-chaired a global panel on the sustainable 
development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
, and we sought evidence direct from the world’s poorest. Their message could 
not have been clearer: as well as an end to poverty, they wanted justice and 
freedom from corruption.

Yet for too long, even talking about corruption, never mind tackling it, has 
been taboo. On Thursday we can begin to change that. Whether it is the 
commitment of President Muhammadu Buhari in Nigeria or President Ashraf Ghani 
in Afghanistan, we know that real progress against corruption begins with 
political will – and Thursday’ssummit 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/anti-corruption-summit-london-2016>
 is the biggest demonstration of political will in tackling corruption that we 
have ever seen.

We know that the web of corruption is global, so we will create an 
international anti-corruption coordination centre

Representatives from more than 40 countries, including leaders from politics, 
business, civil society and sport, will talk honestly about the scale of the 
challenge. We will recognise that corruption affects every country, rich and 
poor, and we will work to agree practical actions in three vital areas.

First we will expose corruption, so there is nowhere for the corrupt to hide. 
Britain is the first country in the G20 tocreate a public register of 
beneficial ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/21/vince-cable-public-register-company-ownership>
, so we can show who really owns and controls every company. On Thursday the 
Netherlands, France, Nigeria and Afghanistan will commit to do the same, and at 
least six more countries will begin exploring similar arrangements.

We will take further steps to get our own house in order. Our crown 
dependencies and overseas territories have already agreed toprovide UK law 
enforcement and tax inspectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/12/overseas-territories-spared-from-uk-law-on-company-registers>
 with full access to information about who really owns companies registered 
with them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwhat-are-the-top-10-most-secretive-tax-havens-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20top%2010%20most%20secretive%20tax%20havens%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwhat-are-the-top-10-most-secretive-tax-havens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20top%2010%20most%20secretive%20tax%20havens%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwhat-are-the-top-10-most-secretive-tax-havens-video&media=>
What are the top 10 most secretive tax havens? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/12/what-are-the-top-10-most-secretive-tax-havens-video>
At Thursday’s summit many of them will go further, joining the UK and 33 other 
governments in agreeing to automatically and regularly share their entire list 
of company ownership with each other. This is huge progress. For decades people 
thought nothing would change. Now, law enforcement agencies across the world 
will be able to use this data to expose the corrupt. And I am clear that the 
ultimate destination for all must be fully transparent, public registers of 
beneficial ownership. The UK will continue to press hard to build a global 
consensus on this.

We also know that some high-value properties, especially in London, are being 
bought bypeople overseas through anonymous shell companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/28/david-cameron-fight-dirty-money-uk-property-market-corruption>
, using plundered or laundered cash. So we will insist that all foreign 
companies that own properties in the UK will also have to register publicly who 
really controls them, and that no foreign company will be able to buy UK 
property or bid for central government contracts without joining this register.

We are also consulting on reversing the burden of proof, so that if we suspect 
people of using stolen money to buy property we can force them to prove they 
accumulated their wealth legitimately – or they will face having it stripped 
from them by a court. We will clean up our property market and send a clear 
message to the corrupt that there is no home for them here.

Second, we will do everything possible to punish the corrupt and support those 
affected by corruption. We know that the web of corruption is global, so we 
will create an international anti-corruption coordination centre to help police 
and prosecutors work together to pursue the corrupt across borders, joining the 
dots to identify and prosecute the corrupt and seize their assets, including by 
using the data made available by registers of beneficial ownership.

Fantastically crony-capitalist: that’ll be Cameron-land | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/crony-capitalist-corruption-david-cameron-british-tax-havens-avoidance>
In the UK, in addition to prosecuting companies that fail to prevent bribery 
and tax evasion, we will consult on extending the criminal offence of “failure 
to prevent” to other economic crimes such as fraud and money laundering so that 
firms are properly held to account for criminal activity that takes place 
within them.

Third, we will drive out corruption by challenging corrupt behaviours around 
the world. We will establish partnerships between different countries’ 
institutions and professions to help build a shared culture of honesty and 
probity. Thursday’s summit will see at least 18 countries committing to such 
partnerships.

Of course, none of this will change things overnight. The summit is only the 
beginning of what will need to be a long-term effort. But I believe that this 
summit can put this issue where it belongs: right at the top of the 
international agenda. For if, together, we continue to show the courage and 
political will to speak and act against corruption, we can ultimately defeat 
one of the greatest enemies of progress in our time.
 