
As a regular festival-goer, I’m used to telling myself what a great thing 
hindsight is while hobbling from stage to stage with blisters on both feet and 
painfully sunburned shoulders. In all the excited planning for four night’s 
camping in a far-flung field, it’s easy to forget the simple things that can 
make festival living that bit more comfortable.

Roughing it is part of the fun, sure, but you can avoid unnecessary hardship 
by making a festival packing list. Try breaking it down into “clothes and 
accessories”, “toiletries”, “valuables” and “camping”, and make sure to include 
these oft-forgotten items that could help you out of a tight spot.

Snacks

Even if you’re not a manic mosher, you’ll be exerting more effort than you 
realise simply by being on your feet day and night. Packing nuts or cereal bars 
– something slow-burning with a good mix of fat and protein – will ensure you 
avoid energy dips.

Rhys James: 'Why did I get into stand-up so young? Jack Whitehall'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/23/rhys-james-why-did-i-get-into-stand-up-so-young-jack-whitehall>
Blister plasters

You’ll cover huge distances journeying back and forth across a festival site 
over the course of a weekend. Throw in a pair of wellies you’ve worn once 
before, and a couple of hundred people treading on your toes, and blisters are 
pretty much inevitable. A gel-based plaster to protect against further rubbing 
is an easily-overlooked necessity.

Duct tape

Think broken tent-poles, tears in your tent canvas, even holes in your 
wellies. A bit of heavy-duty tape in the bottom of your rucksack could get you 
out of a crisis, and it takes up very little space.

A torch

We’ve all been there: scrambling around in a pitch-black tent at 3am after too 
many warm ciders, searching for the zip on your sleeping bag, trying to use the 
screen of your dying phone as a light. You need a little, lightweight torch. If 
your tent has an inside hook, you can even set up a makeshift light by hanging 
your torch from it – and if it doesn’t, get your duct tape out. Duct tape is 
useful, see?

Portable phone charger

Seven festival pitfalls and how to avoid them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/13/seven-festival-pitfalls-and-how-to-avoid-them>
Calls to locate friends and irresistibly Instagrammable sunsets over the main 
stage are going to run that battery down in no time. Most festivals now offer a 
charging facility, but there are queues, they may cost money, and phones can 
disappear. Portable chargers are affordable and reliable, and even the cheapest 
models can provide you with one or two pre-loaded charges that will sort you 
out for the weekend.

Earplugs and eyemask

Chances are you’re going to want at least one decent night’s sleep to see you 
through four days and nights of exertion. Even if you’re camping some distance 
from the main arena, you’ll be with lots of loud and happy people – and tents 
are not exactly soundproof. So if you’re a light sleeper, earplugs are a must. 
Also, it’s summer, and the sun rises insanely early. If that’s going to wake 
you up, pack an eyemask and get an extra couple of hours of rest.

Clothes pegs

Grab a couple of clothes pegs before you leave home and pop them in a rucksack 
pocket. There’s bound to be a deluge at some point. When the sun finally comes 
out, squeeze out your sodden garments and peg them to your tent, or a nearby 
tree. Socks especially – nothing nicer than a dry pair on day three.

A blogger's guide to festival food on a budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/festival-ready/2016/jun/14/a-bloggers-guide-to-festival-food-on-a-budget>
The rest of my festival kit list:

 * Tent (with enough pegs)

 * Sleeping bag

 * Roll-mat

 * Inflatable pillow. Or just a pillow case – you can stuff a jumper into it

 * Plastic bags and bin bags

 * Water container

 * Blanket

 * Clothing for all weathers

 * Wellies – and long socks

 * Shoes 
 * Hat

 * Cash

 * Waterproofs

 * Sunglasses

 * Toilet roll

 * Wet wipes

 * Paracetamol

 * Any medication 

 * Dry shampoo

 * Anti-bacterial hand-wash 

 * Sun cream 

 * Toiletries 
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.

 