
The John Terry award for perfect attendance

Winner: John Terry

If we were to hand it to anybody else, Terry would no doubt appear in the 
triumphant photograph anyway. Ever since the Chelsea captain gatecrashed his
club’s Champions League victory celebrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/may/17/david-beckham-john-terry>
, decked out in full kit and shinpads, as if trying to convince the world (and 
himself) that he had played in the final (rather than watching from the 
sidelines due to being banned), wags with rudimentary Photoshop ability have 
been inserting him into all kinds of jubilant scenes. Usain Bolt’s Olympic 
glory? The royal wedding? Ellen’s Oscars selfie? The 1966 world cup? The moon 
landings? The fall of the Berlin wall? Terry was at them all, and was still 
making appearances days, weeks, months and even years after the joke stopped 
being funny. In fact, Terry’s still at it now. I wouldn’t be at all surprised 
if he photobombed himself receiving this very award.
 The Ikea monkey in Leonardo da Vinci’s Last Supper. 
Runner-up: Ikea monkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/may/31/ikea-monkey-legal-battle-toronto-video>
 was commended by judges for his or her impressive appearance in Leonardo’s 
Last Supper, the first time a miniature primate in a sheepskin coat had ever 
been inserted into a 500-year-old artwork. Accepting the award on the monkey’s 
behalf, John Terry said: “Ikea monkey? Nah, that was actually me at the last 
supper, lads.”Tim Jonze

The least successful use of Photoshop for political ends

Winner: the Conservative ‘road to recovery’ poster
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280278185%2F4bdcd92b-2195-4983-9b03-305abf69f43c-2060x1031.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280278185%2F4bdcd92b-2195-4983-9b03-305abf69f43c-2060x1031.jpeg>
 Unfortunately the road – and stronger economy – turned out to be in Germany. 
Photograph: Conservative Party/PA 
Road to recovery? Check. Freshly tarmacked? Check. Green and pleasant vista? 
Golly, yes! Verges that look freshly trimmed by industrious eastern Europeans 
while we were still in our pyjamas? You’d better believe it. No wonder the 
Tories selected this photo for their first election poster, and that George 
Osborne claimed that it was “a British picture, a British road”. Only it isn’t: 
it’s a German road. Tory lackeys flipped the image, CGI-ed the potholes, put a 
gap in the trees in the horizon. Maybe they airbrushed the BMWs, too – though 
if they’d left them in it would have looked more like Britain in 2015. Also 
“Let’s stay on the road to a stronger economy” is a mouthful – how about 
“Forward with technology” instead? Actually, it sounds even better in German: 
Vorsprung durch technik. Perfect.

 “And how long have you lived in a shoe?” Photograph: Ningguo Civil Affair 
Runner-up: A terrifyingly huge Chinese vice-mayor minus legs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/30/chinese-officials-new-photoshop-fail>
 looms over a tiny hospital patient, possibly shrunken due to some 
boiling-vat-and-cannibals-related accident. This is supposed to be reassuring 
how? The merging of two separate shots was intended to depict caring Chinese 
politicians visiting a sweet old lady, but only gave the internet Orwellian 
nightmares – and obliged the image-makers to undergo some pretty unflinching 
Maoist self-criticism.Stuart Jeffries

The most successful use of Photoshop for political ends

Winner: Photo Op by kennardphillips
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264051384%2Fc78a4ba3-c376-48d5-bd1d-c2e4585a981b-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264051384%2Fc78a4ba3-c376-48d5-bd1d-c2e4585a981b-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Photo Op by Phillips and Kennard. Photograph: Phillips & Kennard 
Emperor Nero fiddling while Rome burned? Amateur hour. Here’s our great 
ex-leader laughing while Iraq fries, the twin evils of our society,narcissism 
and war, together at last in one image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/15/tony-blair-selfie-photo-op-imperial-war-museum>
. Of course, the invasion of Iraq didn’t go down like that, as the Chilcot 
inquiry will probably prove. Some day. No, in reality, Blair was snapped taking 
a selfie with naval cadets during the 2005 general election campaign, and that 
shot was grafted by political artists Peter Kennard and Cat Phillipps on to 
another image and called Photo Op. That’s right, they sexed up something to 
make it appear as if something had happened that hadn’t. Which doesn’t sound 
familiar at all.
 The Golden Putin. 
Runner-up: Cor, what a hunk, eh? And Putin doesn’t look too bad, either. I 
know what you’re thinking. Wasn’t it Lyra Belacqua who rode astride the 
fearsome armoured bear Iorek Byrnison to Svalbard? No, it was Vladimir Putin 
who tore through the tundra thus, half-naked, nipples proud, with no need of 
Photoshop to finesse his superb muscle tone. Because that’s how hard he is.SJ

The award for services to body dysmorphia

Winner: GQ’s 2003 Kate Winslet cover
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264226711%2Fbcc09953-5abd-4a11-a325-8474337385e0-780x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264226711%2Fbcc09953-5abd-4a11-a325-8474337385e0-780x1020.jpeg>
 Some of Kate Winslet on the cover of the February 2003 issue of GQ magazine. 
Photograph: PA 
“What is sexy?” pondered Kate Winslet in her 2003 GQ cover interview. “All I 
know from the men I’ve ever spoken to is that they like girls to have an arse 
on them.” It was a bold move, then, for the magazine to Photoshop said arse, 
and, while they were at it, her thighs, hips, cheeks, chin, little finger 
(probably) ... into an image so brazen in its photogenic engineering that one 
wonders whether it was the picture desk’s bid to launch a line of “your face on 
the body of Miss Universe” greetings cards. Worryingly, editor Dylan Jones said 
the image had been altered “no more than [for] any other cover star”. Winslet 
hit back: “I do not look like that, and more importantly, I don’t desire to 
look like that.” Alas, any hope that the GQ debacle may have quashed the 
glossies’ inexhaustible urge to manipulate women’s bodies was scuppered by
Vogue’s cover of Winslet 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/10/14/kate-winslet-vogue-photos_n_4096789.html>
 in 2013 – a masterful feat of digital Polyfilla that pasted over every 
laughter line, shadow or blemish that made her an actual human being.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280369768%2F97d846c4-c008-4208-af59-3a20e06c8676-793x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280369768%2F97d846c4-c008-4208-af59-3a20e06c8676-793x1020.jpeg>
 Grazia thinks we should trim down the royal family. 
Runner-up: Bizarre for the sheer editorial absurdity that the most watched 
televisual spectacle of the millennium would need to be modified for its 
audience, Grazia’s royal wedding cover featured what most would consider 
Photoshop’s apex of pointlessness: a slimmer Kate Middleton. Just imagine, 
given the mere 35 million people who tuned in to watch the wedding, how limp 
their sales patter would be had they not sliced those extra inches off her 
waist.Jenny Stevens

The really stupid – no, really stupid – idea award

Winner: 9/11 Tourist Guy
 9/11 Tourist Guy. 
Shortly after September 11 2001, a photo appeared of a tourist posing on the 
observation deck of the World Trade Center, oblivious to the aeroplane heading 
towards the building below him. Not only was this image enormously insensitive, 
but also, it turns out, comprehensively inaccurate. The weather was too warm to 
warrant a coat and hat. The observation deck wasn’t set to open until 40 
minutes after the attack. He’s standing on the second tower that was hit, 
making him extremely blase about his proximity to burning skyscrapers. It’s the 
wrong sort of plane. The man responsible for the image, a Hungarian named Péter 
Guzli, has since apologised.

Runner-up: Madonna, for manipulating an image of Martin Luther King to promote 
her new album <https://twitter.com/Madonna/status/551062834021683200>. “This 
#RebelHeart had a dream,” she tweeted, presumably between naps in the middle of 
the afternoon.Stuart Heritage

Most creative use of Stephanie Beacham on a magazine cover

Winner: In Touch magazine
 Bruce Jenner Photoshopped onto Stephanie Beacham’s body on the cover of In 
Touch magazine. Photograph: In Touch/Getty Images 
The most innovative use of another human body is indisputably In Touch’s 
honour, for its (frankly despicable) outing of Bruce Jenner – one-time Olympic 
athlete and husband of matriarchal entertainment behemoth Kris Kardashian – as 
a transitioning woman. Desperate to fill this lacuna between rumour and fact, 
In Touch did what every responsible publication would do: put his face on a 
woman’s body. They even added lipstick and rosy cheeks, with the skill and 
sensitivity of a primary-school class learning Microsoft Paint. However, like a 
true fable for the meme age, In Touch got its comeuppance when it was 
discovered that its Jenner masterpiece was actually a doctored image of Dynasty 
actor Stephanie Beacham. “He looks far lovelier than I do there,” she said.

Runner-up: No, really, In Touch has got this one locked down. JS

The ‘is this a wind-up?’ award for winding people up

Winner: The Photoshop troll
 Handiwork of the Photoshop troll. 
Photoshop isn’t just a tool for making teenage girls feel horrible about how 
they look; it can also be used to improve your everyday snaps. However, if you 
lack the skills to jazz up photos yourself, you can always ask a stranger to do 
it for you for free online. Except don’t use the stranger who runs
photoshoprequest.com <http://photoshoprequest.com/>, because he’ll deliberately 
ruin your pictures and post the results onphotoshoptroll.com 
<http://photoshoptroll.com/>. Want to look beefier? He’ll colour you the shade 
of raw meat <http://www.photoshoptroll.com/beefcake/>. Want your hairline to be 
lower? He’llremove your forehead completely 
<http://www.photoshoptroll.com/forehead/>. For about three months in 2012, this 
was the funniest thing on the internet.
 His look of innocence was soon to be wiped off for ever. Photograph: web 
Runner-up: Also from 2012: a poor man misjudged his perspective during a simple
“holding the sun between his fingers” 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/can-you-please-photoshop-the-sun-between-my-fingers/photos>
 photograph and asked the internet to correct it. The barrage of trolling he 
received was as kaleidoscopic as it was brilliant.SH

The ‘she’s lost an arm’ award for bravery

Winner: Natasha Poly, Russian Vogue
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424265349217%2F25accfe1-5317-43e9-acb3-a292b96c15ab-785x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424265349217%2F25accfe1-5317-43e9-acb3-a292b96c15ab-785x1020.jpeg>
 Come on, they said, a little bit of Photoshop is harmless. Photograph: Vogue 
Russia 
When Russian Vogue hit news stands in August 2012, the burning question was 
less “how much did cover model Natasha Poly get out of bed for?” and more “how 
did she actually get out of bed?” given that, you know, the Russian model was 
missing her right arm. To wipe out an entire limb might seem staggering – on a 
cover no less – but in this instance some critics chalked it up to angles, 
suggesting her arm was behind her head. There was no official response from 
Russian Vogue or Poly, but thankfully, model Coco Rocha sent outa tweet 
requesting that editors count limbs before sending covers to press 
<https://twitter.com/cocorocha/status/225576269197230081> – “Thanks!! 
Sincerely, Models” – which seems fair enough.

Runner-up: Where to start! Vogue China, which managed to hew Doutzen Kroes 
<http://fashionista.com/2012/06/vogue-china-chops-off-doutzen-kroes-leg>’ 
entire leg in June? OrGlamour, which used images of model Daul Kim 
<http://fashionista.com/2012/07/glamour-accidentally-runs-a-photo-of-daul-kim-the-model-who-committed-suicide-three-years-ago-in-their-august-issue>
 in its August 2012 issue, three years after her death? We shouldn’t forget 
personal favourite, US Vogue, which, in 2011,appeared to sever two fingers from 
the hand 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/08/16/kate-moss-daughter-photoshop_n_928681.html>
 of Kate Moss’ eight-year-old daughter. The humanity.Morwenna Ferrier

Most counterproductive use of Photoshop in a movie marketing campaign

Winner: The Heat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424265460639%2F071d552f-2103-40ec-8a99-bb88bc311164-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424265460639%2F071d552f-2103-40ec-8a99-bb88bc311164-2060x1545.jpeg>
 The Heat campaign brought the heat. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
In 2013, the UK publicity team behind cop-buddy comedy The Heat commissioned a 
scientific study that simultaneously revolutionised the fields of anatomy, 
sociology and advertising. The work, titled Fatty No Sell Ticky: Cut the Pounds 
and Up the Pounds showed a negative correlation between the body of star 
Melissa McCarthy and the amount of tickets her films would sell. Based on this 
empirical evidence, the publicists subjected McCarthy’s image to a digital 
diet: smoothing the folds and cutting the double chin. In real life, McCarthy 
is happy with her weight, but boy, did the nip/tuck on the poster make a 
difference to the box office! “I’d never have watched this film if the 
marketing had shown her being, like, fat-fat,” said Absolutely Nobody. Hooray 
for science.

Runner-up: Everyone else. You think skin looks that clear naturally? 
Hollywood’s spots, scars, pocks and pits are filled in routinely by creme 
d’Photoshop. Show us a spotty Jennifer Lawrence with bags under her eyes and a 
burgeoning rash.That would be progress. Henry Barnes

The Lena Dunham award for nothing to see here

Winner: Lena Dunham in Vogue

News of Jezebel’s sisterly plan to pay $10k for unPhotoshopped 
<http://jezebel.com/were-offering-10-000-for-unretouched-images-of-lena-d-1502000514>
 images of Lena Dunham’s US Vogue cover shoot in 2014 was more hyped than news 
of the cover itself. Anna Wintour had put the star of a leftfield comedy show 
on the cover of the February issue? So what! Surely the real news was that 
Vogue had Photoshopped co-star Adam Driver’s knee! Still, the fact that a 
feminist website had paid to see this was catnip to those who stirred the pot 
with lots of hyperbole about the extent to which Dunham had been retouched. The 
truth, revealed througha fun before/after gif 
<http://jezebel.com/here-are-the-unretouched-images-from-lena-dunhams-vogu-1503336657>
, was rather underwhelming, as it transpired that Vogue had basically covered 
her boobs, shaved a little off her hips and popped her through a filter. Ever 
at ease with Photoshop, Vogue argued that it was merely part of the process 
with Vogue, and a bitter feud between critics promptly broke out on Twitter, 
mopping up all of Vogue’s remaining website traffic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280488178%2F2b60d0ad-096a-4f34-83ed-cffecd71564e-783x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280488178%2F2b60d0ad-096a-4f34-83ed-cffecd71564e-783x1020.jpeg>
 Kim Kardashian on the cover of Paper magazine. 
Runner-up: While Kim Kardashian’s glazed ass on the cover of Paper magazine 
didn’t actually break the internet, rumours that she had been Photoshopped to 
the power of n did. In truth, the editors had barely touched it. The picture, 
we mean, not her bum.MF

The award for knowing it can’t be real but forwarding it anyway because why not

Winner: Helicopter Shark

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280548569%2F0e330879-6c7e-414a-8dd3-db1f1d1157d1-1020x574.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Photoshop%20awards%3A%20missing%20limbs%2C%20John%20Terry%20and%20Helicopter%20Shark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fphotoshop-awards-missing-limbs-john-terry-helicopter-shark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424280548569%2F0e330879-6c7e-414a-8dd3-db1f1d1157d1-1020x574.jpeg>
 The moment that messing about with Photoshop jumped the shark. 
Occasionally, a Photoshopped image will turn up online in the middle of a huge 
news event and fool everyone silly. This, to some extent, is the direct 
precursor of that. Back in 2011, an image of a great white shark leaping out of 
the water to attack a man on a helicopter did the rounds, ostensibly because it 
had just been named as National Geographic’s photo of the year. It fooled 
plenty of people for a brief amount of time, right up until the moment that 
everyone collectively realised that this exact thing happened in the 1966 
Batman movie and that this was probably a great big fake. Luckily, we never 
fell for anything like this ever again.

 We won’t be going back to Back to the Future in the future. 
Runner-up: In June 2012, idiots around the world suddenly lost their minds 
after a purported screenshot suggested that they were living in the day that 
Back to the Future 2 was set. The screenshot was a fake, and in reality idiots 
around the world won’t lose their minds until 21 October 2015.SH

 