
25 April 1947 Born in Amsterdam, close to Ajax’s stadium.

April 1957 Joins the Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> youth 
system, in the football and baseball sections. Played as a baseball catcher 
until the age of 15, when he chose to concentrate on football.

November 1964 Makes his first-team debut for Ajax, scoring in a 3-1 defeat by 
GVAV.

Johan Cruyff, Dutch football legend, dies at the age of 68
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-dies-aged-68-holland-football-legend>
March 1966 Scores a hat-trick against Telstar then, four days later, four 
goals against Veendam. Ends season with 25 goals as Ajax win the title. Wins 
title in following two seasons too.

September 1966 Makes Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> 
debut, against Hungary, the first of 48 caps in which he scored 33 goals.

November 1970 Scores six goals in Ajax’s 8-1 win against AZ.

June 1971 Wins European Cup with Ajax, who beat Panathinaikos in the final. 
Voted European footballer of the year for 1971.

May 1972 Scores both Ajax goals against Internazionale in the European Cup 
final in an outstanding individual and team performance.

May 1973 Wins European Cup for a third straight year and is European 
footballer of the year for a second time. Leaves Ajax forBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> for a then world record fee, 
£922,000, in August.

Johan Cruyff obituary: Europe’s first football superstar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-obituary> 
May 1974 Wins Spanish title in his first season at Barcelona and picks up 
European footballer of the year award again.

July 1974 Helps Holland to the World Cup final, where they lose to West 
Germany, making the Cruyff Turn famous along the way.

October 1977 Retires from international football after helping Holland to 
qualify for the following year’s World Cup. He won 48 caps, scoring 33 goals.

May 1979 Signs for Los Angeles Aztecs.

September 1979 Wins the North American Soccer League’s most valuable player 
award.

1980 Joins Washington Diplomats.

January 1981 Leicester City fail with attempt to sign Cruyff, who ends up 
joining Levante. He is there for less than a year, though, before rejoining 
Ajax.

1983 Cruyff joins Ajax’s rivals Feyenoord after not being offered a new 
contract and goes on to win a third straight Dutch title.

May 1984 Ends playing career.

May 1985 Becomes Ajax coach.

May 1986 Ajax win the Dutch Cup. They finish runners-up in the league, despite 
scoring 120 goals.

May 1987 Coaches Ajax to victory in the European Cup Winners’ Cup final, Marco 
van Basten scoring the winner against Lokomotiv Leipzig. Wins another Dutch Cup 
a month later.

May 1988 Takes over as Barcelona coach.

May 1989 Wins European Cup Winners’ Cup final again, defeating Sampdoria in 
the final.

April 1990 Wins the Copa del Rey.

June 1991 Wins the first of four straight La Liga titles.

May 1992 Wins European Cup at Wembley, with Sampdoria again the defeated side 
in the final.

World Cup: 25 stunning moments … No25: the Cruyff Turn is born in 1974
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/11/world-cup-stunning-moments-johan-cruyff-turn-1974>
May 1994 Wins a third consecutive La Liga title but loses the Champions League 
final 4-0 to Milan.

May 1996 Sacked by Barcelona after a run of two seasons without a major trophy.

November 2009 Named manager of the Catalonia national team after a break of 13 
years.

February 2011 Returns to Ajax on an advisory basis but resigns the following 
April.

February 2012 Becomes an adviser for the Mexican club Chivas de Guadalajara 
but contract is terminated in December.

October 2015 Diagnosed with lung cancer, having been a heavy smoker before 
undergoing surgery in 1991.

24 March 2016 Dies at the age of 68, surrounded by his family in Barcelona.
 