
1. Pixelmator

If you want more from a photo-editing app than simple filters and cropping, 
Pixelmator <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pixelmator/id924695435?mt=8> is 
just the thing: a powerful yet easy-to-use image-editing app with more 
retouching tools than you can shake a (paintbrush) stick at, tapping Apple’s 
iCloud service to run across devices.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYJYZCOq-H_Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYJYZCOq-H_Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYJYZCOq-H_Y&media=>
2. Auxy: Beat Studio

Auxy <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/auxy-beat-studio/id909573739?mt=8> is an 
accessible but deceptively powerful music-making app, where you create beats, 
bass lines and melodies then string them together into tracks to share online. 
It’s stylish, fun and has plenty of flexibility, with more features for 
preserving your work added since launch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfw2xjfzYc8U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfw2xjfzYc8U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfw2xjfzYc8U&media=>
3. Microsoft Word

Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> finally brought 
its Office suite to iPad, including individual apps for its different elements. 
Word represents them all in the context of this roundup, then: it was a 
serviceable tablet port of the company’s flagship word processing software, 
with Microsoft’s Office 365 subscriptions built in.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaTYjDo1kj2M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaTYjDo1kj2M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaTYjDo1kj2M&media=>
4. Pacemaker DJ

There have been DJ apps for iPad since the tablet’s earliest days, but 
Pacemaker DJ <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pacemaker-dj/id593873080?mt=8> 
brought a big new feature to the table: it drew on streaming service Spotify 
for tracks to play, rather than just your own collection. But it was also an 
inventive take on tablet DJing for other reasons: its tactile interface worked 
really well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsSWXkecVsgo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsSWXkecVsgo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsSWXkecVsgo&media=>
5. Toca Nature

Toca Nature <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/toca-nature/id893927401?mt=8> was 
an app from children’s publisher Toca Boca: a creative sandbox for exploring 
nature. Kids raise and lower the land to create mountains, valleys and lakes, 
then plant trees to attract foxes, bears, woodpeckers and other wildlife.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGoSm63_lQVc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGoSm63_lQVc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGoSm63_lQVc&media=>
6. Molecules by Theodore Gray

Publisher Touch Press had a huge hit in the iPad’s early days with its 
Elements app. This year it followed up withMolecules 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/molecules-by-theodore-gray/id923383841?mt=8>: 
a beautifully-crafted app that has a book as its guts, but layers on top some 
wonderfully-playful simulations of 348 molecules to interact with using tactile 
controls.

7. Kitchen Stories

Apple choosing this as one of its apps of 2014 may have surprised some, but 
not cooks for whom it had become a trusted kitchen companion.Kitchen Stories 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/kitchen-stories-free-video/id771068291?mt=8> 
is a cleanly-designed recipe guide app, with videos, photos and step-by-step 
instructions that even a cuisine dunce would be hard-pressed to misinterpret.

8. American Interior

American Interior 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/american-interior/id857802114?mt=8> was this 
year’s album from Super Furry Animals’ Gruff Rhys, but it was also a book, a 
film and an app telling the story of adventurer John Evans’ quest to find a 
fabled Welsh-speaking native American tribe. The app uses a mixture of text, 
video and music, and is a great way into the book, film and album.

9. ScratchJr

The coding-for-kids category got crowded on the app stores this year, but 
ScratchJr <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/scratchjr/id895485086?mt=8> came 
from a fine source: MIT, which was responsible for the Scratch visual 
programming language that inspired it. Aimed at 5-7 year-olds, this app gets 
children to create stories by slotting together blocks of code.

10. Storehouse – Visual Storytelling

Not telling you stories: an app for you to use to tell your own tales, using 
photos, videos and text.Storehouse 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/storehouse-visual-storytelling/id791297521?mt=8>
 is one of those apps that Apple can hold up in defence when people say its 
iPad is for consuming, not creating. This is a simple way to turn your digital 
media into stories for sharing on various social networks.

11. Glose

Books might not be social when you’re reading them, but they can be hugely 
social when you’re discussing them later – ask any book group. No digital 
service has ever quite nailed the idea of social reading, butGlose 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/glose/id896681871?mt=8> looked like a 
promising attempt this year, with its community features.

12. Radio Times Magazine

I’ll be honest: I still buy a print copy of the Radio Times every Christmas 
and ring loads of programmes with a red biro (then manage not to watch most of 
them). But the popular UK TV listings magazine also releaseda smart iPad app 
this year 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/radio-times-magazine-uks-best/id873095189?mt=8>
, for couch potatoes wanting more than their EPG.

13. Brian Cox’s Wonders of Life

This book-app from HarperCollins followed its first app collaboration with 
TV’s Brian Cox, Wonders of the Universe.Wonders of Life 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/brian-coxs-wonders-of-life/id773114288?mt=8> 
turned its attention to life on earth, with 3D creatures and habitats to 
explore, and plenty of video, images and articles to inspire you.

14. Learnist

Pitched as a “knowledge social network”, Learnist 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/learnist-experts-curate-lessons/id826591175?mt=8>
 was one of a growing number of apps designed for keen self-educators, 
harvesting information and videos on a host of different topics for you to 
browse and digest. A fertile source of ideas and practical advice alike.

15. Timeline WW1 Tanks

Author and TV presenter Dan Snow thinks apps are ideal for teaching history to 
all ages, andTimeline WW1 Tanks 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/timeline-ww1-tanks/id939162836?mt=8> was one 
of the apps from his own company Ballista that showed his thinking. It was a 
fascinating history of the tank, based around an interactive timeline, with a 
wealth of multimedia material to explore.

16. KORG Gadget

Synthesizer maker KORG’s new app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/korg-gadget/id791077159?mt=8> was expensive – 
launching for £19.99 – but it was marvellous value for music enthusiasts. It’s 
a collection of mobile synths and drum machines which you can mix and match to 
create songs, then share them via SoundCloud, Facebook and/or Twitter.

17. Vivaldi’s Four Seasons

Touch Press had a busy year, with this being its latest classical music app: a 
sumptuous multimedia version ofVivaldi’s Four Seasons 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/vivaldis-four-seasons/id827751585?mt=8>. 
Multi-angle video of an orchestra playing the music, along with a “BeatMap” 
feature to show which sections are playing at any one time, and the ability to 
solo instruments and find out more about Vivaldi himself.

18. Star Wars Scene Maker

A real treat for Star Wars fans: an iPad app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/star-wars-scene-maker/id853282805?mt=8> for 
dreaming up your own scenes within the movie universe, using 3D models of 
characters and settings, then cutting in dialogue from the Star Wars films or 
your own recordings. And then sharing the results. Think of the fan-fiction 
possibilities...

19. Mickey’s Magical Maths World

The first in a new series of educational apps for children by Disney: Mickey’s 
Magical Maths World 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/mickeys-magical-maths-world/id925134465?mt=8> 
is a collection of five mathematical mini-games hosted by Mickey, Minnie, 
Donald, Daisy and Goofy. They’re elegantly done, with lots of extra 
interactivity for kids to explore – and a smart parental companion app too.

20. PDF Office

Developer Readdle has made a succession of very-useful productivity apps: and 
itsPDF Office 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pdf-office-create-edit-annotate/id942085111?mt=8>
 offered another angle: it creates editable PDF documents on your iPad, 
including by taking photos of physical forms and converting them. Once you have 
it, you’ll realise how often it could come in handy.

21. Think Like Churchill

Another Touch Press app, this time with a famous collaborator: London mayor 
Boris Johnson.Think Like Churchill 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/think-like-churchill-guided/id925325182?mt=8> 
aims to help you understand Winston Churchill by putting you in his shoes for 
some of his most famous political dilemmas, using his writings, advice from 
colleagues and other real historical documentation.

22. Next for iPad

If you like nothing more than settling down on the sofa of an evening and 
browsing graphs of your expenses... Well, perhaps check out Netflix or board 
games. ButNext for iPad 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/next-for-ipad-track-your-expenses/id833413936?mt=8>
 is nevertheless an excellent expense-tracking app, taking good advantage of 
the larger touchscreen to present your finances in a clear and simple way.

23. Post-it Plus

A Post-it app? It sounds like a ridiculous novelty, but actually Post-it Plus 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/post-it-plus/id920127738?mt=8> was a clever 
idea: an app capable of photographing your Post-it scribbles from a meeting, 
then turning them into a digital board for further organising, editing and 
sharing.

24. Duet Display

Released right at the end of 2014, Duet Display 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/duet-display/id935754064?mt=8> could be a real 
boon for anyone who needs more display from their desktop, but doesn’t want to 
shell out for an extra monitor. This turns your iPad into an extra display, 
promising – and delivering, as far as I can tell – “lag-free” performance.

25. iPlayer Radio for iPad

Another release late in the year, here in the UK, iPlayer Radio for iPad 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/iplayer-radio-for-ipad/id947844056?mt=8> is 
the official iPad version of the Beeb’s radio app, optimised for the bigger 
screen in both portrait and landscape modes, with simple navigation to get to 
your favourite stations and shows quickly.

 