
As the Taliban hoisted their flag in the centre of Kunduz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/taliban-attempt-to-invade-key-afghan-city-kunduz>
, one of Afghanistan’s strategic northern cities, a forgotten conflict forced 
its way back on to the agenda. This is a watershed moment, not only for
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> but for central 
Asia, where the growth of violent jihadi groups remains a serious concern. 
Kunduz is close to Tadjikistan and the capture of this town represents the 
first time a major urban area has fallen into the hands of the insurgent 
movement since the overthrow of the Taliban regime in 2001 by a US-led 
international coalition.

Both the fact and the symbol send severe shockwaves through the central 
government in Kabul, which continues to struggle to establish authority. The 
attack has taken place just one year into the presidency of the Afghan leader, 
Ashraf Ghani. Huge questions now hang over the prospects of peace talks with 
the Taliban – a policy Mr Ghani has been trying to pursue. Butit also spells 
trouble for western strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/taliban-capture-kunduz-major-blow-afghan-government>
, which has been predicated on the supposition that the end of Nato’s combat 
mission in December 2014 would be compensated by the build-up of Afghan 
national security forces. These were not only unable to prevent the fall of 
Kunduz, but their attempt to retake the town a day later failed dismally. 
Whether the arrival of Nato special forces on Wednesday, along with US air 
strikes, would be sufficient to shore up Afghan government forces as they again 
went on the offensive, remains to be seen. Meanwhile, thousands of panicked 
residentsgave their own verdict by fleeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/sep/30/afghan-civilians-flee-kunduz-as-fighting-rages-taliban-video>
.

After the west intervened in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2011/oct/07/afghanistan-timeline-10-years-interactive>
, Kunduz was the last Taliban stronghold to fall. So its recapture by the 
Taliban, even if it was to turn out to be only temporary, could be a 
game-changing moment, signalling the failure of the post-Nato transition 
period. The Taliban have demonstrated that they are able to break out of their 
southern strongholds and to threaten to take swaths of territory in the north. 
They have also shown that their clout is not limited to rural areas. There are 
now clear signs of a rapid deterioration in Afghanistan, only five months after 
a previous Taliban onslaught on Kunduz had been repelled.

Western strategy failures in Afghanistan are nothing new. After the Soviet 
withdrawal of 1989,Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> 
was allowed to drift. After the overthrow of the Taliban in 2001, western 
attention shifted to Iraq. A combination of negligence and misconceived 
strategic decisions (like the 2005 Nato deployment in rural Pashtun regions, 
which was felt there as an occupation) have had big consequences. The 
corruption of successive western-backed Afghan governments made things worse. 
And by publicly setting a 2014 deadline for the end of their combat missions, 
Nato and the US allowed the Taliban to play for time.

It is not inevitable that Afghanistan will collapse totally into the hands of 
theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>. One certainty, however, 
is that civilians will be the first victims of further instability and 
violence. International security will be threatened if Islamic State, which has 
been trying to get a foothold in the region, is able to step in. It was a 
mistake to think Afghanistan would succeed in taking care of itself once 
foreign troops withdrew. Proclaiming a war has ended doesn’t mean that it 
really has. More focus and more aid are indispensable if further deterioration 
is to be averted. What happens in Kunduz is a reminder of the price tag for 
international neglect of Afghanistan.
 