
Brands incessantly talk about wanting a relationship or a dialogue with 
consumers, but what they’ve historically been involved in is a monologue. For 
years, they’ve taken theirbig, bold brand promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jan/02/2015-social-justice-race-equality-rights-climate-business-marketing>
 and shouted them from the rooftops – from every media outlet possible – in a 
bid to interrupt us with their message that is meant to inspire, excite and 
engage.

And they have done this successfully. Up until now, the gallery of advertising 
legends has been dominated by these ambitious, awesome broadcast campaigns that 
have helped shaped culture and the way we think. Whether it’s telling us to 
Just Do It or toThink Different <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nmwXdGm89Tk>, 
the intention of these larger-than-life slogans has always been to create 
aspiration; a feeling that we should strive towards these lifestyles and ideals 
that are just out of our reach (but accessible via their brand, naturally).

However, what constitutes brilliant marketing and creativity today is 
currently in the throes of redefinition and the industry is grappling to deal 
with a seismic shift in how brands connect with consumers and make their 
messages resonate. In 2016, these generic slogans have become largely 
meaningless. They don’t inspire anymore; they tire.

Sir Martin Sorrell: 'There's no monopoly on wisdom' - video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/04/sir-martin-sorrell-wpp-monopoly-wisdom>
Worse still, they pressurise people into thinking they are not good enough as 
they are, or that their life should be better and that creates disconnection. 
Recent research from theAimia Institute 
<https://www.aimia.com/en/media-center/news-releases/viewer.html/en/irrelevant-marketingfrombrandsgivesrisetothedeletistconsumer>
 shows that seven in 10 Britons are shutting accounts and subscriptions and 
unfriending companies because of poorly targeted communications, giving rise to 
the new term the “deletist consumer”.

When it comes to forging close consumer relationships today, big is 
over-rated. It’s being up close and personal that makes the difference. Brands 
shouldn’t be focusing on creating distance through aspiration, but on creating 
intimacy through understanding. Of course this needs a respect for and careful 
use of the data they hold on customers, but this just needs to be managed as a 
new and vital component of the trust in brands that is fundamental to their 
survival.

Like in all relationships, consumers want to feel the other party gets them 
and listens to them as an individual. They don’t want to feel like one of 
millions targeted in a particular segment; they want to feel like one in a 
million. Don’t we all?

Meeting this challenge is not simply about deploying big data algorithms. Yes, 
data-driven insight can transform your marketing investment, but getting 
personal and relevant is a blend of art and science. It requires the human 
touch. It requires thinking small, taking brand promises and making them chime 
with the individual.

Our research shows that customers are three times more likely to stay with a 
brand and seven times more likely to buy more from it if they feel the brand 
communicates in a relevant way: relevance leads to resonance.

Clearly this level of intimate engagement lends itself to wide range of 
digital channels and connections.Heineken’s Twitter-tool 
<http://www.theheinekencompany.com/media/media-releases/press-releases/2014/07/1822551>
, which suggests buzzing nightlife recommendations based on popularity in real 
time, is a good example. So isBGH air conditioners’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0vxG-7Ux_zI> ability, via Google street map 
and weather data, to calculate the exact amount of sunlight your home receives, 
offering discounts based on those hours.

But, while digital is an effective way to build individual relationships, it’s 
not the only way. In fact, applying this level of personalisation, time and 
effort to traditional channels can produce striking, standout marketing that 
makes consumers feel a brand genuinely cares. Take,TAM airlines 
<http://simpliflying.com/2015/tam-airlines-ownboard-magazine-facebook/>, for 
instance. By gathering some key details about each passenger and merging these 
with Facebook information, it created a completely personalised inflight 
magazine complete with individuals’ mugshots on the cover and tailored content 
inside. Needless to say, the magazines were read cover to cover and treasured 
by every traveller as a keepsake.

While I applaud the ambition and commitment of TAM’s campaign, effective 
relationship marketing doesn’t have to be about grand, expensive gestures. As 
in life, it’s often the small, thoughtful gestures – from a well-timed message 
of consolation after my football team loses to suggesting activities to do with 
the kids when it’s raining in my beach holiday resort – that are the most 
powerful. Today, if brand promises are not made personal, they are not really 
made at all.

Matthew Heath is chair of LIDA <http://www.lida.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media and Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media and Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 