
Carol Morley’s recent film, The Falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/23/the-falling-review-carol-morley>, 
brings into dreamy focus a phenomenon with a long literary history. Unlike a 
straight faint, the literary swoon is never just a medical matter – it’s often 
the product of overwhelming feeling or the return of something repressed. 
Swooning has long been used by writers to dramatise moments of crisis, ecstasy 
and confusion, and the failure of language to express these extremes. It has a 
strong association with the unnerving and the uncanny, with sickness and dying, 
femininity, queer sexuality, moments of political instability. A swoon might be 
an act of resistance, a dramatic rejection of a culture’s language – but it can 
also reinforce stereotypes, such as the sickly, swooning, hysterical woman. 
It’s powerfully ambivalent, and often found in the work of writers who try to 
imagine a different kind of world and for whom coming round from a swoon 
signals a new way of being conscious.

1. The Virgin Mary
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434646444634%2F326ac3d1-354d-4f17-b068-eab449081571-2060x1407.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434646444634%2F326ac3d1-354d-4f17-b068-eab449081571-2060x1407.jpeg>
 The Repentant Mary Magdalene, 1583. Artist: Paolo Veronese. Photograph: Alamy 
The Swoon of the Virgin was a popular subject in medieval art, with 
influential artists depicting Mary fainting and weeping at the foot of the 
cross. Her sympathetic swoon signals the strength of her suffering: she shares 
in the productive pain of the Passion, which will give birth to the church. In 
one early literary swoon (The Life of Mary Magdalen, c1290), a labouring woman 
is overcome by birth pangs and is eventually woken from apparent death by 
“Saint Marie”. These maternal swoons symbolise the power of suffering to 
produce new spiritual life.

2. Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde

In medieval romances, knights swoon just as frequently as ladies. In Chaucer’s 
Troilus and Criseyde (c1380), the hero and heroine both swoon at key moments, 
demonstrating that passion brings them close to death. Troilus swoons at the 
mid-point of the poem, allowing Chaucer to produce an intricate description of 
physiology and passion: his heart shuts down and his vital spirits contract; 
all feeling flees before he swoons. Falling in love is a risky business and its 
danger is expressed through the swoon.

3. Shakespeare’s Hero
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434646713846%2Ff82f7c08-00cd-4d94-b250-e21271acea9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434646713846%2Ff82f7c08-00cd-4d94-b250-e21271acea9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eve Best as Beatrice and Ony Uhiara as Hero inMuch Ado About Nothing at the 
Globe in 2011. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/Guardian 
Shakespeare <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>’s tragic heroes 
swoon when their self-governance dissolves, foreshadowing disturbances in the 
body politic. But it is Hero inMuch Ado About Nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/17/best-shakespeare-productions-much-ado-about-nothing>
 (1598) who sustains the longest and most remarkable swoon on the Shakespearean 
stage: accused of unfaithfulness, she falls, leaving the other characters to 
debate over her prostrate body. Some interpret the swoon as guilt (she is 
“fall’n / Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea / Hath drops too few to wash her 
clean again”), others as proof of her innocence. Hero’s swoon is a rejection of 
men’s lies and her silent, physical response highlights the possible treachery 
of language.

4. Samuel Richardson’s Clarissa

Swooning emerges in the popular novels of the 18th century as a particularly 
feminine habit. In his 1748 novel Richardson deploys a series of faints and 
swoons to describe the decline of his ill-fated heroine, the eponymousClarissa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/14/100-best-books-clarissa-samuel-richardson>
, who is drugged and raped. Clarissa’s swoons demonstrate her feminine 
sensitivity, but they also iconise her vulnerability: the swoon is used to 
describe the downward trajectory of the fallen woman in many novels of this 
period, producing an uneasy mix of sympathy and voyeurism.

5. Jane Austen’s Musgrove sisters
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647008626%2F92dfdfde-f427-4a37-b291-c58ff80419ab-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647008626%2F92dfdfde-f427-4a37-b291-c58ff80419ab-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Victoria Hamilton, Emma Roberts and Sophie Thompson as the Musgrove sisters in 
Persuasion. Photograph: Rex Features 
“Beware of swoons … Run mad as often as you chuse; but do not faint,” the 
14-year-oldAusten <https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten> cautions an 
early heroine. She retains this swoon scepticism in her mature work: in
Persuasion <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/nov/23/janeausten.classics> 
(1818), Louisa Musgrove develops the habit of throwing herself into her beau’s 
arms from various heights and manages to knock herself out cold on the 
pavement. Her sister sinks into a sympathetic swoon and both are “insensible”. 
News spreads to “the workmen and boatmen about the Cobb, and many were 
collected … to enjoy the sight of a dead young lady, nay, two dead young 
ladies, for it proved twice as fine as the first report”. Austen satirises the 
morbid pleasure that swooning allows the male viewer, as well as the hysterical 
feminine performances that have produced it.

6. Charles Dickens’s Mrs Gamp
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647153773%2F6ea0eb07-6b8e-454b-ad74-a59c67f1b655-1601x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647153773%2F6ea0eb07-6b8e-454b-ad74-a59c67f1b655-1601x2040.jpeg>
 Mrs Gamp from Martin Chuzzlewit. Photograph: Alamy 
In Bleak House (1852–53), Dickens uses the swoon to signal the power of an 
unspeakable past: Lady Dedlock swoons at the first hint of her hidden affair 
and child. But Dickens also ridicules characters who swoon as part of a social 
performance. Mrs Gamp (Martin Chuzzlewit, 1843–44) wilts on demand, 
“perform[ing] swoons of different sorts, upon a moderate notice, as Mr Mould 
did Funerals”. Mrs Gamp’s faints are a feint of feminine sensitivity, a cynical 
means of social manipulation.

7. Elizabeth Barrett Browning’s Aurora Leigh

In her ground-breaking verse novel, Aurora Leigh (1856), Barrett Browning uses 
the swoon to figure the transformation of a woman into a poet: “I did not die. 
But slowly, as one in a swoon / To whom life creeps back in the form of death, 
/… I woke, rose up.” Barrett Browning alights on the early religious and 
maternal significance of the swoon, using it to depict spiritual rebirth 
through death: waking from the swoon means waking into a radically reconfigured 
world, a world where women might reject Victorian constraints and follow the 
call to write.

8. Bram Stoker’s Jonathan Harker 

The gothic, with all its buried secrets and untimely returns, has a strong 
tradition of swooning, and the figure of the vampire is particularly associated 
with immobility: the vampire mesmerises his victims into a semi-pleasurable, 
half-conscious state of semi-consciousness. In Stoker’sDracula (1897), Harker 
is overwhelmed in Dracula’s castle – “the horror overcame me, and I sank down 
unconscious” – leaving the Count to carry him to bed. The lunatic Renfield, 
fawning on his “Master”, “falls” into paroxysms, and “swoon[s] into a sort of 
coma”. Passive, swoony masculine states are a source of terror in this 
Victorian novel, which nevertheless betrays a fascination with the pleasures of 
erotic immobility.

9. James Joyce’s Stephen Dedalus

In A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916), Stephen Dedalus’s coming of 
age is described as his soul, “swooning into some new world, fantastic, dim, 
uncertain”. Joyce repeatedly describes characters emerging into a significantly 
altered world following a swoony epiphany, as in the memorable, alliterative 
final line of “The Dead” inDubliners (1914): “His soul swooned slowly as he 
heard the snow falling faintly …. upon all the living and the dead.” The 
soul-swoon is used by Joyce to represent the transformation of the person into 
the poet, the ordinary into the new and strange, and the living into communion 
with the dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647603746%2Fa709b63f-91f5-4a7f-a195-1b27a370a669-1609x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%2010%20literary%20swoons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fthe-top-10-literary-swoons-naomi-booth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647603746%2Fa709b63f-91f5-4a7f-a195-1b27a370a669-1609x2040.jpeg>
 An illustration from the fairy tale Bluebeard by Charles Perrault. Photograph: 
Corbis 
10. Angela Carter’s The Bloody Chamber

EL James’s “red room of pain” and fainting heroine were anticipated (and 
surpassed) by Angela’s Carter’s “The Bloody Chamber” (1979), a reworking of the 
Bluebeard tale. Carter’s poor, virginal narrator marries a marquis, entering a 
world of obscene wealth. She discovers a hoarde of murdered wives hidden in her 
husband’s pile, but her “nerves of steel” mean that she swoons only once: she 
stumbles across a blind boy, a gentle piano-tuner and, “after the dreadful 
revelation of that bloody chamber, it was his tender look that made me faint”. 
Carter’s swoon becomes a hopeful turning point, opening up the possibility that 
violence might be transformed into tenderness.

• Naomi Booth’s debut novella, The Lost Art of Sinking 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/288817/s/the-lost-art-of-sinking/>
, is published by Penned in the Margins.
 