
Philip French, Observer film critic

BEST ACTOR Colin Firth for The King's Speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech?INTCMP=SRCH>

This is a performance of power, depth and dignity about a man of courage and 
probity accepting responsibility for his own life and that of others. I would 
be prepared to go into court as an expert witness to testify to the unique 
authenticity of his stammer.

BEST ACTRESS Natalie Portman for Black Swan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137726/black-swan?INTCMP=SRCH>

Annette Bening <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annette-bening> and Julianne 
Moore ought to win forThe Kids Are All Right. To award one or the other would 
be like giving an Oscar to Laurel forThe Music Box and ignoring Hardy. 
Portman's performance inBlack Swan is a tour de force in a hollow film.
 Jesse Eisenberg stars in The Social Network. Photograph: Merrick Morton 
BEST FILM The Social Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137709/social-network?INTCMP=SRCH>

A superb piece of film-making in every respect, probably the first important 
movie that could only have been made in this century. It brings a sharp eye and 
a critical intelligence to bear upon a remarkable phenomenon without appearing 
either dazzled by youth or querulously fogeyish.

BEST DIRECTOR David Fincher for The Social Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/david-fincher?INTCMP=SRCH>

This is Fincher's best film to date, topping Seven, Fight Club and Zodiac, his 
three previous successes. It weaves with skill and a Renoiresque fairness the 
careers of several competing egotists while explaining the complex context 
within which they work.

DARK HORSE Winter's Bone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/136977/winter-s-bone>

It's a sleeper that might just sneak in there and win something for one of the 
talented women involved.

OVERLOOKED Of Gods and Men 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/139674/of-gods-and-men>

Xavier Beauvois's picture is a masterpiece. It is a disgrace that it wasn't 
shortlisted for best foreign language film and a cause for concern that it 
wasn't nominated for best film.

Sandra Hebron, London Film Festival artistic director

BEST ACTOR Colin Firth <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/colin-firth?INTCMP=SRCH>

It's hard to see anyone other than Colin Firth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/colin-firth> taking home the award, given the 
strength of his performance and its Oscar friendliness. And let's hope he does, 
given his skill in delivering gracious and funny acceptance speeches.
 Annette Bening in The Kids Are All Right. Photograph: Colle/Allstar/Cinetext 
BEST ACTRESS Annette Bening 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/27/annette-bening-david-thomson?INTCMP=SRCH>
 orNatalie Portman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2011/jan/02/observer-profile-natalie-portman?INTCMP=SRCH>

I'd love to see Michelle Williams (Blue Valentine) win, but realistically I 
think it will be a tussle between Annette Bening and Natalie Portman and as 
Portman's is the more "dramatic" role, that might sway the Academy.

BEST FILM The Social Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137709/social-network?INTCMP=SRCH>

The expanded list makes for an unusually deserving set of contenders. Despite 
The King's Speech storming the Baftas, and the film's appeal for US audiences, 
the quintessentially AmericanThe Social Network might still clinch it on the 
night.

BEST DIRECTOR David Fincher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher>

I'm delighted to see Darren Aronofsky (Black Swan) and David O Russell (The 
Fighter) on the list, helping the Academy to seem a little less dusty than in 
some years.That said, I think Fincher (left) is likely to take the award.

DARK HORSE Probably nothing

In the bigger categories, I don't see too many dark horses, except in best 
film, where at this stage anything other thanThe Social Network or The King's 
Speech could probably be deemed a dark horse.

OVERLOOKED Carey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>

Inevitably, there are many, every year. This year, in best actress, I'd 
suggest Carey Mulligan forNever Let Me Go, or Ruth Sheen or Lesley Manville for 
Another Year. Jim Broadbent in that film, too, and Ryan Gosling in Blue 
Valentine. And Alex Garland's script for Never Let Me Go should have been up 
for adapted screenplay.

Jason Solomons, chair of the London Critics' Circle

BEST ACTOR Colin Firth <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/colin-firth?INTCMP=SRCH>

Long live King Colin, although he was better last year in A Single Man. I wish 
Ryan Gosling was nominated - he's astounding inBlue Valentine, going from 
adorable to painful. I was impressed by Jesse Eisenberg's quick patter inThe 
Social Network until I met him last week and discovered he talks like that in 
real life...
 NATALIE PORTMAN 
BEST ACTRESS Natalie Portman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2011/jan/02/observer-profile-natalie-portman?INTCMP=SRCH>

Natalie Portman has it licked, because people have been waiting for her to do 
something half-decent ever sinceLeon. How was Annette Bening nominated when 
Julianne Moore isn't? I wish Lesley Manville (Another Year) was among this lot.

BEST FILM The Social Network">The Social Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137709/social-network?INTCMP=SRCH>

The Academy will counter BAFTAafta jingoism by rewarding The Social Network. 
MaybeThe King's Speech peaked too soon, like Brokeback Mountain in 2006. Could 
there yet be a shock,Crash-style win for True Grit?

BEST DIRECTOR David Fincher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/david-fincher?INTCMP=SRCH>

I can't fathom why Christopher Nolan isn't nominated when Aronofsky is. I 
think it'll go to Fincher, although his film lacks a human touch. All that 
money, all that youth, and yet he seems frustratingly detached from commenting 
on it.

DARK HORSE Toy Story 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/jul/18/toy-story-3-film-review>

Toy Story 3 is the most sensitive, moving and delightful film among the 10 
nominees. I'd love to see it burst out of the animated ghetto and win best 
film. Would anyone really complain?

OVERLOOKED George Clooney <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/georgeclooney>

George Clooney was movie-star mighty in The American, but somehow that film's 
been buried. I would love to have seenUncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past 
Lives in foreign language film and Clio Barnard's The Arbor in the documentary 
category, ahead of Banksy.

Susanna White, director of Generation Kill and Bleak House

BEST ACTOR Colin Firth <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/colin-firth>

It has to go to Colin Firth, who goes from strength to strength. But I thought 
James Franco was extraordinary in127 Hours - only he and Danny Boyle could make 
that situation completely gripping.

BEST ACTRESS Natalie Portman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2011/jan/02/observer-profile-natalie-portman>

I think it will go to Natalie Portman for what is an extraordinary piece of 
work, emotionally and physically, but I'd love to see a win for Annette 
Bening's flawless performance.

BEST FILM The Social Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137709/social-network?INTCMP=SRCH>

Given the home vote, I think it will go to The Social Network. What's great is 
to see so many good low-budget outsiders romping home in the nominations list, 
which must give us hope for the industry –The King's Speech, The Kids Are All 
Right, Winter's Bone, The Fighter, 127 Hours – all thoroughly deserving.

BEST DIRECTOR Tom Hooper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/jan/21/kings-speech-tom-hooper-live-blog>

The DGA (Directors Guild of America) win for Tom is traditionally a good 
indicator. He deserves it forThe King's Speech, a film that shows a really 
unified vision across all aspects – casting, performance, design, score, 
editing.
 Jennifer Lawrence Photograph: Rex Features/c.Roadside/Everett 
DARK HORSE Jennifer Lawrence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/sep/02/jennifer-lawrence-sitting-pretty>

Jennifer Lawrence for best actress; an exciting discovery. And Mark Ruffalo (
The Kids Are All Right) could steal supporting actor from Christian Bale (The 
Fighter) - people feel a lot of affection for him, and he played that role with 
real subtlety. Watch out likewise for the excellent John Hawkes (Winter's Bone).

OVERLOOKED Women directors

I'm saddened that there are no women up for best director given Lisa 
Cholodenko'sThe Kids Are All Right and Debra Granik's extraordinary Winter's 
Bone – both of them thoroughly deserving. Also overlooked and Mia Wasikowska, 
who put in terrific performances inThe Kids Are All Right.
 