
There were scuffles in the courtroom as the trial of one of Africa’s most 
ruthless dictators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/former-chad-dictator-hissene-habre-trial-adjourned-until-september>
 got under way this week, in Dakar, Senegal – before being adjourned until 
September. The emotions were hardly unexpected. The man in the dock was a 
leader who has inflicted an array of repressive measures on his people during 
his decade-long rule. Those who had suffered could finally, after many years of 
legal effort, confront their torturer and hold him accountable for the pain he 
inflicted.

The trial of Hissène Habré, the former president of Chad, is an event of 
historic importance, not just for one nation or one region, but for a whole 
continent and beyond. It is a major step for international justice inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and, as such, it should be 
applauded. African judges will give their verdict on what an African leader did 
to his people. For the first time, an African court, not a western-based one, 
will rule on atrocities committed by an African leader.

Mr Habré is charged with crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture, 
allegedly perpetrated during his period of rule inChad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad> from 1982 to 1990. After he entered 
the courtroom, he wasted no time in expressing his outrage at having to account 
for his acts. “African traitors!” he shouted at those who had finally brought 
him to justice. Yet traitors they are most definitely not. The families of 
victims, the human rights activists and the NGOs who worked tirelessly and 
bravely for over 20 years to reach this moment, are better regarded as heroes.

Hissène Habré’s presidency was a time of widespread political killing, of 
systematic torture and of thousands of arbitrary arrests. Chadians lived under 
the terror of a political police, the DDC, whose directors reported directly to 
Habré himself. More than 40,000 people are estimated to have suffered from 
abuse and torture, and many of them died. This trial therefore sends out a 
clear signal to other leaders in Africa who have trampled on fundamental human 
rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/how-former-us-army-officer-launched-disastrous-coup-the-gambia>
. It is a powerful example of African justice at work in dealing with the most 
serious crimes perpetrated by a political leader.

This is not a case where, as with Charles Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2012/apr/26/charles-taylor-trial-verdict-live>
, a former African leader is transported far away, to Europe, to face justice. 
Nor is it a case involving the international criminal court, which has often – 
and rather unfairly – been decried as a western-led effort solely targeting 
Africans. The trial of Habré is a turning point because it involves a special 
court set up jointly by the African Union and Senegal, the country where Habré 
had sought exile. It is also the first trial in Africa to be carried out under 
universal jurisdiction, a concept which, in international law, allows national 
courts to prosecute the most serious crimes even when they have been committed 
abroad. The fact that the African Union has made such a choice sets an 
important precedent. Perhaps connected to this is the fact that the trial might 
shed some light on the complacency – if not complicity – that some western 
countries showed towards Habré during his rule.

International justice has certainly been applied unevenly in recent years, not 
only in Africa. There is a certain irony in the fact that theAfrican Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> has actively worked to 
prosecute Habré, all the while bashing the international criminal court. That 
smacks of hypocrisy. The ICC can only have jurisdiction over crimes committed 
after its founding treaty came into force in 2002 – long after Habré’s rule. 
And in all the African cases where the ICC has been activated, this came about 
as a result of decisions taken by African governments themselves, or by the UN 
security council.

The ICC is not a western conspiracy. In fact, what the ICC mostly suffers from 
is that powerful countries such as the US, Russia and China, to this day, 
refuse to sign up to the ICC – thus leaving gaping holes in the fight against 
immunity worldwide. Just as they have supported the trial of Habré, African 
nations should live up to their commitments to the ICC. Last month, South 
Africa failed dismally to do so when it refused to detain the Sudanese 
president,Omar al-Bashir, who is the object of an international arrest warrant 
(issued by the ICC) for genocide and crimes against humanity in Darfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/14/guardian-view-on-international-criminal-court-omar-al-bashir>
.

The trial of Habré shows that international justice is progressing, but this 
cannot be a pick-and-choose effort. It must be a coherent, constant endeavour, 
where treaties are respected, where rule of law applies to all, and where a 
clear priority must be given to victims and to their families, who more than 
anything need the truth.
 