
I was being ushered out of the office of a senior Nato officer in Kandahar 
when he turned to me and said: "If I was a young man, I'd be fighting with the
Taliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>."

As they prepared their Kandahar offensive last summer, a British-led command 
group came to the conclusion the real trouble in Kandahar was not the Taliban 
but what became known as "malign actors". The actor in chief was the man 
universally referred to as AWK –Ahmed Wali Karzai, the brother of President 
Hamid Karzai, who was killed yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/12/ahmed-wali-karzai-killing-sparks-fears>
.

I can't name the officer who spoke to me. But Nick Carter, a British major 
general then in charge, was equally blunt about where the trouble lay. 
Deploying a complicated chart of Pashtun tribes, he explained how the origin of 
the Taliban could be linked to the dominant power held across southern
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, both in the 1990s 
and after 9/11, by a small sway of "king-making" tribes, including the Popalzai 
of Karzai's family and the larger Alikozai and Barakzai groups. Thus the 
formation of the Taliban was, in great measure, a revolt of the excluded.

When they arrived after 9/11 in Afghanistan, the US chose to ally with 
warlords from these tribes to push out the Taliban. And, in the years that 
followed, rather than break those ties and widen the circle of power,Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> got to be ever more dependent on these 
men.

As the journalist Anand Gopal has explained brilliantly 
<http://afpak.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2010/11/10/missed_opportunities_in_kandahar>
, powerbrokers such as AWK and the Barakzai strongman and former Kandahar 
governor Gul Agha Sherzai not only seized control of Nato purse-strings by 
acquiring lucrative contracts, but they also manipulated US intelligence and US 
special forces to gain help with their predatory and retaliatory agenda. Facing 
the risk of constant arrest and harassment, they drove the former Taliban over 
the border into Pakistan, where the movement began to be reconstituted.

On the streets of Kandahar, where I stayed unembedded last year, I reported 
<http://www.stephengrey.com/2010/07/hearts-minds-and-the-same-old-warlords/> on 
how it was obvious the armed militias of AWK and other strongmen like Sherzai 
who ruled the roost were feared far more than the Taliban. Perched on a 
strategic trans-Asia highway, Kandahar is essentially a giant truck stop. The 
smuggler was and is king. Most of the media – then obsessed by calling the city 
a "Taliban stronghold" – failed to grasp it.

I remember getting an email from a senior US officer after the district 
governor of Arghandab, just outside the city, was gunned down, in a killing 
blamed widely on the Taliban. "Don't be fooled," he told me. This was not the 
Taliban's work. "It's more like a mafia hit," he said.

In the face of such analysis, Carter and his then commander, General Stan 
McChrystal 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-runaway-general-20100622>, 
decided to face down AWK. A US intelligence chief paid him a visit – 
threatening that if he put a step wrong they would put him on the target list. 
There was a discussion about whether he could be forced into exile.

"If we are going to conduct a population-centric strategy in Afghanistan, and 
we are perceived as backing thugs, then we are just undermining ourselves," 
Major General Michael T Flynn, then the senior US military intelligence 
official in Afghanistan,was quoted as saying 
<http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/33500863/ns/world_news-the_new_york_times/t/karzais-brother-said-be-cia-payroll/>
.

But ultimately the US and Nato backed down. They worried about the power 
vacuum AWK would leave behind. They knew how dependent they were on him: it was 
AWK and Sherzai who staffed and guarded the Nato bases, who secured their vital 
road movements, provided intelligence and who supplied the manpower for some 
secret strike forces run by the CIA and US special forces.

"Every place has a king and you know better than me who is king of Kandahar," 
a local human rights activist, Shahid Hussein, told me. "It isAhmed Wali Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, and he is not doing it 
just because he is the brother of the president; he is doing it because he is 
backed by the Americans."

But, as senior generals told me, the real trouble was politics. It was all 
really a "matter of Kabul". The problem of "malign actors" such as AWK could 
only be solved not by military force, but by a political process: President 
Karzai had to find a means to divorce himself from the warlords such as his 
brother and broaden the base of his political rule.

It was a fanciful dream. What Nato lacked, and lacks now acutely, was the 
luxury of time. McChrystal and his successor, General David Petraeus, won their 
surge of military force in Afghanistan – but it was extracted from Washington 
at the price of a drastic timetable, driven by a political and popular demand 
for a quick exit.

And so, just as the US hurried to defeat the Taliban in 2001 and needed the 
warlords to accomplish that task, as they prepare to leave, they risk depending 
on men such as AWK to secure their withdrawal. They fear there really isn't 
time to reshape Afghan politics.

A case in point is an ally of AWK and notorious gangster in his own right, the 
border police chief Abdul Razaq. Far from ending ties with him, Razaq and his 
militia were brought in by Nato to play a crucial role in the military 
offensives last year; and when the police chief of Kandahar was slain this 
year, Razaq was brought in to fill his shoes.

In this triumph of realpolitik, the death of AWK is a big setback. With the 
fundamental dynamics unchanged, a new strongman will finally emerge as boss. 
But in the meantime there will be some chaos. The warlords will squabble in a 
bloody fashion among themselves and –like in The Godfather – will "go to the 
mattresses" <http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/go_to_the_mattresses>. Hamid Karzai 
is also personally wounded. He rules through powerbrokers and – without his 
anchor down south – will likely be more rudderless than usual.

And yet in his death there is some hope. AWK ruled by fear. Cowed by his 
militias, we found not a single local journalist, for instance, who dared 
criticise him last year. If there is a chance to change those dynamics, to 
remake the politics, to break the power of the warlords, then this is it. But 
don't hold your breath.
 