
A few days ago, I was sitting in a cafe reading a book when a man came up to 
me, looking vaguely embarrassed, but nonetheless determined. “I’ve never done 
this before,” he said. “But I have to tell you: that is probably the best book 
I have ever read.”

I’d never been approached like this before either. Nevertheless, I wasn’t 
surprised that someone had felt so compelled to approach me. After all, I was 
reading The Siege Of Krishnapur by JG Farrell. If any book would make me 
overcome my English reticence and start speaking to a complete stranger in a 
public place, it would be this one.

Looking back at the Booker: JG Farrell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/23/lookingbackatthebookerjg>
What’s more, I think I’d say the same thing. I’d even keep the “probably” in 
there. I wouldn’t want to start a scrap with Hemingway, Joyce, Jean Rhys and 
everyone else. But while I can’t categorically state it’s the best book ever, I 
find it hard to think of one that I prefer. One that does more as a work of 
fiction, or that says more about our flawed humanity.

In case you haven’t yet had the heady delight of reading this masterpiece 
(that’s right: masterpiece), a brief summary: It’s a retelling ofthe Siege of 
Lucknow <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siege_of_Lucknow>, based partly on 
contemporary accounts, diaries and letters ofthe British colonialists who 
defended their Residency against Indian soldiers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Residencies_of_British_India> for several long, 
bloody months during the Indian mutiny.

The Siege Of Krishnapur is a superb portrayal of physical horrors and 
psychological fallout. Intolerable heat, appalling insects, abominable rations, 
the stench of putrefaction, the sweat and shake of fever, the blood and shit of 
cholera – all are evoked in unflinching detail.

Likewise, as the siege goes on, the skein of Victorian civilisation slowly 
frays, before unravelling entirely. Farrell’s hero the Collector, a man devoted 
to his contemporary culture, sees all his ideas about religion, technology, 
civilisation, Englishness and life itself undermined and fatally undone. “From 
the farmyard in which his certitudes perched like fat chickens, every night of 
the siege, one or two were carried off in the jaws of rationalism and despair,” 
writes Farrell in a typically lovely phrase.

Farrell pulls off the impressive trick of not only making us feel like we are 
inside this struggling garrison but also of showing us (as Elizabeth Bowen put 
it) “yesterday reflected in today’s consciousness”. Even though we never emerge 
from the Victorian headspace, this becomes a book about the folly of 
colonialism and the illusions of civilisation, as well as one about survival in 
impossible circumstances.

As if all that isn’t impressive enough, it’s hilarious. In spite of its 
unflinching portrayal of moral and physical collapse, The Siege Of Krishnapur 
is wonderfully funny, written with devastating wit and rambunctious humanity. I 
can’t praise it enough – and I can’t push it enough. I was actually reading it 
in that cafe because I am just about to foist it upon a class of creative 
writing students, as part of my ongoing quest to thrust this novel on people 
whenever I get the chance.

My evangelism is made all the more urgent by a worrying feeling that Farrell 
is still underrated. In a sense, this is an absurd notion. After all, the novel 
has always been well-reviewed, and always had numerous and illustrious 
champions (Hilary Mantel among them 
<http://www.newsweek.com/hilary-mantels-5-favorite-historical-fictions- 64995>
). Itwon the Booker prize in 1973 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/23/lookingbackatthebookerjg>
 – and was subsequently also nominated for the Best of Booker prize.

The fact that it didn’t win the Best of Booker still rankles. Midnight’s 
Children was probably a worthy winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jul/10/bestofbooker> – but I 
think I’d choose The Siege Of Krishnapur. It’s also notable that Farrell didn’t 
make therecent international critics’ list of the best 100 British novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/08/best-british-novel-of-all-time-international-critics-top-100-middlemarch>
, even though CS Lewis did. And if The Siege Of Krishnapur isn’t better than 
The Chronicles Of Narnia, I’m a talking lion with a messiah complex. Even the 
otherwise reliable Robert McCrum left it out ofhis top 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/the-100-best-novels-written-in-english-the-full-list>
.

It seems improbable to me that anyone could read this novel and not have it 
somewhere near the top of their list, so the fact that it rarely makes it on to 
such countdowns makes me see potential new converts everywhere.

And yes, I include you among them. If you haven’t yet read The Siege of 
Krishnapur, don’t hesitate.Buy it 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/siege-of-krishnapur.html>, read it, 
experience the wonder – and then, please, tell everyone else you know.
 