
Anyone coming to The Real Thing for the first time – which may well be the 
case if you are neither Australian nor of a certain age – might assume that 
based on the opening finger-picked guitar notes, here was some lost gem from 
Small Faces or even the Kinks. The song then continues with a chord progression 
pretty much directly lifted from Donovan’sHurdy Gurdy Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3lKCUuyojDI>. 

Russell Morris’s hit is a song that in its nods to many of the most 
recognisable hallmarks of 60s psychedelia, from its use of “phasing” to the 
Hammond organ and sitar, has its roots firmly in San Francisco’s Haight-Ashbury 
or London’s Carnaby Street.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM_1R3aUFL0g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM_1R3aUFL0g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM_1R3aUFL0g&media=>
But it was sung by a man from Melbourne and written by a Dutch immigrant who 
grew up in Perth. Though heavily derivative in nearly every aspect, singer 
Russell Morris and composer Johnny Young, along with producer Ian “Molly” 
Meldrum, are responsible for a single that sits as a seismic release in the 
history of recorded music in Australia. It reached No 1 in May 1969, dislodging 
Peter Sarstedt’s nauseatingWhere Do You Go To (My Lovely)? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8XQZYIiNgo> and was itself replaced by the 
Beatles’ Get Back/Don’t Let Me Down.

There is one ingredient, however, that does distinguish the track from the 
imported rock of the era. After 37 seconds Morris launches into his iconic “ooh 
mama mow mow” refrain, an odd but zeitgeisty piece of nonsense – Meldrum, after 
all, wanted the song to sound like I Am The Walrus. In fact, the line was 
originally meant to be a guitar part, with Morris’s improvised singing a mere 
guide for the guitarist. Meldrum had the nous to keep it.

The Real Thing was written by Johnny Young upon returning to Australia in 
1968, fresh from hanging out with Barry Gibb of the Bee Gees in London. Meldrum 
overheard Young playing it in a TV studio one day, and saw it as the perfect 
fit for Morris, the producer’s great new pop hope.

The song’s recording was an elaborate affair, with Meldrum gathering up a 
coterie of musicians from Melbourne’s finest bands in a hell-bent quest to 
forge an all-encompassing sound in the vein of Strawberry Fields Forever (the 
Beatles) or Good Vibrations (the Beach Boys). It was a noble but wrongheaded 
mission: though passionate and with a keen ear, Meldrum was no George Martin or 
Brian Wilson.

Over several months Meldrum’s team toiled, and they did indeed make history. 
As far as Australian pop went, nothing had been quite this ambitious. As well 
as the sitars and the phasing (something those children of The Real Thing, Tame 
Impala, are so beholden to) the track is a patchwork of overdubs and, of 
course, runs for over six minutes (a shorter version was released for radio) 
thanks to the extended, multi-layered outro which today sounds somewhat thin. 
It was nevertheless a landmark sequence that proved that Australian studios 
could also create the new-fangled sounds floating down from the north. Such a 
complex piece was, somehow, recorded on a mere eight-track device by engineer 
John Sayers.

Lyrically, the song is not as meaningless as it might seem. Young was 
apparently less than impressed by Coca Cola’s advertising slogan proclaiming 
the drink “the real thing”; the song was his retort, a celebration of 
authenticity amid the growing strength of such hollow rhetoric (which is 
ironic, when you consider that The Real Thing was recorded in many different 
parts and tracks using a myriad of studio techniques and effects, a method that 
would have been regarded as far from authentic by some purists in the 60s).

Such is the stature of The Real Thing that both Midnight Oil and Kylie Minogue 
have recorded cover versions. And, the song made up part of theopening credits 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HkCWYZz4t3k> to the 90s children’s TV program, 
The Afternoon Show. The Real Thing’s biggest exposure in recent times, however, 
came when it and a Morris original,Wings Of An Eagle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ho4igoIlrro>, were included on the soundtrack 
to Rob Sitch’s 2000 film The Dish.

Morris, who has often expressed some bewilderment at the fuss made over the 
song, kept up a successful solo career though failed to really penetrate beyond 
Australia. His 1973 album Wings Of An Eagle remains, perhaps, his critical 
highpoint, while at 66 he is still performing regularly and infine voice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yQ5q50I52gk>.
 