
The Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) has published the annual 
statements by its member publishers 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/press-standards/annual-statements/>about their approach 
to editorial standards, complaints-handling procedures and records of 
compliance.

The documents, which cover 2015, highlight how the system of press regulation 
is developing and include national titles, local newspapers and magazines.

Ipso’s chair, Sir Alan Moses <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses>
, calls the statements “a transparent demonstration” of his body’s regulatory 
functions and believes they help to improve compliance with the editors’ code 
of practice.

Among the formal and studiedly cautious documents are some with a lighter 
touch that raise a smile. Far and away the most enjoyable is the submission by 
theCongleton Chronicle <http://www.chronicleseries.com/>.

It is unclear if the writer, editor Jeremy Condliffe, set out to lace his 
statement 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/media/1085/heads-congleton-ltd-annual-statement-2015-for-publication.pdf>
with humour. Whether he did so consciously or not, I found myself chuckling 
throughout.

My interest was initially piqued by his revelation that his paper’s staff work 
tothe code of ethics drawn up by the US Society of Professional Journalists 
<http://www.spj.org/ethicscode.asp>, noting that the home-grown code is merely 
“the minimum standard”.

That made me read on, and it just got better and better: “We speak to both 
sides of any story. The only time this fails is with new trainees”... “In 
theory we have a formal complaints procedure, in practice it is rarely used”... 
“If you’ve done a crime and you’re in the paper, take it on the chin.”


He offered some good home-spun philosophy too: “Just as there’s many a slip 
twixt cup and lip, there’s a many a slip between notepad and screen.” But 
subeditors will surely like his pay-off to a mea culpa about the Chronicle’s 
mistake in its description of a display of angels at the Congleton United 
Reformed Church.

The reporter, apparently unfamiliar with the abbreviations for feet and 
inches, had written that they were seven inches, rather than seven feet, tall. 
“Apologies to the church,” wrote Condliffe. “Metrication, who needs it?”

On a more serious note...

The statement by Associated Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>, publisher of the 
Mail titles, eschews comedy in favour of a sober analysis of its record.

After all, Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre is chair of the editors’ code 
committee and formerMail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> editor Peter Wright sits on 
Ipso’s complaints committee, so you would expect a serious statement.

But, putting aside cynical thoughts (and Hacked Off’s likely antagonism), it 
was interesting to read the company’s“steps taken to respond to adverse 
adjudications 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/media/1061/associated-newspapers-limited-annual-statement-2015-for-publication.pdf>
.”

Each breach is listed. In some cases, staff were reprimanded while general 
warnings were issued. In one instance, subs were told that headlines on 
contentious stories should be checked with reporters. Was that, I wonder, 
influenced by the outrageous one about Ed Miliband’s father hating Britain (
still up online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2435751/Red-Eds-pledge-bring-socialism-homage-Marxist-father-Ralph-Miliband-says-GEOFFREY-LEVY.html>
, I see)?

That said, and let’s be fair, the Mail’s comprehensive statement is something 
of a textbook response to Ipso’s requirements. Others would do well to use it 
as a template.

And finally, to the Times. The statement by its publisher 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/media/1103/news-corp-uk-ireland-annual-statement-2015-for-publication.pdf>
, News UK, contains a revelation about how seriously the paper takes Ipso 
decisions when adjudged guilty of breaching the editors’ code.

After Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> upheld a complaint by 
Jonathan Portes, the principal research fellow at the National Institute of 
Economic and Social Research, a senior Times editor sent a written reminder to 
staff about the need for care in using statistics.

Not content with that, the newsroom was then addressed by a representative of 
the Royal Statistical Society. I doubt, however, that anyone at the session 
dared to say: “Metrication, who needs it?”

All the statements can be found here on the Ipso website 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/press-standards/annual-statements/>.
 