
The smaller aspen's leaves flicker at the edge of the stand, trembling and 
caught in sunlight against the staves of the larger trunks, the gloom beyond. 
How musical the composition is, the tonal pitch perfect. Under the bed in 
Memphis, dust and down from the pillows gathers among old shoes and forgotten 
sneakers. There is a lost dime down there. The first, a black-and-white image, 
is by Ansel Adams, a photographer who could have been a professional pianist. 
This year is his centenary. The second, shot from carpet-level, is byWilliam 
Eggleston <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/william-eggleston>, whom I 
imagine uncomfortable on his belly, poking his camera into the dark, the reek 
of household dust sharp in his nose.

The back-to-back retrospectives of their work, opening at the Hayward Gallery 
on Thursday, provide more than an exercise in comparison, even though it is 
difficult for the viewer not to be drawn into an inner debate. Which do you 
prefer, landscape or life? The artists' lives, their attitudes and their 
photographs of the US could not be more different.

Both have been seen as "pioneers" of photography. Yet we might also see them 
as photographers of the great contested America: the natural and spiritual 
versus the urban and the populous, Adams's awe against Eggleston's everyday. If 
we think of the wonders of nature, whether it is a mile-high rock or a close-up 
view of grass stems in a flooded meadow, as being somehow escapist, and of 
Eggleston's images of a dead black guy in his coffin and a yellow courtesy 
taxi-phone as somehow more real, we are missing something. Nor is Eggleston 
immune to nature, even if it appears only as a backdrop to a rest-stop, or 
shoots in a dry field, where the earth is as fertile as cat litter.

One might say that Adams's photographs look back to the 19th-century painters 
of the American wilderness (recently shown at Tate Britain), while Eggleston is 
at home in the cinematic America of a Tim Burton or David Lynch movie. Nature, 
for Adams, is primordial and somehow wholesome. There is nothing altogether 
wholesome in an Eggleston photograph, however ordinary: a white fan against a 
white ceiling, an axe on a cold barbecue, a middle-aged woman overdressed for 
some occasion. There is nothing innocent in an Eggleston: even the Sunday roast 
on a gingham cloth is somehow nightmarish, a Good Housekeeping spread gone bad.

The pleasure of an Adams photograph lies in the quality he brings to, and 
draws out of, the rocks and ponds, the trees and falls. The world in an Adams 
photograph is filled with variegated shadow and tone, crisp texture and radiant 
light. As much as he was alert to geology and mass, he also saw nature, and its 
relation to the flat, bounded plane of the photograph, in terms of shapes, 
tonality, graphic variety and detail. The lyricism of his work is tempered by a 
great deal of artifice, his images manipulated by the use of lens filters and 
work in the darkroom. He makes you invent colour where there is none, and feel 
immanence where no feeling is.

Eggleston's world is somehow unclean, however bright and tart the colour. 
Eggleston the urbane sharpshooter of the unregarded (sometimes firing the 
camera without looking through the viewfinder); Adams the Wordsworthian 
recorder of peaks, thickets, water and weather. Adams with his plate camera and 
his rich grey scale, his precisely calibrated tones of black, white and 
intermediate greys; Eggleston with his synthetic colour, his technically 
advanced inkjet, Iris and C-type prints. You look into Adams's photographs. You 
look at Eggleston's. This isn't just a matter of differences in scale or 
delicacy, or that you have to work harder at the detail in an Adams image. It 
isn't a matter of long exposure. Somehow, the spirit and tempo of the time 
comes with the photograph. With Eggleston, we feel that the photographer shoots 
and moves on. An Adams has the photographer standing there for a long time, his 
head under a cloth, nature beyond.

Adams's America presents itself as ancient and apparently uninhabited. 
Eggleston's America is trashy and shrill, messed-up, beat-up, littered with 
man-made detritus. Adams and Eggleston do, however, make an oddly apposite 
pairing, harsh though the contrasts and contradictions are.

Another distinction: Eggleston's images seem to cry out for translation into 
words, while Adams's mostly leave you silent, in the same way that the grandeur 
of much of what he photographed leaves you respectfully awestruck. "When we 
look at Adams's best pictures, we imagine that they were made by a man alone in 
the great high silences of romantic solitude," writes John Szarkowski in the 
Adams catalogue. But if Adams makes you think of Wordsworth, Eggleston can 
equally remind the viewer of William Carlos Williams, and his Blakean drop of 
rain on a red wheelbarrow. No wheelbarrows for Eggleston: instead a kid's trike 
on the sidewalk, seen from ground level and looming huge over the suburban 
single-storey houses.

Eggleston once said that he thought of his own photographs as "part of a novel 
I'm doing". This seems right: Eggleston's images are an equivalent to the Big 
American Novel, a novel largely of the south, written in terse, plain 
sentences. It would also be a novel without reason or explication. An armchair 
is abandoned in the dust, a suitcase thrown out with it, dead leaves blown into 
the case, which has a faded violet lining and some purple clothes inside. The 
naked man in the room is scratching his head: you don't know why. The words GOD 
and MONA are sprayed on the wall. A cigarette burns down on the chest of 
drawers. He could be scratching his head because he doesn't know what to make 
of it all either. Eggleston is there too, wedged between the bed and the chest, 
though you know he is there only because he took the photograph. What are any 
of us doing here, one might ask.

It was also Szarkowski, then curator and now director emeritus of the 
photography department of New York's Museum of Modern Art, whom Eggleston 
visited in 1967, with a portfolio of his photographs (like a man turning 
himself in to the authorities, so the story goes). Szarkowski pronounced them 
"perfect". "Perfectly banal," retorted Hilton Kramer in a bilious New York 
Times review, but what did Kramer ever know? The worlds of the two 
photographers are not incompatible. After all, in order to get to the mountain 
you have to pass through the gas station, arriving from somewhere very like the 
world Eggleston depicts.

Eggleston's images are filled with uncanny moments, untold stories, the sense 
of a world observed, dwelt on and - just as significantly - dwelt in. Adams was 
also a more worldly figure than his photographs might suggest. Even his forays 
into the wilderness were not so lonesome as the photographs tell us. He was 
often accompanied by scores of footsore nature lovers, whom he shepherded as 
assistant trail boss. That he did not turn his camera on them may suggest that 
he was escaping something, but he was also looking for something else.

I don't know if Eggleston ever looked for more than what is there. In one of 
his early black-and-white images, low sunlight reaches across the diner 
counter, making the ketchup bottles, the ashtray, the salt cellar, the sugar 
shaker and the chrome napkin-caddy glow. They cast long shadows and deep 
reflections on the counter. Somehow the reflections and the shadows have become 
tangled up, first with each other, then with other reflections of windows and 
the world outside. The whole image could itself be a reflection in a mirror. 
How tangled up in what he saw did Adams get, in those places where shadow and 
sunlight, woods and scree and ponds, are so complex and magnificent that it 
needs a camera's eye to take it all in? The world is various, and that is the 
lesson of this show.

Â· Ansel Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams> at 100 
and William Eggleston are at the Hayward Gallery, London SE1, from Thursday 
until September 22. Details: 020-7960 5226.
 