
There was a very brief moment at the beginning of The Great Holiday Baking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/baking> Show when I knew it wasn’t 
going to work.

ABC’s four-week Christmas-themed variant on the UK super smash The Great 
British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/07/the-guardian-view-on-the-great-british-bake-off-the-bbcs-light-and-delicious-showstopper>
 looks exactly like its predecessor, complete with the stately manor, sprawling 
green lawn and the simple white tent. As the show opens, we see two exuberant 
hosts standing next to six contestants, and the set-up looks very much like the 
British show that a growing number of Americans are obsessed with. But as the 
shot pans out, the American amateur bakers do something their British 
counterparts would never do: they cheer.

That expression of performed enthusiasm was exactly when I knew we were doomed.

The Great Holiday Baking Show, which premieres on ABC on 30 November at 10pm 
EST, tries very, very hard to beThe Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> – which 
aired in the US as The Great British Baking Show for the first four series on 
PBS before Netflix acquired the rights to series five. As in the original Bake 
Off, there are three “bakes” per episode: a signature bake, where contestants 
produce variations on a certain dish; a technical bake, where everyone makes 
the same dish with vague instructions; and a showstopper challenge, which is 
like the signature bake but with a lot more pizazz.

There are two hosts of the ABC special, but instead of Sue Perkins and Mel 
Giedroyc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/19/great-british-bake-off-mel-giedroyc-sue-perkins-its-a-show-about-cakes>
, we have My Big Fat Greek Wedding’s Nia Vardalos and her husband, Cougar Town 
star Ian Gomez. It is a choice so odd that there isn’t an emoji to express how 
it makes me feel. The judges are Johnny Iuzzini, who spent two seasons as the 
judge of Bravo’s Top Chef: Just Desserts, and Bake Off’s reigning queen dowager
Mary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/15/mary-berry-baking-is-physical-and-mental-therapy>
.

The sets look identical, they use the same music cues, and even the little 
storybook drawings of the intended dishes are trotted out. All of the 
ingredients are there, but this soufflé seems to have fallen flat in the oven. 
Maybe it wasn’t left in the proving drawer long enough?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgreat-holiday-baking-show-british-bake-off-abc-copy-fails%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24899f86e0b2e3d6309cb16716f5252414a93cc3%2F0_60_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Great%20Holiday%20Baking%20Show%3A%20US%20tries%20and%20fails%20to%20copy%20UK%20super%20smash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgreat-holiday-baking-show-british-bake-off-abc-copy-fails%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Great%20Holiday%20Baking%20Show%3A%20US%20tries%20and%20fails%20to%20copy%20UK%20super%20smash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgreat-holiday-baking-show-british-bake-off-abc-copy-fails%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24899f86e0b2e3d6309cb16716f5252414a93cc3%2F0_60_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Nia Vardalos and Ian Gomez. Photograph: Michael Bourdillon/ABC 
The problem is that the show is trying so hard to emulate its UK counterpart 
that Bake Off fans are left waiting for it to achieve the same brilliance, but 
it never does. For instance, Vardalos and Gomez use the same “On your marks. 
Get set. Bake!” tagline that Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins employ, but without 
the daffiness that makes it so amusing. Saying the words of a spell isn’t 
enough unless you really believe them. Ian Gomez also goes for a “soggy bottom” 
joke in the first episode, but references cookies instead of pies or tarts, and 
totally misses the provenance of the double entendre.

It also seems that someone in development decided that one of the reasons that 
Bake Off works is because it is “nice”. On theABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> show, everyone tries very hard to be 
nice. Mary Berry gives her constructive criticism, as always, but pulls her 
punches with American bakers. It’s like everyone gets a participation trophy 
rather than tough lessons on how to be a better baker. (And these bakers could 
surely use it. With a field of only six I expected some top-notch creations but 
most of these showstoppers were duds that would never fly on the BBC.)

No, it’s not the niceness that makes The Great British Bake Off a smash (and 
with14.5 million people 
<http://deadline.com/2015/10/the-great-holiday-baking-show-abc-november-the-great-british-bake-off-1201589204/>
 in the UK watching, it is absolutely massive) – it’s the sense of warmth and 
respect from the judges to the contestants and among the contestants 
themselves. Americans, unfortunately, translate that atmosphere of warmth into 
cheering. “We’re going to be nice!” the producers seem to be saying, in 
contrast to the“I’m not here to make friends” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w536Alnon24> ethos that pervades reality 
competitions. “Be as nice as you can be. Root for each other. This is not Top 
Chef. Cheer, damn it. Cheer!”

These attempts to Americanize the show are what really gums it up. When one 
contestant prays before firing up her oven, I rolled my eyes and thought “Ugh, 
how American!” The same baker repeatedly says “I’m a country girl”, which I 
also found obnoxiously cloying. The producers have managed to go American on 
the wrong aspects without adding anything truly American at all. But maybe 
Britons felt the same way when series four contestant Becca constantly talked 
about being Welsh.

This is actually the second attempt to bring the show Stateside. In the summer 
of 2013, CBS aired The American Baking Competition with judge Paul Hollywood 
from Bake Off and hosted by Jeff Foxworthy (it doesn’t get more “American” in a 
derogatory sense than Jeff Foxworthy). It averaged a disappointing (at least 
for CBS) 5 million viewers an episode and was not renewed.

Some have theorized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/06/genius-of-great-british-bake-off>
 that the popularity of the show in the UK has as much to do with British 
national identity as it does with actual baking challenges, and that is 
something American audiences certainly don’t grasp. Our state fairs are about 
deep-fried butter and rickety amusement park rides, not fields of daffodils and 
Victoria sponges (I still don’t know what that is, exactly).


Maybe we should just be happy with importing the original and stop trying to 
retrofit it for our shores. Since we can’t even agree on a definition for 
pudding, we’ll never quite figure out how to put the proof in one.

 