
Bob Shennan, controller, BBC Radio 2 and 6 Music

"I'm delighted that Radio 2 has gained its third ever highest weekly reach, 
and that the Chris Evans Breakfast Show remains the UK's most listened-to 
morning programme." Radio 2's audience was steady year on year. Evans haslost 
1.4 million listeners in six months but remains ahead of BBC Radio 1 breakfast 
DJ Chris Moyles <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-radio>.

Tim Davie, director, BBC audio and music

"These are strong figures for the industry, with BBC networks posting solid 
year-on-year performances after a quarter that saw records broken across the 
portfolio. Radio 3's commitment to bring the BBC Proms to a wider audience has 
been rewarded as the network bounces back above the 2 million mark."BBC Radio 3 
was up 15.4% on the previous quarter, but BBC Radio 5 Live was down 6.9% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-radio>.

Ashley Tabor, Global Radio founder and Global group chief executive

"I'm immensely proud of Global today – this is another great set of results 
taking us to our highest ever listeners, nearly 20 million. Our focus will now 
be to build on Capital's London success as we launch the brand across the UK in 
January." Global's Heart networkshowed gains across the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/talksport-rajar-ratings-record> 
butlost the No 1 spot in London to Bauer rival Magic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-london-magic>.

Steve Parkinson, managing director, Bauer Radio London

"We have obsessed over Magic's music mix this summer and it has paid 
dividends. Whether it's the tunes that people know and love, or introducing 
listeners to new artists like Rumer and Eliza Doolittle, the team ... are 
rightly proud." Magicreturned to the No 1 spot among London commercial stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-london-magic> in terms of 
audience share and weekly reach.

Ford Ennals, chief executive, Digital Radio UK

"We've achieved a step change in digital listening growth in 2010 and we see 
that sustained in Q3, with 17.5% year-on-year growth. The Digital Radio Action 
Plan aims to create a further step change in digital listening in 2011, when we 
should begin to see the benefits of investment in coverage, content, 
communications and cars. Absolute Radio's success shows that compelling and 
distinctive digital content and strong cross promotion is a healthy digital 
model for the future." Digital radio's share of listeninggrew marginally on the 
previous quarter but DAB radio fell back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-digital-radio>.

Ben Cooper, deputy controller, BBC Radio 1 and 1Xtra

"It's another strong set of results for Radio 1. The station is bringing in 
more 15- to 24-year-olds than this time last year ... Having strengthened Radio 
1Xtra's proposition, I'm delighted to see an increase in the number of younger 
listeners we are bringing into the BBC via a digital platform." Radio 1 wasdown 
1.4% on the previous quarter but up 4.8% year on year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-radio>. 1Xtra had the 
biggest BBC digital-only quarterly gain, up 34.3% (and 47.3% year on year) to 
806,000.

Moz Dee, TalkSport programme director

"Our strategy of creating the definitive place for sports talk, news and 
entertainment on the radio has clearly worked with radio listeners. I'm very 
proud of our programming team, who've worked hard to build credibility with 
great journalism and top sports interviews, whilst making the station sound fun 
and engaging." TalkSportshowed big gains quarter on quarter and year on year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/talksport-rajar-ratings-record> 
to 2.96 million.

Vijay Sharma, head of BBC Asian Network

"I'm very pleased with the increased listenership this quarter. We had our 
biggest Summer of Mela Season to date and reached thousands of people all over 
the country. Following the introductions of Sonia Deol and Tommy Sandhu to the 
daytime schedule earlier in the year, in this period we brought Noreen Khan to 
the drivetime show. The increased numbers are a testament to the station's 
staff, who have worked very hard to produce quality programming." The Asian 
Network, which is due to be shut down, wasup 5.7% on the quarter and 29.4% year 
on year <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/rajars-digital-radio> to 
462,000.

Andrew Harrison, chief executive, Radio Centre

"This is another very encouraging set of results for the commercial radio 
sector. On reach this is our second consecutive quarterly record, with listener 
hours also up modestly quarter on quarter. The fact that commercial radio 
continues to grow listeners and gain market share against the backdrop of 
relentless competition for listeners' time is a reflection of the sector's 
ongoing momentum." Commercial radiogained ground on the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/talksport-rajar-ratings-record>, 
narrowing the corporation's lead to a 10.9% share of the audience.

John Simons, programme director, GMG Radio Group, part of the company that 
publishes MediaGuardian.co.uk

"Smooth Radio's record reach and increased listening hours are fantastic news 
for the brand, and provide an excellent platform now the station broadcasts 
nationally. The scope for Smooth Radio is huge and we're looking forward to 
seeing this growth continue as more and more people discover the station across 
the UK." Smooth's total UK radio audience wasup 9% on the quarter and 8.9% year 
on year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/28/talksport-rajar-ratings-record> 
to 3.053 million.

Clive Dickens, chief operating officer, Absolute Radio

"This performance significantly grows the scale of the Absolute Radio brand in 
just two years. We are now a much bigger business than we were before we 
launched, in fact we're at a four-and-a-half-year high." Absolute Radio was up 
4.2% both quarter on quarter and year on year to 1.654 million, and its digital 
stations posted strong figures. But the audience for the main Absolute station 
remains some way below its predecessor, Virgin Radio.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 