
In fiction, breakfast is far from omnipresent. We generally assume that it 
must be happening but, like a character going to the loo or scratching their 
knee, off-camera. When the American poetAnne Sexton declared that breakfast is 
"the sexiest meal of the day", 
<http://bryantmcgill.com/wiki/poetry/anne_sexton/angels_of_the_love_affair> she 
may as well have been saying "it's another of those things we don't talk about".

When we do witness breakfast, it is usually because the author is trying to 
tell us something about the person eating it. Breakfast is the most habitual 
meal of the day, a routine so key to inner wellbeing thatHunter S Thompson 
called it a "psychic anchor", 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/334367-breakfast-is-the-only-meal-of-the-day-that-i>
 drawing, uncharacteristically, on an image of weighty predictability. If 
somebody is having toast with marmalade this morning (or, in the case of 
Thompson, "four bloody marys, two grapefruits, a pot of coffee, Rangoon crepes, 
a half pound of either sausage, bacon or corned-beef hash with diced chillis" 
plus quite a few other things), it is a safe guess that they had it yesterday 
and that they will have it tomorrow as well.

For this reason, breakfast is the ideal barometer of normalcy, the meal that 
tells us who a person really is. An example: in the fifth chapter ofMoby Dick  
<http://www.mobydickbigread.com/>(simply called "Breakfast"), Melville offers a 
morning scene at a bar-room in a whaling town, as a way of painting us a 
picture of Queequeg, a Pacific islander who "eschewed coffee and hot rolls" – 
savagery! – and "applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare". And 
inThe Hobbit <http://www.thehobbit.com/>, Tolkein reveals much about 
the implicitly decadent nature of Hobbithood when he has Bilbo Baggins consume 
a second breakfast – an occurrence that has somehow become one of the most 
recounted parts of the entire book.

Meticulous breakfast prep often signals violent tendencies, providing 
a bracing (or perhaps, for the breakfaster, soothing) contrast, an 
ultra-domesticity to balance out the brutality to come. James Bond is a pedant 
at the morning meal ("his favourite meal of the day"). His routine when 
stationed in London, as detailed inFrom Russia with Love 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Russia-Love-Vintage-Ian-Fleming/dp/0099576058>, always 
comprises "very strong coffee from De Bry in New Oxford Street, brewed in 
an American Chemex, of which he drank two large cups, black and without sugar". 
Foodwise it is a speckled brown egg from a French Marans hen, boiled for 
exactly three and a third minutes ("it amused him to think there was such a 
thing as a perfect boiled egg"). It is always served with wholewheat toast and 
a selection of preserves and a "pat of deep yellow Jersey butter". Such 
fussiness conceals a deadlier truth. "I know all about you," Miranda Frost 
warns him in the most memorable line of Die Another Day 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Die-Another-Day-Raymond-Benson/dp/0340826029>. "Sex 
for dinner, death for breakfast. Well, it's not going to work with me."

Patrick Bateman, the investment banker in Bret Easton Ellis's American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jul/14/bret-easton-ellis-american-psycho>
 exhibits his psychopathic tendencies, sure, by murdering several people in 
horrific fashion – but also in the creepy and ultra-detailed way that he 
describes the breakfasts of his yuppiedom:

"Standing at the island in the kitchen I eat kiwifruit and a sliced Japanese 
apple-pear (they cost four dollars each at Gristedes) out of aluminium storage 
boxes that were designed in West Germany. I take a bran muffin, a decaffeinated 
herbal tea bag and a box of oat-bran cereal from one of the large glass-front 
cabinets... I eat half of the bran muffin after it's been microwaved and 
lightly covered with a small helping of apple butter…" and so on, and so on.

In Ulysses, James Joyce's attempt to account for every detail of a day in the 
life of Leopold Bloom, he gives us all the off-camera stuff: Bloom does go to 
the loo ("asquat on the cuckstool"), and the disruptive event that sends him 
off on his walk around Dublin is a quest for a breakfast that will sate his 
hankering for "the inner organs of beasts and fowls". This he finds at the 
butcher's shop ("a kidney oozed bloodgouts on the willowpatterned dish: the 
last"). But high tension ensues as he stands in a queue behind a woman who may 
or may not be interested in buying the morsel for herself. Few sentences 
in literature have the same primal breakfasty satisfaction as the one in which 
"his hand accepted the moist tender gland and slid it into a sidepocket".

Another one-ingredient breakfast occurs in Albert Camus's novel L'Etranger 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2012/05/camus-translation.html>, 
in which the antihero Meursault demonstrates his commitment to free will in the 
face of a meaningless existence with the following: "Je me suis fait cuire des 
œufs et je les ai mangés à même le plat" – "I cooked some eggs and ate them out 
of the pan."

Simple breakfasts say a lot, but nothing is quite as eccentric as refusing 
breakfast altogether. Bertie Wooster was deeply alarmed by such behaviour, 
noting disapprovingly of one refusenik: "She spoke as if she belonged to an 
anti-sausage league, or a league for the suppression of eggs."

Perhaps, however, the lack of breakfast is not a laughing matter. Walter 
Benjamin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/27/hero-walter-benjamin-elif-shafak>
 wrote an alarming pro-breakfast short essay, "Breakfast Room", warning us of 
the dangers of, among other things, discussing dreamssans breakfast: "The 
person who does so, still half in thrall to the world of dream, betrays that 
world in his words and must expect it to seek vengeance."

Breakfast is not love, or war, or death, or life. It is not one of the great 
themes of literature. But still, it lurks there in the background, a daily 
heartbeat, telling us what that character does when they are not experiencing 
the disruptions that drive great stories. More often than not, all that 
character wants is the freedom and happiness of which the ability to breakfast 
as they wish is a symptom.

In the words of JB Priestley <http://www.jbpriestley.co.uk/JBP/Home.html>, "We 
plan, we toil, we suffer – in the hope of what? A camel load of idols' eyes? 
The title deeds of Radio City? The empire of Asia? A trip to the moon? No, no, 
no, no. Simply to wake up just in time to smell coffee and bacon and eggs."

The Breakfast Bible by Seb Emina and Malcolm Eggs is published this week by 
Bloomsbury. To order it for £12.99 with free UK p&p call Guardian book service 
on 0330 333 6846 or go to theguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/the-breakfast-bible-9781408804810>
 