
Amber Rudd, the home secretary, is wrong to reject the appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/31/nhs-spending-will-fall-on-a-per-head-basis-before-2020-says-health-committee-chair-politics-live>
 for an independent inquiry intothe events at Orgreave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/orgreave-inquiry-calls-grow-after-damning-hillsborough-verdict-for-south-yorkshire-police>
 in June 1984. Although, as she saidin her statement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-10-31/HCWS227/>
 to MPs, there were no deaths and no miscarriage of justice, there is copious 
evidence that the police at the least mislaid the rule book in their attempt to 
break the miners’ strike. She has missed an opportunity to redress a grievance 
shared by former mining communities across Britain and felt most acutely not 
only by those injured in the brutal suppression of the picket at the coking 
plant – there were victims of violence on both sides – but by the 95 men who 
for a year or more feared trial on riot charges that could have led to life 
sentences.

Orgreave was part of the class war that ended with 96 dead at Hillsborough | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
Ms Rudd says it is all a long time ago; changes have long since been made to 
policing practice and accountability that would prevent the kind of 
orchestrated cover-up that appears to have taken place after Orgreave. And the 
tactics and conduct of the South Yorkshire police have now been shatteringly 
exposed by the inquiry intothe Hillsborough tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> which unfolded 
five years later. In short, she says, there was little new to glean about the 
conduct of the policing operation, nor more lessons to be learned. Furthermore, 
a time must come when in the wider interests of society it is necessary to stop 
relitigating the past, distracting attention and resources from the problems of 
the here and now.

These are respectable arguments. But not now, and not to events that have the 
appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/nov/22/miners-strike-orgreave-bloodiest-battle>
 at least of being an affront to the relationship between policing and the 
public. Even the then acting chief constable of South Yorkshire, Dave Jones, 
accepted last May after the Hillsborough findings that an inquiry was needed.

In terms of the enormity of the event, there is no equivalence between 
Orgreave and the deaths, five years later and barely 10 miles away, of 96
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> fans. Yet although 
some of the Orgreave injured were later compensated out of court, the police 
have not been held to account for their actions. Meanwhile, almost a hundred 
men were left unemployable, facing serious charges of riot, until their trial 
collapsed after the police evidence was found to be blatantly unreliable.

The police, under the leadership of Peter Wright – who was still chief 
constable five years later at Hillsborough – have to answer the allegation that 
they were deliberately trying to create the circumstances in which riot charges 
could stick. They must acknowledge that they set about constructing a narrative 
creating the impression of the police as the thin blue line confronting 
thousands of men, bent on violence in order to extend the impact of the strike, 
a narrative briefed to Margaret Thatcher and her ministers that, with its 
element of truth, soon became the orthodoxy. All of these tactics – the 
dishonest evidence, the narrative of a force struggling to do its duty in the 
face of deliberate provocation from a mob, and then the way that version was 
spread – were later to prove lethally damaging in the aftermath of 
Hillsborough. Ms Rudd suggests that such a direct line could not be proved. An 
inquiry might have done just that.

For the local community these all remain causes of abiding grievance. After 30 
years, it may be that their only redress is that the grievances dismissed for 
so long are finally heard. But there is a wider and therefore an even more 
important purpose to such an inquiry: the recognition, nationally, that public 
institutions must be publicly accountable. Ms Rudd will of course have made her 
decision, as she said to MPs, after a great deal of thought. She has given her 
reasons. But this is not an exercise in accountancy. It is about trust, the 
trust of the ordinary citizen that the duty of the police to act lawfully is 
upheld from the very top, and the trust too of the ordinary citizen that a 
government that sets out to work in the interests of everyone in the country 
means pensioned-off miners in Yorkshire along with everyone else.
 