
I've said it before and I will say it again, because it really matters: the 
Artist Rooms <http://www.tate.org.uk/collection/artistrooms/>collection, 
founded in 2008 through the generous vision of theart dealer Anthony d'Offay 
<http://thescotsman.scotsman.com/features/Scotsman-Review-Interview-Anthony-d39Offay.5045551.jp>
, is a startling national asset. As it begins afourth successive tour of 
galleries throughout Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/pressoffice/pressreleases/2011/24608.htm>, this 
public collection of contemporary art is changing the very fabric of our visual 
culture.

There is only one contrast, one conflict that matters when it comes to art. 
Modern versus traditional? Don't be daft. Painting versus installation? Yawn. 
The only struggle that matters is the timeless war between good and bad art. In 
Britain, because of prejudices rooted deep in our history, museums have long 
possessed plenty of examples of great Renaissance or Romantic art, but few 
masterpieces of modernity. This distorts our entire experience of art: it makes 
arguments about artistic value oddly thin and ideological, because people are 
unfamiliar with first-rate examples of the art of the past 50 years.

Artist Rooms <http://www.artfund.org/artistrooms/index.php> is changing all 
that. This collection could easily fill a museum of its own, and would be a 
major national attraction if it did. But it is being used in a far more radical 
and liberating way. With the support of theArt Fund 
<http://www.artfund.org/buynationalartpass/?utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=art%20fund&utm_campaign=Head%20Terms&utm_source=google>
, its outstanding examples of works by the best artists of recent times are 
shown in rotation in public galleries around Britain. Museums get a boost, and 
audiences everywhere are introduced to top-quality modern art. In the latest 
round of exhibitions, there is evena game 
<http://www.nationalgalleries.org/collection/ar_page/4:21490/> to make it still 
more accessible to a young public 
<http://www.artdaily.org/index.asp?int_sec=2&int_new=50155>.

I have to pinch myself when I read, say, that an exhibition of the great 
German contemporary artistAnselm Kiefer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/mar/21/anselm-kiefer-painting-life-art>
 will open this winter in Llandudno. For me, based on childhood memories, this 
seaside town means an Edwardian pier and a sea full of jellyfish. Now it has a 
fine modern gallery that is showing, wow, Kiefer, thanks toArtist Rooms 
<http://www.artfund.org/artistrooms/on_tour/57/anselm_kiefer>. It is the same 
story elsewhere 
<http://www.artfund.org/news/1191/artist-rooms-on-tour-with-the-art-fund-2012>. 
In Hull you can seeAndy Warhol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/andywarhol> next year, while Belfast 
will getRobert Therrien 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/collection/artistrooms/artist.do?id=2312> and Robert 
Mapplethorpe 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/sep/21/robert-mapplethorpe> will 
be showing in Dunoon.

It is an enriching feast of excellence. The difference between a great and an 
ordinary work of conceptual art is as deep as the difference between a good and 
bad painting. Museums that collect old and new art equally offer a richer 
experience than museums that just do one or the other, but token collecting of 
hot names in current art is a flawed strategy, doomed to age badly. Instead, 
our public collections should put quality first and insist on fine and 
inspiring modern works for their collections. We need the treasures of our time 
in British galleries, not the run-of-the-mill stuff. That is why Artist Rooms 
is so important.
 