
Today, thanks to many Cif readers, the overall total raised for the Atheist 
Bus Campaign 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising> 
stands at a truly overwhelming£135,000 <http://www.justgiving.com/atheistbus>, 
breaking our original target of £5,500 by over 2400%. Given this unexpected 
amount, I'm very excited to tell you that 800 buses – instead of the 30 we were 
initially aiming for – are now rolling out across the UK with the slogan, 
"There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy your life", in locations 
all over England, Scotland and Wales, including Manchester, Edinburgh, Glasgow, 
York, Cardiff, Devon, Leeds, Bristol and Aberdeen.

From today's launch, two hundred of the buses will run in London, because the 
campaign was originally started as apositive counter-response 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/jun/20/transport.religion> to the 
Jesus Said ads running on London buses in June 2008. These ads displayed the 
URL of a website which stated that non-Christians "will be condemned to 
everlasting separation from God and then you spend all eternity in torment in 
hell … Jesus spoke about this as a lake of fire prepared for the devil". Our 
rational slogan will hopefully reassure anyone who has been scared by this kind 
of evangelism.

In addition, we're running adverts on two further types of media. In my last 
Cif blog on the campaign, I asked Cif readers for ideas on alternative ways to 
spend the funds, and also for thoughts on different slogans. Commenters
WoollyMindedLiberal <http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/woollymindedliberal>, 
PaoloV <http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/PaoloV> and Catch22 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/Catch22> suggested that we use quotes from 
famous freethinkers, and we've done just that: from Monday January 12, 1,000 
tube cards will run on London Underground featuring atheist quotations from 
Douglas Adams, Albert Einstein, Emily Dickinson and Katharine Hepburn (see 
above), alongside the original campaign slogan.

An animated version of the slogan will also appear on two large LCD screens on 
Oxford Street (opposite Bond Street tube station), so that you can see the 
advert live without having to wait for an atheist bus. And, to thank all donors 
and show the strength of atheism in the UK, every ABC advertisement will 
contain the line "This advert was funded by public donations".

Amazingly, the campaign has now gone international. Spain's Union of Atheists 
and Freethinkers are launchingbuses across Barcelona <http://www.busateo.org/> 
today with a translation of our slogan, Italy's Union of Atheist, Agnostics and 
Rationalists are also planning to roll out atheist buses, while the American 
Humanist Association have been inspired tolaunch a campaign 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/2008/dec/11/religion-advertising-atheism-bus>
, and buses carrying their slogan "Why believe in a God? Just be good for 
goodness' sake" have now been running for over a month in Washington DC. Sadly, 
not every country has been so open to the idea: the Atheist Foundation of 
Australia tried to place the slogan "Atheism – celebrate reason" on buses,but 
were rejected <http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2008/11/26/2430714.htm> by 
Australia's biggest outdoor advertising company.

The campaign's success is thanks to Cif and Cif readers. If Matt Seaton hadn't 
allowed me to run with the idea here, and so many of you hadn't been so 
enthusiastic about it and donated generously to it, it would never have 
happened. There may be further campaign developments, and thecampaign website 
<http://www.atheistcampaign.org/> and Facebook group <http://www.facebook.com/> 
will be regularly updated with the latest news; but for now, I hope you enjoy 
seeing the adverts on the streets, and that they brighten these bleak January 
days just a little bit. AsCharlie Brooker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/charliebrooker> – one of the first people to 
donate to the Atheist Bus Campaign – says: "Public transport in Britain 
suggests there isn't a God anyway, but in case anyone hasn't noticed, or feels 
isolated for thinking such a thing, this campaign should help." I hope it does.
 