

Gun control ... Al Pacino in Scarface. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive

Until now, my favourite product of movie censorship has always been the 
oxymoronic "family friendly" version of Brian De Palma's Scarface, often shown 
on British TV. For me, it's never been possible to top the joys of the ineptly 
dubbed early scene in which Al Pacino's Tony Montana is asked by a sneering 
immigration officer whether he got the scar across his cheek not from the act 
of male-on-female intimacy referred to in the original, but instead from (cue 
the voice of an entirely different actor) "eating pineapple".

That may be about to change, however, after reading at Pullquote 
<http://pullquote.typepad.com/pullquote/2008/01/saints-preserve.html> of 
ClearPlay, the "advanced parental control system" - a prudish DVD player 
adapted to use "filters" that, the makers claim, will exorcise instances of 
profanity and nudity from ordinary discs. Seemingly designed to cater to those 
American parents who want to show their young children Die Hard 4.0 (to give 
one example of the 2000 titles on offer) while ensuring that the two hours plus 
of bloody mayhem is free of "cuss words and bedroom scenes 
<http://www.clearplay.com/CustomerComments.aspx>," the gimmick here is that the 
filters supposedly eliminate the nastiness all but untraceably, leaving the 
rest of the film intact, as if visited by a censorious A-bomb.

Yet a close inspection of the ClearPlay website <http://www.clearplay.com/> 
suggests that, however advanced its technology, the operation as a whole still 
depends on notaries hunched over a TV set in a corner of a Utah business park, 
frantically registering every occasion on which a nipple looms into view in 
Rush Hour 3. Either way,the cinetrix <http://pullquote.typepad.com/pullquote> 
is right that this could offer a route to rubbing the flaws out of any movie - 
after all, if ClearPlay users get to erase Viggo Mortensen's buttocks from 
Eastern Promises, shouldn't the rest of us be able to protect our sensibilities 
too? Personally, I'd be glad to sign up if ClearPlay could filter out Vince 
Vaughan from any film I might otherwise want to see for the rest of both our 
lives.

Of course, if we were to extend the logic, you might eventually erase whole 
decades of an actor or director's career - an innovation that could only be 
welcomed by those of us exposed, for example, to the recent films of Woody 
Allen.Risky Business will surely delight someone, somewhere 
<http://www.riskybusinessblog.com/2007/12/no-manhattan-my.html> with the news 
that he's to return to setting his films in New York after the grand tour of 
London and Barcelona on which he's been engaged of late. But can I be the only 
person aghast at the blog's suggestion that there's any desire out there for a 
thirty-years-later sequel to Annie Hall, a concept that must give even the most 
fervent Allen fan the abdabs?

Meanwhile, The House Next Door links to an enlightening interview 
<http://mattzollerseitz.blogspot.com/2008/01/what-they-dont-teach-you-in-film-school.html>
 with the film-maker most often identified as Allen's next-in-line, Noah 
Baumbach, whose latest yarn of domestic strife Margot at the Wedding comes out 
here next month. As the product of a grim divorce, there's always going to be a 
special place in my heart for Baumbach's The Squid and the Whale - and it's 
heartening to see Baumbach defending his use of "unsympathetic" characters 
(typically described as such for simply being recognisably human).

And lastly, Spout Blog devoted space this week 
<http://blog.spout.com/2008/01/08/film-critic-punished-for-whoring/#more-1607> 
to the (professional) demise of US critic Pete Hammond,sometimes 
<http://www.dailyherald.com/story/?id=82236> described 
<http://hollywoodbitchslap.com/feature.php?feature=1812> as perhaps the world's 
leading practitioner <http://www.efilmcritic.com/feature.php?feature=2346> of 
the black art known as "quote whoring," wherein implausibly enthused quotes are 
provided by reviewers for the ad campaigns of the world's most terrible films. 
Now, however, Hammond's stint at men's magazine Maxim is over - although Karina 
Longworth is right to point out that, rather than this heralding a new era of 
integrity in film criticism, it probably owes more to the slow exclusion of any 
movie writing at all from the majority of papers and magazines. And on that 
"High-Octane, Nerve-Jangling, Edge-Of-Your-Seat" note, do have the very 
jolliest of weekends ...
 