
The Independent <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> has made 
what it calls “a dramatic improvement in its financial position” by announcing 
a trading loss of £4.6m for the year up to September 2014. That compares with a 
loss of £9.1m in the previous year.

Its parent company, ESI Media, also points out that it sustained a loss of 
£22.6m in 2010-11, prompting it to refer to the changed circumstances as “a 
remarkable reduction” over the four-year period.

ESI Media’s owner, Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, described the result in a 
tweet as “one of the biggest turnarounds in modern media”.

His company is forecasting, on the basis of the first three quarters of the 
current financial year, that there will be “a further significant reduction” in 
trading losses when the next results are announced.

Inside sources suggest that the change in fortunes means that previous 
thoughts of the Independent being sold off by Lebedev have now receded.

Steve Auckland <https://www.theguardian.com/media/steve-auckland>, who became 
ESI Media’s chief executive in September 2014, said: “After nine months in the 
job I can see reasons for real optimism.

“We have cut costs without damaging our core brands and products. We’ve added 
new revenue streams, and restructured our commercial team which, I think, will 
ultimately boost performance.”

He said the titles – the Independent, i and Independent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> – along with the Indy 
website, “represent strong, proud and internationally respected brands which 
appeal to advertisers”.

In its press release, ESI Media lists three factors that have helped it to 
improve its figures: firstly, a sharp rise in i’s revenues after two price 
rises, moving up from 20p to 30p and then to 40p.

Secondly, the company has made cost savings, mostly in production, printing 
and its back-office operations. There have also been cuts in editorial, and it 
now has a newsroom staff numbering 150.

Thirdly, there have been benefits from the launch of i’s online platform, 
i100.co.uk <http://i100.co.uk/>.

Amol Rajan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amol-rajan>, the Independent’s 
editor, said: “The past two years have been a resounding success, both 
editorially and financially.”

He said he had wanted to revive some of the spirit of the paper’s founders in 
1986, and believes he has achieved that, proclaiming that the Independent is 
now “a true global force”. It has opened an office in New York and is planning 
to hire more staff there.

This is the second set of ESI Media results released this week. On Monday, as 
MediaGuardian reported, the company’s local TV channel London Livemade an 
operating loss of almost £11.6m in the year up to September 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/29/london-live-makes-12m-loss>.


But it said it was on track to reduce the losses by about half over the 
current financial year.

On Wednesday, ESI Media is due to release the results for the London Evening 
Standard <https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> which, 
according to another tweet by Lebedev, will be “more good news”.

• The author writes a weekly media column for the Evening Standard

 