
Either HP or Acer led the market in notebook shipments in the first quarter of 
this year, but the main two market trackers -- Gartner and IDC -- appear to 
differ about which company took the top spot. IDC apparently thinks 
Hewlett-Packard did it by shipping 9.5 million units against Acer's 8.65m, 
while Gartner hasAcer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> pipping HP 
by 9.5m to 9.47m.
Neither Gartner nor IDC makes a habit of revealing numbers for specific types 
of product (PC shipments includes desktops, laptops, netbooks etc, but not 
servers) or of listing firms outside the top five. They have the numbers, of 
course, but they charge for them. However, a certain amount of bragging goes 
on, which can make some of them available, though they're not guaranteed to be 
reliable.

In this case, the Taiwan-based DigiTimes has covered the disagreement about 
which company shipped the most portables inMarket watchers differ with the 
leader of notebook brands for 1Q10 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20100427PD205.html> (a story that will soon be 
available to subscribers only). It has also reported IDC numbers for other top 
suppliers. The pecking order looks something like this:

1. HP -- 9.5m
2. Acer -- 8.65m
3. Dell -- 5.7m
4. Toshiba -- 4.6m
5. Asus -- 4.3m
6. Lenovo -- 4.1m
7. Apple -- 1.85m
8. Samsung -- 1.72m
9. Sony -- 1.68m

All but one of those companies ships netbooks as well as notebooks, and three 
companies seem to have done particularly well out of them: Acer, Asus and 
Samsung. They could therefore be hit if the netbook market declines.

At the moment, it seems the netbook market may have reached a plateau. In 
discussing its latest quarterly results, earlier this month,Intel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/intel> noted that Atom sales dipped by 
19% to $355m over the previous (Christmas) quarter, though they were up by 62% 
year-on-year.

But as I commented at the time, the netbook market could be boosted by the 
arrival of dual-core Atom chips that remove many of the performance limitations 
(Dual-core Atoms coming as Intel aims for the first "netbook refresh cycle" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/blog/2010/apr/14/intel-dualcore-atom-chips>
), and some PC manufacturers could also have hits with tablet versions and 
other form factors -- Samsung, for example, has done OK with its Q1. The new 
system-on-a-chip Atom design codenamed Tunnel Creek could also have an impact: 
it's cheaper and uses less power, which should encourage more innovative form 
factors.

Note: I expect that tablets running Windows 7 will count in the rankings but 
Apple's iPad tablet will not. The iPad is a media consumption device like the 
iPod Touch or Sony PlayStation Portable. There are now lots of devices -- 
including smart phones and games consoles -- that are not personal computers, 
even though they are personal, and compute.
 