
Alabama – Republican and Democratic primaries

Matthew Teague in Mount Vernon
In rural Mount Vernon, Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, 
people drove from miles around to the Mount Vernon civic center, a tiny white 
building with a sign saying “VOTE HERE” on the front door.

The electorate in Mount Vernon, at least by midday, seemed uniformly 
gray-haired. Outside, 84-year-old Earl Middleton climbed the steps to vote. 
“There’s only one man to vote for,” he said. “I served my country, and I’m 
voting for the one man who will keep our military strong.”

Who is that? “Donald Trump!” he said. 

Further south, on Mobile Bay, in the relatively affluent town of Fairhope, a 
woman in her 20s named Megrez Mosher voted. She felt stunned by the demographic 
– gray-haired, like rural Mount Vernon, and said she was “all about shaming 
people into doing their civic duty”.


So she went home and posted on Facebook: “I just voted. I was the only person 
my age in the civic center. Millennials and Gen Xers get out and vote!! I don’t 
really care who you vote for, but don’t keep posting memes and sharing articles 
on Facebook if you do not fulfill your civic duty.”

Alaska – Republican caucuses

Julia O’Malley in Anchorage

“Oh, it’s gonna be big,” said Peter Goldberg, 67, chairman of the Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> Republican party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30841fa6ea8300dff66756117b8287745cf4be1b%2F0_22_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30841fa6ea8300dff66756117b8287745cf4be1b%2F0_22_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Peter Goldberg, chairman of the Alaska Republican party. Photograph: Julia 
O'Malley for the Guardian 
“By big I mean I think last time we did this four years ago, there were a 
little more than 15,000 [votes counted] – I’m expecting 20,000. But at the rate 
that phone out there is ringing, it may exceed that … I think the primary 
factor is the incredible dissatisfaction with what Barack Obama has done to the 
country in the last seven years … Because I’m chair of the party, my position 
(on which candidate to support) is neutral. Not even my wife knows.”

American Samoa – Democratic caucuses

Ellen Brait in New York

Two American Samoans spoke about what issues are important to them, and what 
they want candidates to know about their sometimes-overlooked home:

Patrick Ti’a Reid, 32: ‘We don’t have a big voice on the political stage’

I’m voting for Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>. I feel like she’s the 
only candidate that’s actually been here. So the fact that she’s actually 
visited the island tells me that she’s more aware of the issues we’re facing as 
a territory. I think she has a better plan, she’s more experienced, she’s more 
qualified, and I think she’ll do a better job than any of the other candidates.

We don’t have a big voice on the political stage. Because we’re so remote, 
people are more concerned with what’s going on here on the island, I think, 
than with national issues. I also don’t think candidates are very aware of how 
impacted we are by some foreign policies because we have so many family members 
in the military.

American Samoan voters won't be overlooked on Super Tuesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/american-samoan-voters-super-tuesday>
Uperesa Fakava, 19: ‘I would like to see up-close what they’re really doing’

I’m kind of leaning towards Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> for the Democratic party.

I would like [the candidates] to know that the unemployment rate is so high 
here and most families live almost in poverty. Some families don’t even have 
electricity.

I’m always watching the news everyday and I have subscriptions to online 
newspapers so I’m always up to date on this kind of stuff but I would like to 
see up close what they’re really doing. People in New Hampshire get to meet all 
the candidates, I would really like to meet one of them – but since I’m here I 
only get to watch the news and subscribe to the newspapers and publishers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5596399a7d4bbb58bcdafe1f39b5383267b73403%2F0_375_4032_2424%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5596399a7d4bbb58bcdafe1f39b5383267b73403%2F0_375_4032_2424%2F4032.jpg>
 Little Rock, Arkansas Photograph: Jeb Lund for the Guardian 
Arkansas – Democratic and Republican primaries


Jeb Lund in Little Rock, Arkansas

If you were in Little Rock, you woke up to something like this today, the 
neighborhood notwithstanding. Under normal circumstances, this sort of weather 
is not a problem; you live in the south, so it happens pretty much from summer 
into fall with great regularity. What it might’ve done, however, is stifle your 
urge for manning the polls or standing on street corners waving signs.

Not that it likely mattered. Early voting begin two weeks ago, and Arkansas 
has experiencednear record levels of early voters 
<http://m.swtimes.com/news/politics/early-voting-arkansas-record-levels-ahead-tuesday-s-primary>
.

Campaign workers I spoke to said that chances for converting voters had in 
many cases been thwarted by early voting. Everyone from friends to former 
governor Jim Guy Tucker reported seeing full precincts on opening day, with 
steady flows of voters, a tableau that has been repeated at lunch hour for 
every day since.

Basically, between early voting, the lack of competitive Democratic state-wide 
races and a 25-point lead for Hillary Clinton here, this was probably over 
before the rain started.

If one group is liable to be harmed by inclement weather, it’s likely to be 
late-breaking voters and converts forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, the sort of people who might 
not have been active enough to get out and cast a ballot early.

While Ted Cruz holds a slight lead over Trump and Rubio, either of the latter 
two candidates can erase that if their voters are motivated. Rubio recently 
received an endorsement from Republican governor Asa Hutchinson, and Trump 
recently hired Mike Huckabee’s daughter to run his outreach here in the state.

Also, the sun just came out. Time to find out whose ass it’s going to shine on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2445684ce05869e9f5848fe5069994a3dcc192a4%2F0_95_863_518%2F863.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2445684ce05869e9f5848fe5069994a3dcc192a4%2F0_95_863_518%2F863.jpg>
 Maile Rains. Photograph: Sam Levin for the Guardian 
Colorado – Democratic and Republican caucuses

Sam Levin in Denver, Colorado

Bernie Sanders volunteer Alex Calleros stumbled on an unusual household while 
doing a final round of canvassing before theSuper Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/super-tuesday> Democratic caucus in Denver.

Maile Rains, who answered the door, was the registered Democrat the Sanders 
campaign was trying to reach. But her husband, she explained, would not be 
caucusing for Bernie Sanders or Hillary Clinton, because he is a registered 
Republican.


“We’re very respectful and open-minded,” said Rains, a 36-year-old 
stay-at-home mother. “We have the same values but different approaches.”

Rains said she did not know if she was going to support Clinton or Sanders on 
Super Tuesday – she had reservations about both of them. Her husband, 
meanwhile, was interested in Marco Rubio and John Kasich, although Colorado’s
unique GOP caucus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/super-tuesday-presidential-candidates-cheat-sheet-need-know>
 won’t be an official vote and delegates will remainfree agents 
<http://www.coloradoindependent.com/156936/colorado-republican-caucuses> 
(meaning the Super Tuesday event doesn’t matter too much on the Republican 
side).

“The unifying issue for us is Trump,” she said. “How do we oust him? … We’re 
scared of him ... It’s like Mussolini all over again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F687491a334433648b1d13c7a9290e9168d0bfce6%2F0_189_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F687491a334433648b1d13c7a9290e9168d0bfce6%2F0_189_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
 Poll manager Adrienne Dowling looks after Jane Major’s terrier mix while Major 
casts her ballot at Mary Lin Elementary School in Atlanta, Georgia on Tuesday. 
Photograph: Erik S Lesser/EPA 
Georgia – Democratic and Republican primaries

Richard Wolffe in Atlanta, Georgia

Is Donald Trump a dream candidate for Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>?

Judging from all the whoopin’ and a hollerin’ at a Rubio rally inside an 
Atlanta hotel on Monday, he might just be the kind of Republican nominee who 
finally delivers some bipartisan agreement in American politics – agreement 
that Trump represents a surefire disaster for the Republican party.

In a ballroom filled with several hundred Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, Nikki Haley denounced Trump 
for failing to disavow support from the Ku Klux Klan.

Along the way, the South Carolina governor – a rising star inside the party – 
described Trump in terms that were much harsher than anything she used to 
condemn either Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton. After calling him a 
Kindergarten bully, she linked him to a wrenching moment in her own state’s 
recent history.

“South Carolina went through a terrible tragedy last year,” she said, 
referring to the Charleston church massacre, in which Dylann Roof killed nine 
black churchgoers as he tried to ignite racial conflict. “And the KKK came to 
South Carolina from out of state to protest on our statehouse grounds. We saw 
and looked at true hate in the eyes, last year in Charleston.

“I will not stop until we fight a man that chooses not to disavow the KKK. 
That is not a part of our party. That is not who we want as president. We will 
not allow that in our country.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42d799cfc7897a150f78deea4411cf9777e86988%2F0_61_4056_2435%2F4056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42d799cfc7897a150f78deea4411cf9777e86988%2F0_61_4056_2435%2F4056.jpg>
 Voters cast their ballots at the Old South Church polling place in Boston, 
Massachusetts on Tuesday. Photograph: Cj Gunther/EPA 
Massachusetts – Democratic and Republican primaries

Jill Abramson in Charlestown, Massachusetts

The turnout was heavy in Ward 3, Precinct 2 in Charlestown, Massachusetts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/massachusetts>, near downtown Boston, with 
lots of older women in line to vote. In order to receive their paper ballots, 
voters had to declare their party. The Democratic line seemed to be far more 
active than the Republican one.

Hillary Clinton was listed third on the ballot, behind Sanders and O’Malley. 
Trump was near the top of the much longer GOP ballot. Both ballots listed all 
the candidates who had since dropped out.

One woman, a 32-year-old Democrat, said she was excited to cast her ballot for 
a woman. She said, “Hillary will fight for the things I care about, like 
quality and affordable child care.”

Minnesota – Democratic and Republican caucuses 

Megan Carpentier in Minneapolis

Colin, 25, works at an upscale coffee house just north of downtown 
Minneapolis, at the base of a new construction apartment building with rentals 
he can’t afford. But as well as spending his days as a full-time barista, 
serving $5 pour-overs to well-off Minnesotans who drink them in front of their 
laptops, he also serves upscale grilled cheese sandwiches out of a food truck 
and hosts a bar trivia night to make ends meet.

“I know I’m a walking stereotype” he said. “Of course I support who I support” 
– which is Bernie Sanders.

Colin, who is looking for a full-time job at a non-profit serving college-age 
young people, says that he supports Sanders “on principles” like health care, 
job security assistance and Sanders’ college tuition plans (“I’m out of school, 
but I work three non-college-mandatory jobs.”)

He caucused for Barack Obama in 2008, when he was 18, but he’s not optimistic 
about tonight’s caucus results. “I’ve got this vibe right now where I don’t 
think he’s going to win the nomination, which sucks,” he said. “But I still 
want my voice to be heard.”

And when it comes to the general, he isn’t going to stay home even if Sanders 
isn’t on the ballot. “I’m still going to vote Democratic,” he vowed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ac899ae3edec9c6451cdb00593b49fea36c7043%2F0_112_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ac899ae3edec9c6451cdb00593b49fea36c7043%2F0_112_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
 A woman and her daughter vote at a polling center in Edmond, Oklahoma on 
Tuesday. Photograph: J Pat Carter/EPA 
Oklahoma – Democratic and Republican primaries

Leah Sikes in Edmond, Oklahoma

In election seasons, it’s easy to find yourself stuck in a labeled box against 
your will. As a student at Oklahoma Christian University, pollsters and 
political pundits assume things about people like me because of my background. 
But I’m not a stereotypical conservative fromOklahoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oklahoma>. I am a Christian – but I am 
also a feminist.

Living in the heart of the Bible belt, it isn’t surprising that people’s views 
tend to lean to the right, especially on a Christian college campus. Many of my 
classmates have thrown their support behind candidates like Ted Cruz orMarco 
Rubio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio>. I have different 
political leanings – I am more drawn to libertarians than traditional 
conservatives because I believe in the right to freedom, be it religious or 
otherwise.

I am a Christian from the Bible belt. But you may find my views surprising | 
Leah Sikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/christian-bible-belt-views-might-surprise-you-oklahoma-primaries>
Just as I wouldn’t want to live according to other people’s religious laws, no 
one should be bound to my Christian beliefs. But I’m not the only one who is 
the odd one out on campus: there is not a lack of students backing Bernie 
Sanders.

Tennessee – Democratic and Republican primaries

Adam Gabbatt in Nashville

With Tennessee being among the Super Tuesday states voting today, the 
Guardian’s Adam Gabbatt headed to Nashville to find out how catchy some of this 
year’s most famous campaign lines would sound if they made it into a song. He 
met up with local bandsSweet Cheeks <https://sweetcheeks.bandcamp.com/releases> 
andthe Strumms <https://www.facebook.com/thestrumms/> and challenged them to a 
freestyle music contest.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmake-america-great-again-donald-trump-election-campaign-slogans-song-lyrics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Make%20America%20great%20again'%20sung%20Nashville-style%20has%20a%20whole%20new%20meaning%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmake-america-great-again-donald-trump-election-campaign-slogans-song-lyrics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Make%20America%20great%20again%27%20sung%20Nashville-style%20has%20a%20whole%20new%20meaning%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmake-america-great-again-donald-trump-election-campaign-slogans-song-lyrics-video&media=>
Texas – Democratic and Republican primaries

Ben Jacobs in Houston

Speaking outside his polling place in Houston, Ted Cruz suggested that Marco 
Rubio should consider dropping out after Super Tuesday.

The Texas senator told reporters: “I believe we are going to do very, very 
well here inTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>. It’s gonna be up 
to Texans to make their decision. But there is no doubt that any candidate who 
cannot win his home state has real problems.”

He added: “any candidate that wakes up tomorrow morning that has not won any 
states, for any candidate that wakes up tomorrow morning and has won a 
negligible number of delegates, it’s time to start thinking about coming 
together and unifying and a clear choice.”

The statements represented a clear shot at Rubio, who has yet to win a state 
and is lagging in polls in his home state of Florida. However, despite this, 
Rubio has become an establishment favorite and party elected officials are 
coalescing around his candidacy, much to the irritation of the Cruz campaign.

While Cruz is favored in his home state of Texas and has the potential to win 
other states on Super Tuesday, Rubio’s campaign has already conceded that the 
Florida senator will be shut out yet again in Tuesday’s contests.

Spokespeople for Rubio’s campaign did not immediately return a request for 
comment. After engaging for months in a bitter battle with Cruz, the Florida 
senator has recently shifted his focus to attacking Donald Trump as part of a 
last-ditch effort to blunt the frontrunner’s momentum.

Vermont – Democratic and Republican presidential primaries

Sophie Yanow in Hartford, Vermont
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F755c5e3c67d72259a2d1980351552127467b4def%2F0_0_1200_809%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F755c5e3c67d72259a2d1980351552127467b4def%2F0_0_1200_809%2F1200.jpg>
 A Vermont voter on why she supports Sanders. Photograph: Sophie Yanow 
Illustrator Sophie Yanow drove to Hartford, Vermont to meet voters and sketch 
them –they told her who they voted for, and why 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/meeting-the-super-tuesday-voters-sketches-from-vermont>
.

Virginia – Democratic and Republican primaries

Lucia Graves in Lynchburg, Virginia

The struggle for the anti-establishment vote in Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia> is very much a mirror image of 
what’s happening at the national level as Donald Trump and Ted Cruz vie for 
Republican voters ahead of Tuesday’s primary

Cruz has invested significant energy in the state, launching his bid for the 
presidency at the evangelical stronghold Liberty University back in March of 
2015. But almost exactly a year after he first came to town, it is Trump who’s 
been making inroads in the state, attracting a wide array of unlikely voting 
groups such as evangelical voters and military veterans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b976930d3e28c145c6171661c3be1f52793f82%2F0_249_2448_1472%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20'Oh%2C%20it's%20gonna%20be%20big'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scene%20in%20the%20Super%20Tuesday%20states%3A%20%27Oh%2C%20it%27s%20gonna%20be%20big%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsuper-tuesday-democratic-republican-primaries-us-election-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b976930d3e28c145c6171661c3be1f52793f82%2F0_249_2448_1472%2F2448.jpg>
 Students register to vote at Liberty University’s on-campus voting location in 
Lynchburg, Virginia on Tuesday. Photograph: Lucia Graves for the Guardian 
Military veteran Jon Whitman, 38, is an outspoken Trump supporter and at a 
rally on the campus of Radford University on Monday, he praised the mogul as 
really “smart” and a better candidate than the media gives him credit for. 
Trump’s record on the military was criticized after he made derogatory comments 
about John McCain’s torture despite never having served in the military 
himself. But such things don’t bother Whitman. “I honestly think there’s a lot 
of media hype about Trump and basically I don’t go off of a lot of media hype,” 
he said. “That’s why I’m here today.”

Similarly, the Guardian’s conversations with Republican voters in Southeastern 
Virginia have found supporters are indifferent to many of Trump’s other 
stumbles, such as hishesitancy to denounce his support from white supremacist 
David Duke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/feb/29/donald-trump-kkk-david-duke-video>
, something Virginia resident Josh Neuse, 31, denounced as an “irrelevant 
issue”.

The candidate’s promise to “Make America Great Again” is a concept that plays 
well in poor rural parts of Virginia, where for many years, coal was king. 
“We’re going to bring the coal energy back 100%,” Trump said in his speech 
yesterday. “It’s devastated for no reason whatsoever so we’re going to bring 
coal back.”
 