 Alexander McCall Smith, The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency 
You see, I am not much of a reader of detective books, but this one seemed to 
catch my eye on amazon.com's kindle store. Anyway, I am quite fond of McCall 
Smith's books and I decided to settle some matters of my own, thinking that 
maybe this book will help me sort out my problems with detective stories. 
Luckily, it did. Now, I am hooked to the series.

Anyway, back to the plot, enough with the blabbering! Precious (silly name, 
don't you think, for a grown up woman! I suppose it's a good nickname.) 
Ramotswe has had ups and downs in her life. She didn't have a mother and was 
brought up by her father and her father's cousin. She grew up to be a sensible, 
equal minded, smart and quite well educated woman. She married a trumpeter, 
Note Mokoti, but sadly, in the end, they were divorced when she got sick of 
getting beaten up by him.

After her father died, she used the money from their cattle farm to buy a 
small building and start her own little detective agency. She named it The No.1 
Ladies's Detective Agency. That is where the adventures start.

It will be hard for me to continue with the storytelling because Ms. Ramotswe 
encounters lots of different cases in the book. Probably the funniest one is 
'The Boyfriend' case. Later on in the book, her good friend, Mr. J.L.B. 
Matekoni, proposes to her, and she says yes. This time, her marriage will not 
be a mistake.

I really enjoyed this book, I found it thoroughly entertaining. Sometimes, 
while reading, I'd get so involved with the case Mma Ramostwe was solving that 
I wouldn't leave my chair until the case got over. Some of the mysteries are 
really quite funny, while others can be a bit scary!

Although I picked this book up from the adult section, I am sure that young 
readers will also enjoy this book and I recommend the entire series to you. The 
writing was easy to understand and the plot was interesting, which kept me 
turning every page until the book was over.

â€¢ Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780349116754>

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 