
Overview


By Benjamin Mialot, editor-in-chief of culture and leisure guide Le Petit 
Bulletin <http://www.petit-bulletin.fr/lyon/index.html>


Often regarded as being like Paris, but on a more human scale, Lyon is unusual 
among European cities in combining the museums and galleries of a cultural 
capital with the dynamism of a former industrial hub.


France is a world-beater in lots of things (strikes, pretentiousness, kissing) 
but its towns and cities are also masters at according themselves the title of 
capital of something, be it a skill, a dish or a pastime.
Lyon locator map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/travel_lyon-zip/giv-30080Qb3e6Dp86yd9>
Lyon can boast many such titles: gastronomy capital, silk capital and ancient 
capital of the Gauls. But it was also the capital of repression when it came to 
electronic dance music. In the middle of the 1990s, when the rave revolution 
was at its height, the city did its best to stamp it out, by means ranging from 
the refusal of late-night licences to calling in the riot police.

You won’t find this snippet of local history in any of Lyon’s museums, though. 
The city has since embraced rave culture as one of its main attractions, and it 
has never been so easy to burn the candle at both ends – at 130 beats per 
minute. The big event is the five-dayNuits Sonores 
<http://www.nuits-sonores.com/en/> festival each May, which celebrated its 12th 
birthday this year, but every weekend in Lyon sees dozens of DJs and promoters 
playing all over the city in dedicated electro clubs (DV1 <http://dv1-club.com/>
,Terminal <http://terminal-club.com/>, Petit Salon <http://lpslyon.fr/>); on 
river barges (Sirius <http://lesirius.com/>, Marquise 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Marquise/152102618156251>, Sonic 
<http://sonic-lyon.blogspot.co.uk/>); and in big concert venues on the 
outskirts such asKao <http://www.ninkasi.fr/musique/agenda.html> and 
Transbordeur <http://www.transbordeur.fr/accueil/>.

One venue in particular epitomises this soaraway success: Le Sucre 
<http://www.le-sucre.eu/> (see below), in an eyrie on the roof of a former 
sugar factory that’s now a contemporary arts centre, and run by the team behind
Nuits Sonores <http://www.nuits-sonores.com/en/>. It is one of the landmarks of 
La Confluence <http://www.lyon-confluence.fr/en/index.html>, the newly 
revitalised industrial area on a tongue of land between the rivers Saône and 
Rhône, dotted with statement architecture, such as the newMusée des Confluences 
<http://www.museedesconfluences.fr/>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440158179933%2F5540d2c7-30e4-4b26-9f2c-b7f74963e833-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440158179933%2F5540d2c7-30e4-4b26-9f2c-b7f74963e833-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Le Sucre, a rooftop club, epitomises the soaraway success of La Confluence area
La Confluence is part of a feel-good development that included the 
pedestrianisation of the two river banks and has brought with it an element of 
gentrification not unlike that happening in Lyon’s 7th arrondissement, to the 
west. This multicultural and until recently relatively affordable district has 
seen the city’s trendiest new restaurant openings and its most interesting 
nightlife (DIY Live Station <http://livestationdiy.com/>, Le Café du Rhône 
<https://www.facebook.com/cafedurhone>) – to the point where it is taking over 
from the former silk manufacturing Croix Rousse district as the city’s most 
happening area.

But all up and coming areas eventually reach a plateau, and it becomes the 
turn of another district to attract a young crowd. In Lyon it’s now the inner 
suburbs – thanks to citizen politics in places like Villeurbanne, and the 
transformation of theGrrrnd Zero 
<https://www.grrrndzero.org/index.php/gz-bohlen/manifeste> squat at 
Vaulx-en-Velin into a place of pilgrimage for underground music (see below) – 
that must nurture new avant-garde movements.

Music/clubs scene


By promoters Paulin Grégoire, Matthias Perrette and Kimi Do (who work as Merci 
Bonsoir <https://www.facebook.com/MerciMerciBonsoir>)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440067993901%2F9b48b270-3499-4521-8994-8a5b94796650-2060x938.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440067993901%2F9b48b270-3499-4521-8994-8a5b94796650-2060x938.jpeg>
 Clubbers enjoy music from French electronic musician Danger at Le Sucre 
The cultural offering in Lyon is huge. There’s lots of energy: people creating 
things, and also people organising events, setting up music labels. These 
projects often prompt established places into upping their game and undertaking 
big revamps.


Our favourite space is probably the Marché Gare <http://www.marchegare.fr/>. 
It holds 300 people, and there’s a Berlin feel to its 1970s public-sector 
building vibe. The music is indie, in the widest sense. In the same part of La 
Confluence,Le Sucre <http://www.le-sucre.eu/> has rapidly become Lyon’s big 
name electro-dance club, hosting internationally known acts.
 Nuit Sonore’s Lyon playlist 
Transbordeur <http://www.transbordeur.fr/accueil/> is one of Lyon’s largest 
venues by capacity, but stands out for its eclectic choice of acts and its 
indie credentials. It’s in a former factory and has kept its look industrial, 
with a huge gantry hanging over the bar. It’s at its most fun duringSummer 
Sessions 
<http://www.transbordeur.fr/agenda/summer-sessions-2015-du-25-juin-au-31-juillet/>
, an outdoor programme with concerts, street art and film screenings in a group 
of old containers. Then there’sl’Epicerie Moderne 
<http://www.epiceriemoderne.com/>, a little further out, which is the Lyon 
area’s temple to indie music.

In a recently decommissioned factory in Vaulx-en-Velin, Grrrnd Zero 
<https://www.grrrndzero.org/index.php/gz-bohlen/manifeste> is the heart of 
underground Lyon. Its carefully curated programme and dizzying list of events 
make it a must-do, with building work going on all around you.

The best rock music club is still Le Sonic <http://sonic-lyon.blogspot.co.uk/>
, on a barge moored by the Gare de Perrache. It has low pinkish lighting, red 
walls and well-chosen acts. You could be lucky enough to find Thurston Moore 
playing: he says this is his favourite club in Lyon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440154079797%2F598abf41-bade-40a9-a0e7-9a0aae54481d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440154079797%2F598abf41-bade-40a9-a0e7-9a0aae54481d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Le Trokson, an alternative music venue that hosts free concerts 
Another place to hear live music over a drink or two is Le Trokson 
<http://www.trokson.com/>. It puts on free concerts several nights a week, 
leaning towards garage, surf and psychedelic sounds. It’s a nice looking spot, 
with a vaulted basement room and a convivial atmosphere and is my favourite 
place in the historic 1st arrondissement, but there’s alsoLes Capucins 
<https://www.facebook.com/bar.des.capucins>, a relaxed bar for a few drinks 
with friends, and there are regular gigs in its basement. It’s right across the 
road from a picturesque building used as a Scientology centre. Still on the 
slopes of the Croix Rousse district, not-for-profit barLa Triperie 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Triperie/122017327859707> is the perfect 
place to catch an underground gig, with old stone walls, parquet flooring, 
pinball machines and bottled beer, but it’s hard to find out what’s going on 
there – you have to look out for posters around town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440072209856%2F1e01a38a-0258-4dfa-a63b-98900a6cbaee-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440072209856%2F1e01a38a-0258-4dfa-a63b-98900a6cbaee-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sofa record shop. 
There’s a similar ambience at Le Café du Rhône 
<https://www.facebook.com/cafedurhone> on the river bank (as the name 
suggests), which is also a good daytime stop for a beer and the dish of the 
day. At night, head downstairs to the basement for concerts, especially ones 
promoted by French alternative pop outfitLa Souterraine 
<http://souterraine.biz/>. And don’t forget Kraspek Myzik 
<https://www.facebook.com/kraspek.Myzik>, an independent record shop by day and 
concert venue by night; its tiny proportions make every evening unique.

Another fine record shop is Dangerhouse <http://www.dangerhouse.fr/>, the 
oldest in Lyon. It’s a treasure trove of garage-rock and 1960s music, its bins 
overflow with everything from classic albums to unusual finds.Sofa 
<http://www.sofarecords.fr/> is also very highly regarded, particularly for its 
African, South American and Asian collection of vinyl.

Where to eat/drink


By Guillaume Long, a Geneva-born graphic novel writer, blogger (A boire et à 
manger <http://long.blog.lemonde.fr/>) and illustrator

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440154301421%2Ff6cca24c-04ce-47fc-8313-8e900e3ec1d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440154301421%2Ff6cca24c-04ce-47fc-8313-8e900e3ec1d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Le Bistrot des Fauves 
Lyon is known for the great gastronomic tradition of bouchons, traditional 
taverns of a kind that these days I rarely visit. Most bouchons are pretty 
poor, and I don’t think they do the city’s image any favours. There are places 
being opened up by talented young chefs that deserve more attention.

There are exceptions to this rule, however. For “real” Lyonnaise cuisine, I’d 
recommend Le Garet (7 rue du Garet 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Le+Garet/@45.7606952,4.8397833,14z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x8eccccf3603f33ad>
, no website). It’s typical of the city and a bit twee, with its wood 
panelling, checked tablecloths and suitably gruff owner. You eat packed 
together in a convivial atmosphere. Another bouchon I like isDaniel et Denise 
<http://www.daniel-et-denise.fr/> (156 rue de Crèqui 
<http://www.daniel-et-denise.fr/>) in the old town. Its chef is Joseph Viola, 
winner of a prestigiousMeilleur Ouvrier de France 
<http://www.meilleursouvriersdefrance.info/> award (best craftsman of France) 
and his cooking is exceptional.

The 7th arrondissement, where I live, is flourishing culturally and has lots 
of informal bistro-type restaurants, which are much more my kind of thing for 
everyday eating. In the three years I have lived here, I’ve seen the opening of 
loads of little places that are worth seeking out. There’sLes Pralins 
<http://www.lespralins.com/> (62 rue Sébastien Gryphe 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/62+Rue+S%C3%A9bastien+Gryphe,+69007+Lyon,+France/@45.7510221,4.8424077,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47f4ea4468b5947b:0xb2f02f3e4401074f>
) for Sunday brunch;le Stamtich <https://www.facebook.com/stamtich> (44 rue 
Raulin 
<https://www.here.com/fra/lyon/street-square/stamtich--loc-dmVyc2lvbj0xO3RpdGxlPU40NS43NDcyOSslMkMrRTQuODM1MDk7bGF0PTQ1Ljc0NzI5O2xvbj00LjgzNTA5O2NhdGVnb3J5SWQ9Y2l0eS10b3duLXZpbGxhZ2U7c291cmNlU3lzdGVtPWludGVybmFs?map=45.74341,4.87474,13,normal&msg=Stamtich>
), where you can eat realflammekueche (a sort of Alsatian pizza) and sumptuous 
banoffee pie; andNam Sandwich <http://namsandwich.fr/> (12 Place Raspail 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/12+Place+Raspail,+69007+Lyon,+France/@45.7545686,4.8401486,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47f4ea5ac9af4105:0xf569f5f527a2fc11>
), where you can get a tastybanh mi Vietnamese sandwich to take away and eat by 
the Rhône.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440068689688%2F723281dc-62ca-4145-b59e-0c29b0cb3877-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440068689688%2F723281dc-62ca-4145-b59e-0c29b0cb3877-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A typical traditional Bouchon-style Lyonnais restaurant in Vieux Lyon 
For something a bit more exotic, try Chez Terra 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Chez-Terra/109996612411211> (81 rue Duguesclin 
<https://www.here.com/directions/drive/mylocation/Chez-Terra:250u05kq-440c7829e1bf4cb1b25e6eb17c9d2495?map=45.77016,4.84709,13,traffic&x=ep>
) in the 6th arrondissement: it’s a brilliant Japanese restaurant where the 
menu is short, but everything’s delicious. Then there’sDoshilack 
<https://www.facebook.com/Doshilack> (28 rue de Marseilles 
<https://www.here.com/directions/drive/mylocation/Doshilack:250u05kq-0f225ee9cbaa47bfa62b6b7239363501?map=45.75254,4.84074,13,traffic>
), in the multicultural Guillotière district, for divine Korean food.

For drinks, head for Le Bistrot des Fauves 
<https://www.facebook.com/lebistrotdesfauves> (29 rue Saint Michael 
<https://www.here.com/directions/drive/mylocation/Le-Bistrot-Des-Fauves:2508lxx5-b57df4e10761021349c417007c9e7d7f?map=45.75186,4.84536,13,traffic&x=ep>
), which does good beer. Sit at one of several mismatched tables and enjoy it 
with a very good plate of cheese and charcuterie. It puts on exhibitions from 
time to time, there are magazines lying around and the clientele is quite boho.

But my true favourite is Le Kitchen Café 
<https://www.facebook.com/lekitchencafe> (34 rue Chevreul 
<https://www.here.com/directions/drive/mylocation/Le-Kitchen-Caf%C3%A9:2508lxx5-026fb6ee82df0932049af97f911d03a9?map=45.74848,4.83989,13,traffic>
), a stone’s throw from my house. The cooking is Franco-Swedish, all made with 
locally grown produce. It has old sewing machines as lamp stands and table 
legs, and is a very popular meeting place. The coffee is good, and I always go 
for the homemade patisserie: cookies, financiers (almond sponge cakes) and 
petit fours are all top class, at reasonable prices. Close to the Gare de 
Lyon-Perrache,Café Marmot <https://www.facebook.com/CafeMarmot> (51 rue de la 
Charité 
<https://www.here.com/directions/drive/mylocation/Cafe-Marmot:250aabd1-00dd8c25f01b0463154608cb5a1c6b10?map=45.75061,4.83047,13,traffic&x=ep>
) is also worth a trip. Its cookies are delicious and the atmosphere is 
friendly.Le Palégrié <http://www.palegrie.fr/en/> (8 rue du Palais Grillet 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Rue+Palais+Grillet,+69002+Lyon,+France/@45.7621339,4.835306,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47f4ea56725959f1:0x79251ef733f6e8a3>
) is a bit like Le Kitchen Café, with reasonable prices. It’s a simple but very 
refined little place, where the staff can advise on the choice of excellent 
wines.

Where to go for art and design


By Julie Rodriguez-Malti, co-director of the Néon art collective

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440068907397%2Fcd123a7c-1ae0-49cf-b55c-97682cc60dff-2060x1067.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440068907397%2Fcd123a7c-1ae0-49cf-b55c-97682cc60dff-2060x1067.jpeg>
 Le Bleu du Ciel art gallery 
When we started out, there were just three galleries in rue Burdeau in the 1st 
arrondissement. Today there are 15 or so, thanks to the local authority. When 
they saw what we were doing, they made it financially attractive for other 
galleries to set up here, too.


I used to love going to the Salle de Bains 
<http://www.lasalledebains.net/index.php?lang=uk> not-for-profit arts centre up 
in Croix Rousse. It has been working peripatetically in Lyon’s museums and 
galleries since it lost the lease on its premises last year. Through it I 
discovered lots of young artists from around the world. Apart from that, I love 
the exhibitions put on byGalerie Mathieu <http://galeriemathieu.blogspot.co.uk/>
, which displays some lovely minimalist pieces. It is a gallery very much of 
its era – it was set up in 1979 – with real character and a taste for geometric 
abstraction.

Lower down in the Croix Rousse quarter is L’Oeil de Beouf 
<http://atelier-oeildeboeuf.com/>, an arts studio that’s very young and 
eclectic, open just six months of the year. Its backers don’t really 
communicate much, except on social media, but they organise concerts for each 
new show. And I often get a nice surpise at theDatta 
<http://datta.fr/datta_galerie.html> bookshop, which as well as magazines and 
periodicals, has a small space for showing nice pieces of design, illustration 
and graphic art.

You can also admire the photography of Gilles Vernet at Le Bleu du Ciel 
<http://www.lebleuduciel.net/>. His work has sociological leanings, but is done 
with lots of panache. And the setting of the gallery is fantastic and has an 
incredible view over the whole of Lyon.

In the 7th arrondissement, there are three places in particular worth seeking 
out. One is a little shop window affair calledBikini 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/bikini-espace-dart-contemporain/241793752552285>
, on rue de la Thibaudière. You can’t go in, except on opening nights; you just 
look from outside. A little notice goes up each month, telling you about shows 
and how long they are on for. It can seem frustrating, but it is in fact very 
generous.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440078788727%2Fc5dc5d52-9538-46c0-a2a6-60f3e96f0584-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Lyon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Flyon-france-alternative-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440078788727%2Fc5dc5d52-9538-46c0-a2a6-60f3e96f0584-1020x612.jpeg>
 L’Oeil de Beouf gallery, which is open for just six months of the year 
On the same street there’s a new gallery called Snap 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/SNAP/211725908989995>, set up by a sculptor 
calledPaul Raguenes <http://www.paulraguenes.com/>, which has quite big ideas. 
Its attitude is like that of a Parisian gallery: he’s not afraid of showing 
large attention-grabbing pieces of work.

And finally, while in the area, make time for the Ilot d’Amaranthes garden at 
the junction of Rue d’Anvers and Rue de la Thibaudière, which was designed by 
the artistEmmanuel Louisgrand <https://louisgrand.carbonmade.com/> (with 
support fromGalerie Tator <http://www.rogertator.com/>). Once a vacant plot 
between two buildings, it has become a unique community space, with some 
amazing roses. If I had to move house, I would go to the 7th arrondissement. It 
has the freshness and vibrancy the Croix Rousse slopes had a few years ago.

The most unusual place I know is over towards the Île Barbe, an island in the 
Saône in the 9th arrondissement. It’s calledL’Attrape-couleurs 
<http://www.attrape-couleurs.com/>, and the walk there along the banks of the 
river is magical. It’s in the annex of a town hall, a big space with parquet 
floors and a marble fireplace, opposite the famousJocteur 
<http://www.boulangeriejocteur.com/texteUk.html> bakery. The artists curate the 
shows themselves and you can find works you won’t see anywhere else.
• If you’d like to find out more about what’s on at galleries in Lyon check out
Adele <http://adele-lyon.fr/home.php>, which is published by an association of 
all the contemporary galleries in the city

Readers’ tips and Instagram


There’s no better guide to a city than word-of-mouth recommendations – from 
people who live there and people who have visited. We asked our readers to 
share their favourite experiences andInstagram pictures of Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/24/instagram-snapshots-lyon-eyes-of-locals>
. Here are just a few – you’llfind more readers’ tips here <http:// 
http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/24/best-of-lyon-readers-travel-tips>.

Enjoy Lyon by bike
Get yourself lost down cobbled streets and across countless bridges in this 
extremely bike-friendly city. Take the tour along thequais (the banks of the 
river Saône and Rhône), particularly Quai St Vincent (underneath La 
Croix-Rousse looking up to Lyon’s miniature version of the Eiffel Tower). Cycle 
all the way along the bank until you get to the tunnel de La Croix-Rousse, a 
cyclist/pedestrian-only tunnel stretching from east to west built under the 
bohemian arts district known as Croix Rousse. A surreal ride accompanied by 
music and dancing animals projected onto the wall. When you reach the other 
side, cross the bridge towards theParc de la Tête d’Or 
<http://www.loisirs-parcdelatetedor.com/en/>, a huge park with a lake, pedalos 
and even a zoo!
Rose Labdon

A fine time with food and wine
La Voûte Chez Léa <http://www.lavoute-chezlea.com/index2.html> is a great 
restaurant, similar menu-wise to Lyon’s many bouchons but the standard of 
cooking was a good few notches above most.La Cave de Cécile 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Cave-de-C%C3%A9cile-Restaurant-Cave-%C3%A0-Vins-%C3%A0-LYON/471872486158440>
 is a great wine bar in an atmospheric setting with a by-the-glass selection 
that changes daily. Also, tryBernachon <http://www.bernachon.com/fr/>, which is 
a famous chocolate shop and cafe. Tip: the selection in the shop is much the 
same, and much cheaper, than the neighbouring cafe.
Dave Stenton

The best beers – and great burgers


Lyon is getting more and more of a taste for beer. Several bars dedicated to 
quality beers have opened these last few years. One of the oldest is theLe 
Palais de la Bière 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Le-Palais-de-la-Bi%C3%A8re/123012937763423>, 
with more than 300 beers available. TheNinkasi <http://www.ninkasi.fr/en/> is a 
local brewery with several bars around town.The Beers 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Beers/183641308398059> has a friendly 
atmosphere and is close to the Vieux Lyon. The405 
<https://www.facebook.com/405lyon> is close to the town hall and has 40 beers 
on tap – and shows rugby matches on widescreen TVs around the bar.Les Fleurs du 
Malt <http://www.lesfleursdumaltlebar.fr/> may be a bit pricey but it stocks 
rare beers and its bartenders know their job. In summer, there’s an amazing 
beer garden by the river at theStar Ferry 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheStarferry>, which has a wide selection of beers 
from all over the world, and great burgers.
Glasny

Discover the city’s on-trend areas
Visit SoBell (South Bellecour), the trendy name for the area south of Place 
Bellecour and before Perrache train station. Take the metro to Ampere, to where 
the 2nd arrondissement is shaking down its shabby self with chic new 
restaurants, such asComptoire Thomas 
<http://www.restaurant-thomas.com/index.mc.Comptoir-Thomas-Presentation.rub_id.219.html>
, and galleries and boutiques (try the Rhône side for late local bars, though 
it’s a bit prickly around the edges). On the Saône side you’ll find more 
tranquil cafes and historic ramparts.
LyonLondon

Stroll, savour and learn
Wander round the medieval old town (France’s largest, and a Unesco world 
heritage site). When you do though, give the odd front door a gentle push. If 
it opens, it may well lead you into one of Lyon’s (once hidden but now famous)
traboules, or passageways. Originally used by the city’s merchants as a 
short-cut to and from the river, the traboules became vital to the city’s 
resistance movement during the second world war, as they gave resistance 
fighters who knew the city a means of escape from the Gestapo. The Gestapo 
headquarters is now theResistance and Deportation History Centre 
<http://www.chrd.lyon.fr/chrd/sections/fr/pied/english_1>.
James King
 