
Everest <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ZQVpPiOji0>

Could it be this year’s Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>? A 3D 
adventure-disaster thriller set, not in space, but up a really high mountain? 
It is based on thereal-life incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/mar/30/everest.features> of 1996, when 
an attempt to climb Mount Everest ended in a terrifying catastrophe.The film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/everest-open-venice-film-festival-movie>
 – from British screenwritersWilliam Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/10/william-nicholson-interview> and 
Simon Beaufoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/14/billy-flynn-long-halftime-walk-adalt-film4>
 and directed byBaltasar Kormákur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/may/25/culture.features2> – depicts the 
desperate survival attempts of two separate groups, led by characters played by 
Jake Gyllenhaal and Jason Clarke. It promises to reawaken memories of the great 
documfladyentary classicTouching the Void 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1104804,00.html>
.


Australia 17 September, UK and US 18 September 

Life 


Director Anton Corbijn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn>’s 
intriguing post-Control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/may/18/cannes2007.cannesfilmfestival1> 
career continues in an unconventional fashion, after chilly thrillersThe 
American <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/25/the-american-review> and 
A Most Wanted Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/a-most-wanted-man-review-philip-seymour-hoffman>
, withthis biographical 1950s-set drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/09/berlin-2015-life-review-anton-corbijn-james-dean>
. It’s centred on the friendship between James Dean and Life photographer 
Dennis Stock, played by Dane DeHaan and Robert Pattinson, as they travel across 
the US. The lead duo make for a promising double act: Pattinson, like fellow 
Twilight survivor Kristen Stewart, is avoiding blockbusters, while co-star 
DeHaan, who impressed inChronicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/02/chronicle-film-review>, is 
similarly carving an offbeat niche.
UK 25 September, US 4 December
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlMMwg4RoaRU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlMMwg4RoaRU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlMMwg4RoaRU&media=>
Mia Madre <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWiFif96t3Y> 

The great Italian auteur Nanni Moretti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nanni-moretti> has got his groove back with a 
new film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/16/my-mother-review-nanni-morettis-meta-movie-is-his-best-since-the-sons-room>
 in his characteristically playful, self-referential style. It is his best for 
years: a warm, witty and seductive movie about cinema, family ties and the 
importance of enjoying life. A renowned movie director Margherita, played by 
Margherita Buy, is plagued by her pampered and temperamental American star, 
very amusingly played by John Turturro. She experiences a further crisis when 
her elderly mother becomes severely ill, and she has to move back briefly into 
the family home. A smart and enjoyable movie.
UK 25 September

The Martian <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ej3ioOneTy8> 

Ridley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott>’s last jaunt into 
space was the middling Alien prequelPrometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/prometheus-review>, but, 
undeterred, he’s heading back for an adaptation ofAndy Weir’s hit novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/10/science-fiction-roundup-review>. 
Pitched as Gravity meetsCast Away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/jan/12/culture.reviews>, the film stars 
Matt Damon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/08/the-martian-matt-damon-ridley-scott>
 as an astronaut stranded on Mars, who must use his ingenuity to survive. An 
impressive supporting cast (Jessica Chastain, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Kristen Wiig, 
Jeff Daniels) suggests more than just a one-man show, while a world premiere at 
Toronto film festival implies possible awards glory.
Australia and UK 30 September, US 2 October

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718488611%2F7e20001c-1a44-4bad-bf99-08f6f3d99fa3-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20films%20to%20watch%20in%20autumn%202015%3A%20from%20Everest%20to%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20films%20to%20watch%20in%20autumn%202015%3A%20from%20Everest%20to%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718488611%2F7e20001c-1a44-4bad-bf99-08f6f3d99fa3-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Robert De Niro and Anne Hathaway in The Intern. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros
The Intern <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZU3Xban0Y6A> 

The Devil Wears Prada <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/06/drama>’s 
Anne Hathaway gets a promotion to CEO of a whizzy online fashion company in 
this new comedy from veteran directorNancy Meyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/12/its-complicated-film-recap-meryl-streep>
. Hathaway’s new work experience kid is Robert De Niro, as part of a community 
outreach programme. Rene Russo is the office masseuse (only in America!) De 
Niro falls for, in between helping the youngsters remember what’s really 
important, like staying true to your principles and tucking your shirt in.
Australia 1 October, UK 2 October, US 25 September

Macbeth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YqHhKuCQmoY> 

Australian film-maker Justin Kurzel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/michael-fassbender-macbeth-suffered-from-ptsd>
 brings an operatic verve to this powerfully acted version ofMacbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/macbeth-review-fassbender-and-cotillard-full-of-sound-and-fury-in-significant-shakespeare-adaptation>
, which appears to take place in some kind of nightmarishly red-lit Scots 
outback. Michael Fassbender and Marion Cotillard are the A-list casting as 
Macbeth and Lady M. Fassbender brings his alpha-rage and ambition to the role, 
but he is arguably upstaged by Cotillard who brings a demurely sinister 
determination to her regicidal plan. A spectacular and involving production.


Australia 1 October, UK 2 October, US 4 December

Sicario 

Here is the high-octane drama thriller in which Canadian director Denis 
Villeneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/denis-villeneuve-sicario-cannes-2015>
 appears to have stolen Michael Mann’s crown. It’s a scorchingly brutal 
picture, often really exciting, in whichEmily Blunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/19/sicario-review-emily-blunt-thriller>
, rather surprisingly, establishes herself as a kickass action heroine. She 
plays an FBI field agent who finds herself in the frontline of a war against a 
Mexican drug cartel, alongside two male colleagues, played by Josh Brolin and 
Benicio Del Toro. Slowly, it dawns on her that secret objectives are being 
hidden from her. A blistering action thriller.


Australia 24 September, UK 8 October, US 18 September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsR0SDT2GeFg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsR0SDT2GeFg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsR0SDT2GeFg&media=>
Oscar bait: why the glossy documentary remake rules this season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/documentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis>
The Walk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GR1EmTKAWIw> 

Five years ago, James Marsh won the best documentary Oscar for Man on Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/01/documentary1>, about Philippe 
Petit’s death-defying and illegal tightrope wobble between the twin towers of 
the World Trade Center in 1974. Now,Robert Zemeckis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/03/flight-denzel-washington-zemeckis-review>
 is hoping Oscar glory will result from his fictionalised account of the stunt, 
starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt as the polo-neck wearing Frenchman and shot in 
reportedly vertiginous 3D.
Australia 22 October, UK and US 2 October

Suffragette <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=056FI2Pq9RY> 

Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/16/abi-morgan-27-thatcher-shame> 
(screenwriter ofThe Iron Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/05/the-iron-lady-film-review> and 
Shame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/12/shame-film-review-fassbender>) 
scripts this period drama based on the struggle of the early suffragettes. 
Carey Mulligan plays Maud Watts, Helena Bonham Carter is Edith Ellyn, and Meryl 
Streep takes the role of Emmeline Pankhurst. The suffragettes find that 
parliamentary debate is of no use, and the only way to exert pressure for 
change is to resort to increasingly violent direct action — and the state 
resorts to action against them.
UK 12 October, US 23 October


Crimson Peak 

Tom Hiddleston has three major movies out this season: Hank Williams biopic I 
Saw the Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/13/tom-hiddleston-country-hank-williams-biopic>
, Ben Wheatley’s adaptation of JG Ballard’sHigh-Rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/tom-hiddleston-high-rise-jg-ballard-toronto-film-festival>
 (both of which are likely to be released in the spring) and this Cumbria-set 
19th-century high-end horror fromGuillermo del Toro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guillermodeltoro>, in which he plays the 
spooky hubbie of Mia Wasikowska. His family home also turns out to boast some 
quirky original features, including his acquired-taste sister-in-law, Jessica 
Chastain. At an early screening, Stephen King reported the film was “gorgeous 
and just fucking terrifying”.


Australia 15 October, UK and US 16 October
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6yAbFYbi8XU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6yAbFYbi8XU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6yAbFYbi8XU&media=>
The Lobster <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WSZN8PyO0Cc> 

Film-maker Yorgos Lanthimos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/11/greek-director-yorgos-lanthimos>, 
the standard-bearer of the new Greek cinema, has madehis first English-language 
film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/15/the-lobster-review-cannes-film-festival-2015>
: a macabre adventure in black-comic absurdism which satirises our obsession 
with monogamy and relationships. In a weird future, or alternative present, all 
those who find themselves without a partner, for any reason, must attend a 
remedial hotel course with other singles. If they fail to pair up, they will be 
magically transformed into animals and released into the forest. A very bizarre 
drama, starring Colin Farrell, on interesting form as a lonely, plump singleton.
UK 16 October

Pan 

Many expectations are riding on the good ship Pan, Joe Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-wright>’s big-budget fantasy origins 
story for Captain Hook (a complexly coiffured Hugh Jackman) and little Peter 
(newcomer Levi Miller). Special effects galore are promised, but there’s as 
much interest in the casting as the swashbuckling. Cara Delevingne pops up as a 
mermaid, Kathy Burke is Mother Barnabas and Rooney Mara plays Tiger Lily (a 
choice which angered many, as the character is generallyportrayed as Native 
American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/07/tiger-lily-peter-pan-native-american-stereotype>
).
Australia 24 September, UK 16 October, US 9 October
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0QopQaTNF1I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0QopQaTNF1I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0QopQaTNF1I&media=>
The Program <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5lNUl_PTLyE> 

Stephen Frears <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears> returns after 
the triumphantPhilomena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/03/philomena-review-steve-coogan-judi-dench>
 with something a little less heart-warming: an account of the rise and fall of 
Lance Armstrong, from cancer survival and record-breaking yellow jersey winning 
streak, to retirement and ill-fated return to the scene in 2009 before he was
stripped of all seven Tour de France titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/22/lance-armstrong-tour-de-france-uci>
 after being found guilty of doping. Ben Foster stars, with Chris O’Dowd as
David Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jan/28/lance-armstrong-sundaytimes>
, the Sunday Times journalist successfully sued by Armstrong for his 
allegations, who went on to be proved right – and have a movie made of his book.
UK 16 October

Spectre <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBnGxAkdh_k> 

Daniel Craig returns to strike that feet-planted-wide-apart pose as 007. It’s 
his fourth outing in the role and probably a great test. The huge emotional 
upheaval concerning M provided a fillip to the third Craig/Bond filmSkyfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/25/skyfall-review>, which effaced 
the memory of the disappointingQuantum of Solace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/18/jamesbond1> before that. Will 
this measure up? Or is it time for Craig to hand over his Walther PPK to 
another actor?Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre> promises to be 
an “origin-myth” narrative showing Bond’s first encounter with the super-evil 
organisation Spectre.
Australia 6 November, UK 26 October, US 6 November

Brooklyn 

The writing of Colm Tóibin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/colm-toibin> 
is widely treasured, and now hismost commercially successful novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/sep/07/book-club-brooklyn-colm-toibin>
 has a movie version, adapted by Nick Hornby and directed by John Crowley.
Saoirse Ronan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/brooklyn-trailer-saoirse-ronan-colm-toibin-novel>
 plays Ellis Lacey, a young woman who emigrates from Ireland in the 1950s. In 
Brooklyn, she falls in love with someone, but then has to return to Ireland 
after her sister dies, and finds herself strongly attracted to someone there. 
And so the torment of love is given a geographical dimension, spread across 
continents. Tóibin’s readers will be fascinated to see how his book appears on 
screen.
UK and US 6 November
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ekxPFTZm1Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ekxPFTZm1Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ekxPFTZm1Y&media=>
Burnt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IiGJlUVQDGk> 

Bradley Cooper has just spent months in London starring in The Elephant Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/01/the-elephant-man-review-bradley-cooper-london>
 on stage; before that he was here on a cookery bootcamp with Gordon Ramsay 
protege Jason Atherton, ahead of shooting this, a romantic drama set in the 
pressure-cooker world of gourmet restaurateurs. Previously titled Chef until the
Jon Favreau street-food movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/26/chef-jon-favreau-film-review> 
beat them to it, and then Adam Jones until, presumably, someone noticed that 
that was perhaps the world’s most boring movie title, Burnt stars Sienna 
Miller, Uma Thurman, Alicia Vikander and Emma Thompson. Expect showcase slicing.
UK 6 November, US 23 October
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718558267%2Fceb7cc90-d09a-47ee-a367-3540f2a59975-2060x1396.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20films%20to%20watch%20in%20autumn%202015%3A%20from%20Everest%20to%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20films%20to%20watch%20in%20autumn%202015%3A%20from%20Everest%20to%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718558267%2Fceb7cc90-d09a-47ee-a367-3540f2a59975-2060x1396.jpeg>
 Alex Jennings and Maggie Smith in The Lady in the Van. Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
Films 
The Lady in the Van <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=47T0HORY9gs> 

Fifteen years after the role won her an Olivier nomination at the National, 
Maggie Smith is back as bag lady Mary Shepherd, who temporarily parked the van 
in which she lived in Alan Bennett’s drive in Camden Town – and stayed for 15 
years.Longtime Bennett alter ego Alex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/17/hymn-cocktail-sticks-review> 
plays the author, grappling with mam as well as his new old lady, as well as a 
less than fulfilling love life and the liberal scepticism about the new arrival 
of his neighbours (among them Frances de la Tour, Roger Allam). Original stage 
production directorNicholas Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/09/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film>
 also returns.
UK 13 November, US 11 December

Steve Jobs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ufMgQNCXy_M> 

Compared to the Ashton Kutcher pic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/14/steve-jobs-apple-film-biopic-review>
 that was rushed out shortly after the Apple co-founder’s death in 2011, this 
is very much the blue-chip treatment: script by Aaron Sorkin, director Danny 
Boyle, with Michael Fassbender playing the man himself. (Initially actor 
Christian Bale and director David Fincher were in the frame – and a very 
different movie would, no doubt, have resulted.) This one draws onWalter 
Isaacson’s official biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/25/steve-jobs-biography-walter-isaacson-review>
, and is centred around extensive scenes during three key product launches. 
Room has been found for Kate Winslet as a key early collaborator Joanna 
Hoffman, and Seth Rogen as Apple’s co-founder Steve Wozniak; this will be high 
powered stuff.
Australia 8 October, UK 13 November, US 4 September

Tangerine

Despite being shot entirely on an iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/10/tangerine-film-iphone-buddy-comedy-transgender-prostitutes>
, there’s nothing gimmicky about this lo-fi Hollywood-set tale. Focusing on two 
trans sex workers who are seeking revenge against a pimp, it goes for the heart 
rather than the jugular, or the wallet, with warm screwball comedy and 
stereotype-defying storytelling. As well as directorSean S Baker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/11/tangerine-director-sean-baker-isnt-it-time-diversity-was-taken-more-seriously>
, the two impressive leads should be marked as ones to watch, having both been 
picked from obscurity at the Los Angeles LGBT Centre.
Australia 10 September, UK 13 November
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfUxRxgtYt0M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfUxRxgtYt0M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfUxRxgtYt0M&media=>
Hunger Games: Mockingjay, Part 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3zVaD7t39w8> 

The most dystopian young adult franchise stomps to a close as Jennifer 
Lawrence’s Katniss leads an all-out revolution against the autocratic Capitol. 
Will they overthrow Donald Sutherland’s President Snow? Will the show fronted 
by Stanley Tucci go on regardless? And, maybe most crucially, will Katniss wind 
up with hunky Gale or titchy Peeta? Be warned: there will be blood. Plus:the 
very final performance by Philip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/a-most-wanted-man-review-philip-seymour-hoffman>
.
Australia 19 October, UK and US 20 November

Black Mass 


Johnny Depp aims to make up for over-the-top, underwhelming disappointments 
such asMortdecai <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/22/mortdecai-review>
 andThe Lone Ranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/08/the-lone-ranger-review> by 
hauling on a bald wig and inserting cold-as-ice contact lenses to playJames 
“Whitey” Bulger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/23/james-whitey-bulger-capture-fbi> 
in a sprawling gangland saga that is aiming to be this generation’sGoodfellas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/goodfellas>. Bulger was the Irish-American 
crime boss who managed to stay on the FBI’s payroll as an informant while 
carving his way – sometimes literally – through the Boston underworld.Out of 
the Furnace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/30/out-of-the-furnace-review>’s 
Scott Cooper directs, ensuring that requisite levels of gritty authenticity 
will be maintained.Read our first-look review here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/04/black-mass-review-compelling-true-drama-is-mighty-comeback-for-johnny-depp>
Australia 17 September, UK 27 November, US 18 September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Bx4RH7n49M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Bx4RH7n49M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Bx4RH7n49M&media=>
Bridge of Spies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mBBuzHrZBro> 

British writer Matt Charman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/may/24/matt-charman-the-machine> hit 
the jackpot when he showed his spec script to Steven Spielberg – who promptly 
agreed to direct it (although Charman’s screenplay has been worked on by the 
Coen brothers). This is a true-life story from the cold war about James 
Donovan, played by Tom Hanks, a lawyer who negotiated the release of thedowned 
U-2 pilot Gary Powers in exchange for Russian spy Rudolf Abel 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1960_U-2_incident> – and later came under 
pressure to help assassinate Fidel Castro. Hanks will undoubtedly bring an 
element of troubled decency to the role.
Australia 22 October, UK 27 November, US 16 October

Carol 

This is a fascinating and sensationally sensual movie: Todd Haynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/todd-haynes>’s adapation of Patricia 
Highsmith’s 1952 novel The Price of Salt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/patricia-highsmith-film-adaptation-carol-only-openly-lesbian-novel-cannes-cate-blanchett>
. It is the story of a passionate love affair between a virginal shopgirl, 
played by Rooney Mara, and the beautiful and older woman she serves in the 
store, played by Cate Blanchett. Their relationship advances in painfully 
difficult and subtly slow increments, and the sexual tension is all but 
unbearable. This is an intensely sexy and superbly acted film.
UK 27 November, US 20 November
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLt-WC9xa7qs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLt-WC9xa7qs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLt-WC9xa7qs&media=>
The Good Dinosaur <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BrH72aFXfI> 

Somewhat improbably, this will be the second Pixar animation of 2015, after 
Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/inside-out-review-cannes-film-festival-pixar>
; the studio’s usual spacing was disrupted when Dinosaurran into story problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/25/pixar-lays-off-workers-good-dinosaur>
, and original director Bob Peterson was replaced by Peter Sohn. Still, it 
sounds like a nice little film, positing an Earth where the dinosaurs never 
died out, and a young apatosaurus called Arlo gets lost and becomes pally with 
a six-year-old human as he tries to make it home. Although the voice track was 
largely recast, there are a lot of quality names, including Frances McDormand, 
Anna Paquin and Steve Zahn.
Australia 26 December, UK 27 November, US 25 November

Sunset Song 

This is the project which Terence Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terence-davies> has been developing on and 
off for years: a screen version of the 1932 novelSunset Song by Lewis Grassic 
Gibbon <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/09/classics>. Agyness Deyn 
plays Chris Guthrie, the young woman living with her brother and father in a 
remote farmhouse, a family rendered dysfunctional by the death of Chris’s 
mother. It is perhaps Davies’s most ambitious movie since his version of Edith 
Wharton’sThe House Of Mirth <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/oct/13/1> in 
2000.
UK 4 December
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718640724%2Fe9d55727-fee9-412b-91cc-3a0edb8b593b-2060x1370.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20films%20to%20watch%20in%20autumn%202015%3A%20from%20Everest%20to%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20films%20to%20watch%20in%20autumn%202015%3A%20from%20Everest%20to%20Star%20Wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffilm-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718640724%2Fe9d55727-fee9-412b-91cc-3a0edb8b593b-2060x1370.jpeg>
 Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie fall apart in By the Sea. Photograph: 
Allstar/Universal Pictures 
By the Sea <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vUFZOO9zO0Q> 

Unlike her first two films as director – the gruelling Bosnian rape drama In 
the Land of Blood and Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/10/in-the-land-blood-honey-review> 
andUnbroken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/01/unbroken-review-angelina-jolie-jack-o-connell-louis-zamperini-oscar-bait>
, last year’s iffy biopic of Olympic athlete Louis Zamperini – Angelina Jolie 
has cast herself in By the Sea, the story of a couple whose marriage crumbles 
as they holiday in Malta. Jolie’s husband, Brad Pitt, co-stars – the first time 
they’ve acted opposite each other since spy romanceMr and Mrs Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jun/10/1>, when they met 10 years 
ago during filming.
UK 11 December, US 13 November

Grandma <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vUFZOO9zO0Q> 

Lily Tomlin is enjoying a late career resurgence thanks to the Netflix show 
Grace and Frankie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/08/grace-and-frankie-jane-fonda-lily-tomlin>
 and thisSundance hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/27/sundance-2015-review-grandma-lily-tomlin>
. The film follows a bereaved lesbian poet who goes on the road with her 
teenage granddaughter, trying to raise funds for the latter’s abortion. It’s 
Tomlin’sfirst leading movie role in 27 years 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094739/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_48>, written for her by 
director Paul Weitz. She even drives her own car, a 1955 Dodge Royal.
UK 11 December

Star Wars: The Force Awakens <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMOVFvcNfvE> 

This is going to be absolutely huge. JJ Abrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams> directs the new Star Wars movie — 
the one which many believe is the projectGeorge Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> could and should have steered to 
the screen 16 years ago instead of Phantom Menace and the whole prequel 
trilogy. Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher and Mark Hamill return, along with 
newcomersJohn Boyega 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/28/star-wars-the-force-awakens-footage-shows-lightsaber-wielding-john-boyega>
,Adam Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/26/girls-adam-driver-star-wars-villain>
,Oscar Isaac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/03/oscar-isaac-most-violent-year> and
Lupita Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/lupita-nyongo-best-supporting-actress-oscar>
. Weirdly, Chewie and C3PO stay the same age while the iconic faces get older. 
Prepare for a thermonuclear detonation of fanboy/fangirl excitement this 
Christmas.
Australia and UK 17 December, US 18 December
 