
In India, tens of thousands of middle-class people respond to a quasi-Gandhian 
activist's call for a second freedom struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/16/anna-hazare-arrest-india-protests>
 – this time, against the country's venal "brown masters",as one protester told 
the Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424053111904279004576524251574234220.html>
. Middle-classIsraelis demanding "social justice" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/07/israelis-march-protesters-social-justice>
 turn out for their country's first major demonstrations in years. In China, 
the state broadcaster CCTV unprecedentedly joins millions of cyber-critics in 
blaming a government that placed wealth creation above social welfare for the
fatal high-speed train crash in Wenzhou last month 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/01/us-china-train-censorship-idUSTRE7700ET20110801>
.

Add to this the uprisings against kleptocracies in Egypt and Tunisia, the 
street protests in Greece andSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> 
earlier this year, and you are looking at a fresh political awakening. The 
specific contexts may seem very different, ranging from authoritarian China to 
democratic America (where Warren Buffett, the world's richest man, publicly 
denounced a "billionaire-friendly Congress" last fortnight). And the grievances 
may be diversely phrased. But public anger derives from the same source: 
extreme and seemingly insurmountable inequality.

As Forbes magazine, that well-known socialist tool, describes it 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/joelkotkin/2011/08/15/u-k-riots-global-class-war/>
, protesters everywhere are driven by "the conviction that the power structure, 
corporate and government, work together to screw the broad middle class" (and 
the working class too, whose distress is not usually examined in Forbes).

Certainly, the strident promoters of globalisation – politicians, big 
businessmen, and journalists – will have to work much harder now to bamboozle 
their audiences.

For years now, the mantra of "economic growth" justified government 
interventions on behalf of big business and investors with generous tax breaks 
(and, in the west, the rescue of criminally reckless investors and speculators 
with massive bailouts at the taxpayer's expense). The fact that a few people 
get very rich while a majority remains poor seemed of little importance as long 
as the GDP figures looked impressive.

In heavily populated countries like India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, even a small number of people moving 
into the middle class made for an awe-inspiring spectacle. Helped by an 
entertainment-obsessed and "patriotic" corporate media, you could easily ignore 
the bad news – the suicides, for instance, of hundreds of thousands of farmers 
in the last decade. However, the carefully maintained illusions of 
globalisation shattered when even its putative beneficiaries – the educated and 
aspiring classes – began to hurt from high inflation, decreasing access to 
education and other opportunities for upward mobility.

Economic growth is no defence against the frustration of the semi-empowered. 
The economies of both India and Israel have recorded dramatic growth, 
especially in their service sectors, in recent years. But inequality has also 
grown spectacularly. The Financial Times, which recently compared India's 
oligarchic business families to Russia's mafia-capitalists, pointed out two 
weeks ago that "the 10 largest business families inIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> own about 30% of the stock market 
value" while one quarter of Israeli families live below the poverty line.

Last month the Indian supreme court blamed increasing social violence in the 
country on the "false promises of ever-increasing spirals of consumption 
leading to economic growth that will lift everyone". Obviously it is not the 
supreme court's remit to define India's economic policies. Nor shouldAnna Hazare
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> be entrusted with establishing 
the office of an anti-corruption ombudsman, a moral rather than political 
mission that amounts to nothing in a country littered with compromised and 
impotent institutions.

Still, they respond, however incoherently, to a profound crisis of legitimacy 
afflicting their country's highest institutions, and their supposed watchdog, 
the media. In India, for instance, a lot of public anger in recent months has 
focused on the country's senior journalists who were recently caught making 
deals between corrupt politicians and businessmen.

In the last decade, billionaires, "billionaire-friendly" legislators and 
CEO-worshipping writers and journalists have together constituted what the 
political economist Ha Joon Chang calls a"powerful propaganda machine, a 
financial-intellectual complex backed by money and power" 
<http://www.thirdworldtraveler.com/Globalization/Bad_Samaritans.html>.

Nevertheless, the real facts about "economic growth" are getting through to 
those most vulnerable to it in both the east and the west: the young. 
Denouncing "the corruption among politicians, businessmen, and bankers" that 
leaves "us helpless, without a voice", the manifesto of theSpanish indignados  
<http://www.thenation.com/article/161229/spains-indignados-take-square>released 
after their massive demonstrations in May could have been authored by the 
Indian supporters of Hazare.

Even as they export jobs and capital to Asia, economic globalisers in the west 
continue to preach the importance of upgrading skills and retraining at home. 
Yet the dead-end of economic globalisation looms clearly before Europe and 
America's youth: little chance of stable employment, or even affordable 
education.

The violence in European cities this year comes at the end of a long cycle of 
steady socioeconomic growth. In postcolonial India andChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, where billions are now being coerced 
into a transition from agrarian to urban industrial economies, this cycle had 
barely begun before it began to splutter. A secure and dignified life seems 
even more remote for most as a tiny minority hives off the fruits of "economic 
growth". Worried by the prospect of social unrest, China's communist leaders 
frankly describe their nation's apparently booming economy as "unstable, 
unbalanced, unco-ordinated and ultimately unsustainable". Its fumbling response 
to Anna Hazare reveals that India's democratically elected government has no 
better ideas about how to deal with the anger of an overwhelmingly young 
population, whose dramatically raised expectations stand little chance of being 
fulfilled.

The Chinese philosopher Zhang Junmai 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carsun_Chang> once wrote that an agrarian country 
has few "material demands" and can exist over a long period of time with 
"poverty but equality, scarcity but peace". However, its embrace of the west's 
model of consumer capitalism exposes it to endless political and social chaos.

Returning to an austere age of wisely managed expectations is no longer 
possible – even if it was desirable. It remains to be seen what political forms 
this summer's unrest will take. But there is no doubt that many more people 
across a wide swath of the world will awaken with rage to what Zhang warned 
against: "A condition of prosperity without equality, wealth without peace."
 