
Though not entirely a rags to riches story, a young Asil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir> once sold newspapers on the 
streets of Northern Cyprus before moving to Istanbul to study economics at 
university. During his college days, he supported himself by performing with 
his band, The Asils.

On graduating in 1963, Nadir moved to London's east end, a journey his family 
had already made from Cyprus. Before long, Asil made his mark in the rag trade 
as chairman of garment firm Wearwell, before turning the loss-making ladies 
fashion group Polly Peck into a business empire.
 Published in the Guardian on 14 February 1980, click on image for full story 
He added packaging, electronics and fresh produce companies to the Polly Peck 
conglomerate, which later became listed as a FTSE 100 company.

Polly Peck's rapid growth saw its value rise to £2 billion, making City 
traders fall in love with it during the boom times of the 1980s, some in the 
Square Mile calling it "wonder stock". By 1990, Nadir was in the Sunday Times 
rich list, and agenerous donor 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2012/8/21/1345543361215/Gdn28091991-001.jpg>
 to Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government.
 Published in the Guardian on 25 October 1990, click on image for full story 
Then in August 1990, in a move that baffled the city, Nadir tried to buy up 
Polly Peck shares from investors, only to retreat from this position days 
later. It was too late: Nadir had spooked the market and Polly Peck's shares 
plunged. The value of Nadir's personal holding was rumoured to have dropped by 
more than £160m.

Worse was to come, when trading in Polly Peck was suspended and Nadir was 
quizzed by theSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>. When Polly Peck was 
forced into liquidation in October 1990, its creditors were owed £1.3bn.
 Published in the Guardian on 21 September 1990, click on image for full story 
 Nadir, who has always denied the 66 charges of false accounting and theft 
made against him, was alleged to have secretly transferred £34m out of the 
company, leading to its collapse.

In 1993, just days before he was due to face charges, Nadir was driven to 
Compton Abbas airfield in Dorset, boarded a waiting business jet and fled to 
his native Northern Cyprus – which has no extradition treaty with Britain.

In 2010, having evaded the British courts for nearly 20 years, Nadir flew back 
to the UK, and declared himself delighted at the prospect of finally standing 
trial and "clearing his name".

At his trial 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/aug/22/asil-nadir-guilty-six-theft-charges>
 at the Old Bailey in 2012, Asil Nadir was found guilty of 10 charges involving 
the theft of millions of pounds from his Polly Peck empire.

The jury found him not guilty on three counts – all similar theft offences.

• This article was amended on 24 August 2012 because it said Asil Nadir fled 
to Northern Cyprus from an airfield near London. In fact he left from Compton 
Abbas airfield in Dorset, over 100 miles from London.
 