
The puncher’s chance is a beautiful thing. A boxer can be barely standing, 
fighting more by muscle memory than will, and yet there is always a chance that 
a single perfect punch can turn a hopeless fight – and sometimes even a 
drooping career – around in a split second.

This wild card factor is behind some of boxing’s most electric moments. It’s 
exactly what saved Andy Lee when he was in serious trouble against John 
Jackson. He had already been down in the first and by the fifth Jackson was 
putting the pressure on so much that for a moment Lee waspractically outside of 
the ropes 
<http://cdn1.bloguin.com/queensberryrules/wp-content/uploads/sites/93/2014/08/RedDearAlaskankleekai.gif>
.

Jackson must have sensed that the end was near when Lee was shook and 
stumbling backwards. But suddenly the Irishman regained his balance and landeda 
solid right hook to knock Jackson out 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=M1Nq9ksjLuY#t=551>. 
It was an unexpected treat for us Irish fans (finally!) as such a sudden KO is 
rare outside of the heavyweight division.

This particular kind of fight has all the elements that make boxing movies so 
successful. A plucky underdog on a quest for redemption. The thrill of a flash 
knockout. Such fights are ready-made for Hollywood.

No wonder Rocky managed to win best picture at the Oscars over Taxi Driver 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1976_in_film>. No wonder it remained the 
undisputed best Rocky movie for nine long years until Sylvester Stallone 
produced his magnum opus,Rocky IV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/jan/16/remembering-rocky-balboa-defied-critics-defeat-ivan-drago>
, complete with thesnowiest and beardiest of all montages 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1SUzcDUERLo>, world peace on Christmas and 
talking (possibly sexy) robots.

Let’s have a look at some of the greatest KOs from a losing fighter, starting 
with that other legendary Rocky…

Rocky Marciano v Jersey Joe Walcott, September 1952 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=I9O3vxoOWbU>

Rocky Marciano tore up the heavyweight ranks with a record of 42 wins, 37 by 
knockout, before facing Jersey Joe Walcott for the world title. Walcott’s 
experience and powerful shots quickly took their toll as Marciano was dropped 
in the first by a left hook and soon fell behind on the scorecards.

Walcott was well ahead by round 13, when Marciano landed a devastating hook of 
his own to knock him out. He slumped over the ropes, completely oblivious to 
the count, as Rocky became the new heavyweight champion.

While this fight cemented Marciano as the real deal, it is also a testament to 
Walcott’s skill and grit. He faced a guy 11 years his junior, widely regarded 
as one of the toughest fighters in memory and floored him in the first minute 
of the fight. It was the first and one of only two times Rocky hit the canvas.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9O3vxoOWbU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9O3vxoOWbU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9O3vxoOWbU&media=>
Audley Harrison v Michael Sprott, April 2010 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=yP3Q3E9aGVo>

British fight fans had high hopes for Olympic gold medallist Audley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> when he turned 
professional. Yet, following defeats to fighters like Danny Williams and 
Belfast taxi driver Martin Rogan, he was struggling, even on his home turf.

Michael Sprott had already knocked out Harrison in just three rounds in 2007. 
Although Harrison was still standing in round 12 of their second meeting, he 
was trailing behind. As the final round began, Sprott pinned him against the 
ropes and hit him with a barrage of shots that sent him staggering into a 
corner.

When it looked like Sprott would finish strongly, Harrison managed to find a 
little space, wait for his moment and put Sprott to the canvas with a hard left.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyP3Q3E9aGVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyP3Q3E9aGVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyP3Q3E9aGVo&media=>
Mike Weaver v John Tate, March 1980 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=cQ6qgLIGmtw>

Big John Tate quickly made a name for himself on the heavyweight scene. He 
worked his way through well-respected and highly ranked opponents picking up 
legions of fans along the way until he fought Gerrie Coetzee for the vacant WBA 
belt. He won it in style by beating the South African in his own back yard in 
front of 80,000 fans.

He was a world titlist and there was talk of a match-up with Muhammed Ali. The 
world was at his feet. It seemed that way all through his first title defence 
against Mike Weaver, too. Tate had bullied Weaver around the ring throughout 
the fight and even though Weaver was starting to hurt him in the later rounds, 
Tate was miles ahead on the cards. He just had to hold on for one more round.

Clearly exhausted, he absorbed an attack from Weaver. He had done all he 
needed to do, he just had to wait it out. But then, with less than a minute 
left in the fight, Weaver stunned Tate and the crowd with a combination that 
knocked Tate out cold.

Weaver celebrated with a handstand beside the limp Tate. But it’s hard not to 
feel sorry for the man; he wasn’t even 60 seconds away from winning the fight. 
He wasn’t the same after the fight. He was knocked out in his next fight and in 
later bouts he weighed in at over 400 pounds.

He would subsequently develop a cocaine habit and spend time in jail. He died 
when he crashed his pickup truck while high aged just 43. It seems that this 
knockout began his downward spiral. “Everywhere I went,” he said of the Weaver 
fight, “it tormented me the way I lost to him. I guess it will always torment 
me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcQ6qgLIGmtw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcQ6qgLIGmtw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcQ6qgLIGmtw&media=>
George Foreman v Michael Moorer, November 1994 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=U0SONoA5L1g#t=111>

In 1994 it looked as if 45-year-old George Foreman’s bid to regain his world 
heavyweight titles was winding down. He had lost two title shots already, 
against Evander Holyfield and Tommy Morrison. Moorer eventually took 
Holyfield’s belts and Foreman managed to get a quite undeserved title shot 
against the new champion.

Moorer was 19 years younger. He must have thought it was an easy fight, and it 
was for nine rounds, as Moorer easily outboxed Foreman. He was ahead on all of 
the scorecards by round 10, when Foreman landed a solid right hand to his chin 
to become the oldest heavyweight champion in history.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0SONoA5L1g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0SONoA5L1g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0SONoA5L1g&media=>
Danny Williams v Mark Potter, October 2000 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=QY1jzjTjIhY>

Danny Williams found himself in serious trouble in what should have been a 
walkover against Mark Potter, who accepted the fight less than a week before 
the bout. Williams went to the canvas in the first round and, to make matters 
worse, he dislocated his right shoulder in the third. As the fight went on, it 
looked like he might be able to carry on until he threw an awkward right hook 
in the sixth that really put it out of place.

With his arm sagging, Williams could barely defend himself, yet fought on 
using only his left. Amazingly, a desperate uppercut caught Potter and floored 
him in what must be the most astonishing U-turn ever seen in boxing. If you 
look closely at around2:40 
<http://cdn1.bloguin.com/queensberryrules/wp-content/uploads/sites/93/2014/08/SlimyRedFrog.gif>
 you see that even Gordon Ramsay approves, and you know how hard that guy is to 
please.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQY1jzjTjIhY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQY1jzjTjIhY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQY1jzjTjIhY&media=>
Entertaining as they are, these bouts teach us some important lessons. 
Fighters should treat them as cautionary tales on the dangers of resting on 
their laurels and cruising through late rounds. Fans should realise that even, 
when the heavyweight division is going through a boring patch, it can always 
produce some great moments. You might think every Wladimir Klitschko fight will 
be the same, but if you miss them, you could end up missing a huge upset that 
would reignite the heavyweight division.

• This article first appeared on The Queensberry Rules 
<http://www.queensberry-rules.com/>
• Follow The Queensberry Rules <https://twitter.com/tqbr> and Cathal McGuigan 
<https://twitter.com/CathalMcGuigan> on Twitter
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 