
There’s nothing particularly alluring about the back way into Vienna’s 
Kunsthistorisches Museum <http://www.khm.at/en/>: up a few dimly lit steps, 
past a staff noticeboard and through a scuffed white door. But that door 
delivers you straight into the spectacular central hall, under the soaring 
frescoed dome – and lets you smugly bypass the queue of tourists waiting to buy 
tickets. It’s the sort of experience some people are prepared to pay £1,000 a 
day for.

Such doors are the unique selling point for the Art Fund 
<http://www.artfund.org/>’s new range of exceedingly expensive holidays: 
special access for small groups of rich people, beyond the red rope, past the 
sign that says closed, through the door marked private, sharing an artist’s 
modest favourite cafe for lunch, taking tea with a princess, or swaggering into 
a VIP reception after hours.

The VIP route through the Kunsthistorisches Museum leads on up the grand 
staircase, under the Gustav Klimt murals, and into the glamorous, newly restored
Kunstkammer galleries <http://www.khm.at/en/visit/collections/kunstkammer-wien/>
. Curator Jasper Sharp is our host on hand to explain the contents of the 
treasure rooms, stuffed with gold, silver and jewels, imperial executive toys 
includingEmperor Rudolf II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/11/biography.features2>’s 
17th-century centaur (which fires golden arrows to indicate which diner must 
make the next toast), or priceless works of art such as Benvenuto Cellini’s 
fabulous16th-century alt cellar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jan/23/arttheft.austria>, once 
stolen from the museum by a man who shinned up some scaffolding and insisted 
he’d only done it to test the efficacy of the burglar alarms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fart-fund-charity-launches-luxury-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440157732540%2Fa6ad5265-8571-49e5-8525-c933aca4dd0f-2060x1613.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Art%20Fund%20charity%20launches%20a%20line%20of%20luxury%20holidays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fart-fund-charity-launches-luxury-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Art%20Fund%20charity%20launches%20a%20line%20of%20luxury%20holidays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fart-fund-charity-launches-luxury-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440157732540%2Fa6ad5265-8571-49e5-8525-c933aca4dd0f-2060x1613.jpeg>
 Priceless … Cellini’s golden salt cellar, one of the treasures of the 
Kunstkammer. Photograph: Maeve Kennedy 
Outside the museum’s walls lies the Ringstrasse 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1033>, the grandest ring road in Europe, a 
boulevard lined with gigantic homes and palaces of art, commerce and politics, 
built along the demolished medieval fortified city walls. It officially opened 
in May 1965 and is now a Unesco world heritage site. Here, the Art Fund guide 
is Andreas Nierhaus, an art historian who can not only open the doors out of 
hours at the Wien Museum where he works, but can shove open massive wooden 
doors on the street, between the cafe tables and the postcard stands, that lead 
up to sumptuous first-floor rooms with gilded ceilings, frescoed walls and 
porcelain stoves the size of London flats.

When the Ringstrasse was built, the site of the Vienna Contemporary 
<http://www.viennacontemporary.at/> art fair would have been far removed from 
the gilded world of the waltzers and opera-goers. The art fair will happen for 
the first time in a spectacular new venue, theMarx Halle 
<http://www.viennacontemporary.at/en/location/>, a vast, converted 19th-century 
cattle market. The organisers have particularly good contacts, not just with 
Vienna’s growing gallery scene, but with young artists in eastern Europe. 
Prospective tour groups will be treated better than royalty: they will be 
welcomed as art-buying oligarchs would be, with flowing champagne and 
introductions to artists and dealers.

 On the last day of the tour, the road will lead out of Vienna, halfway to the 
Hungarian border, for lunch with the Count and Countess Waldburg-Zeil atRohrau 
castle <http://en.schloss-rohrau.at/>, a building somewhere between a fortress 
and a farmhouse, with a spectacular art collection that traces the history of 
the family and its engagement with the tangled politics of the Habsburg and 
Austro-Hungarian empires.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fart-fund-charity-launches-luxury-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440157424717%2Fc77121f9-860b-4296-9571-9ca84ded2c64-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Art%20Fund%20charity%20launches%20a%20line%20of%20luxury%20holidays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fart-fund-charity-launches-luxury-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Art%20Fund%20charity%20launches%20a%20line%20of%20luxury%20holidays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fart-fund-charity-launches-luxury-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440157424717%2Fc77121f9-860b-4296-9571-9ca84ded2c64-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Bypass the tourist hordes … for a fast-track to spectacular interiors and 
artworks. Photograph: Maeve Kennedy 
Perhaps the most fun part of my trip was sharing a wiener schnitzel with the 
amiable artistPeter Kogler <http://www.kogler.net/> at the Gasthaus Wild, an 
endearingly modest brown cafe a stone’s throw from his home and studio: 
September’s tourists will have tea with the sculptorErwin Wurm  
<http://www.erwinwurm.at/>at his home and studio. 

The Vienna trip was very enjoyable, but this is clearly not art for the 
masses: prices for a three-night holiday will start at £1,800, flights not 
included. Prices rise to the dizzying heights of £9,915, without flights, for 
10 days in Japan next year with the art historianSophie Richard 
<http://sainsbury-institute.org/support-us/e-magazine/e-magazine-issue-06/my-japan-issue-06/>
.

It all seems a curious choice for a charity such as the Art Fund, which has 
vociferously championed universal free museum access. The VIP cultural travel 
market it is venturing into is already well supplied, with a range of 
specialist companies offering art and archaeology holidays, often accompanied 
by distinguished academics and authors:Cazenove+Loyd 
<http://www.cazloyd.com/en-gb/>, the company operating the Art Fund’s holidays, 
already has a track record in tailor-made cultural trips outside Europe, and 
the Art Fund itself already offers two ranges of less eye-wateringly expensive 
holidays.

“Our members are really very seriously interested in art, and it’s the level 
of access you will get on these holidays that makes them really special. We are 
all about engaging audiences with art, at every level,” said Carolyn Young, 
marketing director of theArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
Fund. “These holidays have been designed to offer unique encounters, whether 
you view them as a once-in-a-lifetime experience, or just another very nice 
holiday.”

The Art Fund is described as “the national fundraising charity for art”, with 
a 110-year history of helping museums and galleries acquire spectacular objects 
– including recentlyVan Dyck’s dazzling self-portrait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/01/van-dyck-campaign-selfportrait-britain>
 for the National Portrait Gallery – and a notable track record on campaigning 
on museum issues.

Most of its funds come from its 117,000 members, who pay £60 a year for a 
National Art Pass that gives them free or discounted admission to museums and 
exhibitions. But the call on its resources are endless, and sure to increase as 
museum cuts bite harder. The holidays – which the Art Fund badges, helps 
design, takes a commission on, but doesn’t actually run – are a useful extra 
revenue stream, Young says. But she also believes the travellers will get 
extraordinarily close encounters with art historians, artists and museum 
experts, which would be extremely difficult to engineer in any other way.

Anyone who can afford the deluxe holidays is likely to find they have formed a 
warm and lasting relationship with the Art Fund. “If you can afford to spend 
£4,000 for a four-day trip, you are probably quite a good prospect for our 
donor programme,” Young said, thoughtfully.

• Maev Kennedy travelled to Vienna with Cazenove+Loyd in partnership with the 
Art Fund.Art and Architecture in Vienna 
<http://www.cazloyd.com/en-gb/escorted_tours/luxury-art-tour-vienna> , 23-26 
September, prices from £1,800 per person based on two sharing, including 
breakfast, two lunches, two dinners, private guiding, transfers and entrance 
fees.
 