
Sea Hero Quest: the mobile phone game helping fight dementia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/16/sea-hero-quest-the-mobile-phone-game-helping-fight-dementia>
Most of us forget names, dates or places from time to time. But Hilary Doxford 
never did. While the rest of us smile about our common inadequacy, she knew she 
was experiencing a genuine malfunction of her high-performance brain. “I did 
have a really good memory and didn’t need to write things down,” she says. “And 
I used to be able to multiply two four-digit numbers together almost 
instantaneously.” But one day, she started getting the sums wrong.

The doctors sent her away at first. So you can’t remember names or multiply 
3,765 by 1,983 any more? Oh well, that’s middle age for you. But Doxford, who 
was then in her late 40s, knew differently. “My benchmark is myself,” she says. 
“Even now, when I tell people, everybody says: ‘I would never have known.’ What 
I’m doing is no different from what other people are experiencing. But when I 
compare it to how I used to be … I can’t multiply a two-digit number by a 
one-digit number. I can do it if I add them – like 27 times three. It’s my 
short-term memory – when you need to hang on to a number because you need to 
use it. That’s what’s gone.”

Doxford went to the GP because her partner, Peter, had asked her to marry him. 
She wanted to be sure she would not be sentencing Peter to looking after a 
woman whose brain was deteriorating. “My GP said: ‘It’s normal – off you go.’”

Three years later, then a married woman, she went back. “All the symptoms were 
getting worse,” she says. Doxford is the general manager of a medical research 
charity. “I forgot the surnames of some of my staff. I started finding it hard 
to concentrate and focus. Then I started avoiding taking responsibility for 
things unless I absolutely had to.”

The GP said it was probably stress and sent her home again. But then she had a 
long, difficult business meeting with somebody, and when he greeted her three 
weeks later, she had no recollection of having met him before. This time she 
was sent for tests. She scored incredibly highly on the IQ part and incredibly 
poorly on memory, and was given an MRI scan. “The diagnosis was Alzheimer’s,” 
she says, matter-of-factly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Flong-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe74f138b28a9bf81f7dc20812d6687553a03bfce%2F0_318_864_518%2F864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20long%2C%20difficult%20search%20for%20a%20drug%20to%20treat%20Alzheimer%E2%80%99s%20and%20dementia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Flong-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20long%2C%20difficult%20search%20for%20a%20drug%20to%20treat%20Alzheimer%E2%80%99s%20and%20dementia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Flong-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe74f138b28a9bf81f7dc20812d6687553a03bfce%2F0_318_864_518%2F864.jpg>
 ‘My benchmark is myself. When I compare it now to how I used to be’ … Hilary 
Doxford, who was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s in her early 50s. Photograph: Lydia 
Goldblatt for the Guardian 
Dementia will take hold of one in three people who passes the age of 65, and 
costs the UK more than £26bn a year. This week the Office for National 
Statistics announced it is nowthe commonest cause of death in England and Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
, passing cancer and heart disease. People with dementia lose the ability to 
care for themselves and can become malnourished, while their immune system 
weakens. Infections such as pneumonia may be the actual agent of death, but 
dementia is the underlying cause.

It is a cruel disease, which takes away the person their families love and 
know, leaving a stranger who looks at them with confusion. And while there are 
are some drugs that will temporarily alleviate symptoms in some people, there 
is no cure. But dementia, of which Alzheimer’s is the commonest form, has 
finally begun to get the attention it deserves. In December 2013, the G8 
countries, meeting in London, agreed to set an ambition to cure or come up with 
a significant treatment for Alzheimer’s by 2025. Last year David Cameron 
announced that the UK would set upa dedicated dementia research institute 
<http:>, with initial funding of £150m, and a further £100m from Alzheimer’s 
charities. Although the UK was already spending £300m on dementia research, 
Cameron believed it should be afforded the same level of resources as Aids and 
climate change. That was welcome news to campaigners, although, they say, the 
sum is still much less than that invested in cancer research (£590m in 2010).

Doxford, now 56, was glad to have a diagnosis. “On the one hand, it was a 
relief, because it explained all the problems I’d been having just doing normal 
stuff. On the other hand, ‘Oh shit’. The first question I asked the consultant 
was: ‘How long have I got being normal?’ He was implying that I only had two to 
three years, but then he said: ‘I do know somebody who is eight years down the 
line and she is pretty much OK.’” Others Doxford has met have since told her of 
people managing fine 10 to 15 years after diagnosis. For her, it has now been 
nine.

Initially she was put on Aricept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/27/alzheimers-drug-may-keep-late-stage-sufferers-out-of-nursing-homes>
 (the brand name of donepezil), one of the few Alzheimer’s drugs currently 
available. These drugs help some people by delaying the worsening of symptoms, 
although they progress faster later on. But they do not work for everyone.

“It was pretty horrendous,” says Doxford. “I seemed to get all the side 
effects on the packet.” She began falling over. The worst was when she was 
tying up the boat that she and her husband kept. “We were in the marina and I 
had the rope in my hand. The next thing I knew, I was in the water.” They sold 
the boat, fearing for her safety. The consultant gave her another drug, but it 
was worse. “The first day I took it, I thought I was dying,” she says. She 
decided drugs were not for her.

Dementia and Alzheimer's leading cause of death in England and Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
There ought to be big money in Alzheimer’s drugs. It is more than a century 
since abnormal protein deposits in the brain were identified by the German 
psychiatrist Alois Alzheimer as a likely cause of neurodegeneration. Over the 
past few decades, drug research has focused largely on attempts to clear the 
amyloid-beta peptides and tau proteins believed to cause these deposits, which 
gradually shut down the brain’s normal workings.

But there has been a very high failure rate, often at a late stage of 
development, when companies have spent a great deal of money – in some cases as 
much as $300m – on research and development. Dr Eric Karran, formerly the 
director of research at Alzheimer’s Research UK and now leading the efforts of 
drug company Abbvie to find a cure, says that yes, it’s difficult, but too 
often in these failed trials, the preparatory work has not been thorough enough.

“Some people in the field would say that [the failure rate] has been a 
disaster,” he says. They suggest that the underlying concept, that Alzheimer’s 
is caused by amyloid plaque, may be wrong. “I would not subscribe to that view. 
There has been some sloppy science. We would not expect such trials to work 
anyway. In some cases there has been a very strong commercial push. In other 
cases, there has been a strong desire to get something into [human trials] 
because we have so little.”

Nobody would say research into Alzheimer’s is easy, says Dr Mike Hutton, chief 
scientific officer for neuroscientific drug discovery at the pharmaceutical 
company Lilly. “Amyloid accumulates in the brain for 10 to 15 years before you 
see clinical symptoms. There is a worry that we’re focusing on populations that 
are too far advanced.” Ideally, scientists must figure out who is most likely 
to get Alzheimer’s – then see if they can prevent healthy brains from 
developing it. But although there are some predictive tests available, it is 
hardly ethical to offer them to people when medical science cannot offer them 
treatment.

So the trials must be done in people with the earliest stages of dementia. And 
this year, for the first time, the results of two separate early trials have 
suggested that it may be possible to find drugs that might slow down the decay 
for people with mild dementia. Small wonder there have been wild headlines 
about a cure – a bit of good news is desperately wanted. One, Lilly’s 
solanezumab, a monoclonal antibody, failed in a large 2012 trial to slow the 
deterioration in most people with Alzheimer’s, but there was some improvement 
in those with the mildest form of the disease. Results from a new trial of more 
than 2,000 people with early-stage Alzheimer’s are eagerly anticipated, and due 
before the end of the year.

Another drug, Biogen’s aducanumab, made headlines in September. Trial results 
showed it almost completely cleared amyloid from the brains of a group of early 
Alzheimer’s patients, and that the expected deterioration slowed down 
significantly. The trial was small (166 people), and at the high doses that 
produced the best results, there were side effects such as headaches, but there 
was excited talk of “a game-changer”.

There has been such hype before, but David Reynolds, chief scientific officer 
of Alzheimer’s Research UK, says he is reasonably confident that the 
solanezumab results in December will also show an improvement in the symptoms 
of dementia, or at least a slowing of the decline. Sadly, there still seems 
little hope for those who already have moderate to severe dementia, beyond care 
and compassion.

In a nursing home in Hertfordshire, surrounded by trees and green spaces, 
James Gatesman, a former coroner’s officer and enthusiastic allotment gardener, 
spent the last years of his life in bed, his long legs angled to the wall, 
under a framed photograph of his Metropolitan police class at Hendon College. A 
yellow spot attached to the glass identified his own face in the picture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Flong-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67062eeeff4dc636230ef37f32dd1b667d75dc97%2F0_67_864_518%2F864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20long%2C%20difficult%20search%20for%20a%20drug%20to%20treat%20Alzheimer%E2%80%99s%20and%20dementia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Flong-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20long%2C%20difficult%20search%20for%20a%20drug%20to%20treat%20Alzheimer%E2%80%99s%20and%20dementia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Flong-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67062eeeff4dc636230ef37f32dd1b667d75dc97%2F0_67_864_518%2F864.jpg>
 Deborah Gateman with her father, James, before he died. Photograph: Lydia 
Goldblatt for the Guardian 
You could still see the fine figure of a man that Gatesman had been – 6ft 2in 
with broad shoulders and a strong, handsome face. But he had ceased to speak, 
and could no longer move his own limbs. His daughter Deborah and his wife, 
Doreen, could only communicate with him through touch, or his occasional 
grunts, moans and howls.

“I always talk to him and treat him as if he understands us,” said Deborah, 
shortly before her father died. “I think of it as almost like locked-in 
syndrome – that he is in there. I worry about what we discuss in front of him.” 
When his wife paid for him to have music therapy, Gatesman responded to the 
Gilbert and Sullivan tunes he used to love with noises and movement of his 
hands. That confirmed Deborah’s belief that he was more aware than he seemed.

Gatesman was diagnosed in 2003, but Doreen recalls odd behaviour on a holiday 
in Australia in 1996, when he wandered away from their group and nobody knew 
where he was. In later years, his behaviour became unpredictable, and he 
refused to go to a doctor. “That was probably the worst time,” she said. “Where 
do you go for help?”

Eventually Gatesman had to see a GP because of an ear infection, and ended up 
in the memory clinic. He had a brain scan and was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s. 
The progression was slow but inexorable. He was on Aricept for a year, but that 
was stopped when he was sent to a residential assessment centre – a care home 
where people with dementia spend some weeks or months while their condition and 
needs are determined. Instead, he was put on the drugs that are too often used 
to control the sometimes bizarre and agitated behaviour of dementia patients – 
antipsychotics. “He was throwing chairs around and he did pull a handrail off 
the wall,” Doreen says. When they visited him, he was no longer walking, but 
sitting in a reclining chair. “He was a bit of a dribbling mess,” said Deborah. 
“The antipsychotics were turning him into a zombie.” By the time he was moved 
to the long-term home in Hertfordshire, he was underweight. Doreen insisted the 
antipsychotics were stopped, and he regained not just his weight, but his 
spirit. Then “they had quite a lively character on their hands. He would run 
off down the corridors,” said Deborah. Or he would speak to the Polish nurses 
in the Flemish and German he had learned while in the RAF, in the war.

A decade of deadlock over Alzheimer's treatment may be drawing to a close
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/a-decade-of-deadlock-over-alzheimers-treatment-may-be-drawing-to-a-close>
The Alzheimer’s Society has campaigned to reduce the use of antipsychotics – 
often referred to as the “chemical cosh” – in care homes. Dr Doug Brown, the 
organisation’s research director, says prescriptions have markedly reduced as a 
result, though “we wouldn’t say the problem has gone away. We still need to 
keep an eye on it”. The Society has piloted staff training in more than 100 
care homes for “person-centred care”, which appears to cut the use of drugs 
dramatically. It involves taking the trouble to understand the triggers for an 
individual’s distress – such as the man who gathered all his furniture in the 
centre of his room every day and became upset when staff put it back. He was a 
decorator. Given a brush and a bucket of water, he spent contented hours 
thinking he was painting the walls.

The overuse of antipsychotics is one outcome of the past neglect of dementia, 
and further evidence of the real need for a drug that will do more than just 
quieten patients down – one that will slow the progress of a devastating 
disease and eventually, hopefully, cure it.
 