
The news started to spread <http://twitter.com/#!/search/asian%20network> 
almost as soon as Andy Parfitt, the controller of the BBC Asian Network, began 
to speak to staff on Monday afternoon. Asian music artists started the party by 
announcing that they had heard, via some indiscreet DJs perhaps,that the 
station was being saved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/14/bbc-asian-network> and that 
Bhangra, Bollywood and all the other manifestations of the Asian sound would 
continue to be championed by the BBC Asian Network.

In the midst of all this euphoria some people had missed the comment about 
this being an update not an announcement. This is not a done deal and the BBC 
Asian Network has not been saved â€“ it is still ultimately in the hands of the 
BBC Trust, which will make its final decision towards the end of this year. For 
the many people who work for the BBC Asian Network in Birmingham, Leicester and 
London it was a statement of intent, that someone, somewhere, in the upper 
echelons of the BBC felt that the station was worth saving. For the staff and 
broadcasters this was a vindication of the huge effort that had been put into 
turning the station around, from one that was perceived to be failing,to one 
that has increased its listening figures by 33% in one year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/03/rajars-talk-radio?INTCMP=SRCH>.

It was over a year ago that I wrote an article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/mar/03/keeping-the-asian-network-national>
 outlining how absurd I found the idea of closing the Asian Network down was. I 
can only assume that, try as they might, the BBC has still not managed to find 
a way to serve the large and influential British Asian audience that is better 
than the way the Asian Network currently does it. Each and every day my show 
asks questions that many other radio stations would shy away from asking. It 
was my show thatinquired <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00xch1k> whether 
there was a cultural dimension to the rape gangs operating in the north of 
England before the mainstream were brave enough to do so.

The BBC Asian Network provides a place for British Asian people of all ages to 
experience high quality broadcasting that is free of commercial pressures while 
understanding that it has to justify why it spends the public money that it 
does. The news coverage is of a very high standard, the unique experiences 
offered to our listeners such as the audiences with stars of music and cinema, 
and the commitment to specialist music at night withBobby Friction's Sony award 
winning show <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00730pn>, proves that our 
audience values what we do and is being drawn to us in increasing numbers.

In the year that has passed since I wrote that article, with a cloud 
permanently hanging over us all, it is a testament to the vision for the 
network and the strength of my friends and colleagues that there are more 
people listening in. The BBCAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> did not have the benefit of 
being able to draw on powerful friends in the media to put its case across. It 
had to rely on quiet diplomacy and getting the right schedule in place while 
reaching out to its audience and asking them to spread the word.

There are those who feel that the station is not value for money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/02/bbc-asian-network-mediocre>, and 
a year ago it would have been an argument that would have carried some weight, 
but the considerable increase in audience figure proves it has found its place.

If, as is being reported, the Asian Network will remain but with half the 
budget, then that is what we will be given. Why should the Asian Network be 
immune from the cuts that both public and privately funded bodies are being 
subjected to? The answer is of course that it shouldn't.

On Saturday afternoon while watching my three-year-old son play toddler 
football I got into a conversation with another dad, a non-Asian hedge fund 
manager. When I mentioned that I was a Radio 1 DJ he looked impressed; when I 
mentioned that I also presented a show on the BBC Asian Network a look of pity 
spread across his face as he said: "Aren't you closing down?" This is what we 
have had to contend with for the past year. For now there seems to have been a 
change of heart from up on high, and there is a glimmer of hope that theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Asian Network may survive as a national 
digital radio station, though with a much reduced budget.

The listeners have spoken and told the BBC that this is a station worth saving 
and one that is relevant to their life experience. The BBC is not Midsomer; 
there are many stories to be told emanating from the diverse communities that 
make up this country, and the BBC Asian Network plays a big part in helping to 
articulate them.
 