
Members of Airbnb, the site that allows users to host travellers or stay in 
other people’s homes when on holiday, were informed this weekend by email of a 
new“community commitment” 
<http://blog.airbnb.com/the-airbnb-community-commitment/>. From today when they 
log on they must accept an agreement that reads: “You commit to treat everyone 
– regardless of race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, sex, 
gender identity, sexual orientation or age – with respect, and without judgment 
or bias.” Users who don’t agree must stop hosting or travelling with the site.

Airbnb faces worldwide opposition. It plans a movement to rise up in its 
defence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/29/airbnb-backlash-customers-fight-back-london>
The company explains to its users located in 34,000 cities around the world: 
“The principles of inclusion and respect are important to us and to our 
community, and we require that all our users abide by this policy.” Like it, or 
you can sling your hook,Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> 
seems to be saying. So is this a spontaneous gesture of loving kindness on the 
company’s part? Not exactly.

The days of civil rights struggles, anti-discrimination laws and I’d Like to 
Teach the World to Sing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wlR0KElxxVg> topping 
the charts may have long gone. But Airbnb has discovered that prejudice is very 
much alive and kicking in the digital age. The company leapt into action 
earlier this year following a series ofhigh-profile discrimination claims 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/travel/airbnb-discrimination-lawsuit.html?_r=0>
 that left serious dents in its brand image. The forum’s reliance on the 
exchange of names and photographs during the booking process were considered 
major causes of the problem.

In July 2015, the hashtag #AirBnbwhileblack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/airbnbwhileblack-hashtag-highlights-potential-racial-bias-rental-app>
 was created after Airbnb user Quirtina Crittendon found herself continuously 
declined as a guest when she tried to rent properties. She says it was only 
when she shortened her first name to Tina and swapped her profile picture with 
a generic cityscape image that the rejections stopped.

More race discrimination stories followed, from community members such as 
Rohan Gilkes, whose blog post 
<https://medium.com/stay-woke/i-read-about-this-phenomenon-of-black-people-being-rejected-on-airbnb-f36dd3ab0375#.2yo63r1cy>
 about how his accommodation requests were cancelled went viral. And instances 
of discrimination against LGBT users emerged too, including transgender 
Hollywood producer Shadi Petosky, who said she was denied a stay because the 
host had a teenage son and “felt uncomfortable”. Airbnb was roundly accused by 
victims of failing to act on complaints, but in July this year it admitted it 
had a problem.

To its credit, the company enlisted the help of former US attorney general 
Eric Holder and Laura Murphy of the American Civil Liberties Union in a bid to
shake up its policies 
<http://blog.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/REPORT_Airbnbs-Work-to-Fight-Discrimination-and-Build-Inclusion_09292016.pdf?3c10be>
. It also promised to increase the diversity of its workforce and bring in 
anti-bias training.

It’s highly unlikely that discrimination by all users will come to an abrupt 
halt as a result of users accepting the new terms. And Airbnb’s approach 
appears to stop short of banning the use of profile pictures and names, as 
suggested by some affected users. But as a so-called minority traveller it’s 
helpful to get an indication of which companies offer a welcoming approach, at 
least in principle.

While I’ve never experienced discrimination, on the few occasions I’ve stayed 
in Airbnb accommodation I’ve had my fair share of dodgy travel experiences. My 
most vivid memory is of a stay at a bed and breakfast in Cornwall when I was 
greeted in the morning, as I munched on cold scrambled eggs, by the owner 
inquiring about my cultural heritage. When I answered that I had an Antiguan 
mother and Irish father, she proceeded to lecture me on the evils of mixed-race 
relationships before setting down my toast with the retort, “coloured people 
should stick to their own”. I won’t be returning to that particular 
establishment any time soon, or recommend it to my friends.

The 'Airbnb effect': is it real, and what is it doing to a city like Amsterdam?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/06/the-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-communities>
For too long it’s been assumed that anti-discrimination policy should stay in 
its marginal place as something that no one much cares about. But research 
shows that discrimination is a hefty risk for black and LGBT travellers in 
particular. Arecent Harvard study 
<http://www.benedelman.org/publications/airbnb-guest-discrimination-2016-09-16.pdf>
 of 6,400 listings in five US cities found that users with distinctively black 
names like Tamika and Darnell were 16% more likely to be refused Airbnb 
accommodation compared with users with distinctively white-sounding names like 
Brett and Kristen.

Hosts would rather burn a hole in their own pocket and forgo an average charge 
per night of around £55-70 by rejecting black guest, the researchers found. 
Last month a study from Virgin Holidaysrevealed 
<https://www.virgin.com/virgin-unite/issues-facing-lgbt-travellers> more than 
one in three LGBT travellers had experienced discrimination when travelling, 
with 6% saying they have experienced the threat of violence as a result of 
their sexuality.

The tribulations of Airbnb provide a warning that discrimination isn’t only a 
matter of seriousness to the victims involved. Rival Airbnb-style companies 
have been launched recently as a means of offering travellers safe 
accommodation experiences, like Noirbnb and Innclusive aimed at black users and 
Wimbify and misterbnb aimed at LGBT users. When mainstream companies don’t 
serve particular groups of consumers well enough, new enterprises very quickly 
muscle in on their territory. And those who ignore matters of bias, prejudice 
or downright bigotry do so at their peril: we simply won’t waste our 
hard-earned money on them if they aren’t seen to be taking action.
 