

A bungee jumper over Bloukrans river. Photograph: David Goldblatt
The South African photographer David Goldblatt has won the Hasselblad 
FoundationInternational Award 
<http://www.hasselbladfoundation.org/prize_about_en.html> in Photography, the 
photographer's equivalent of the Nobel Prize, with previous winners including 
the likes ofHenri Cartier-Bresson <http://www.henricartierbresson.org/Henri> and
Ansel Adams <http://www.zpub.com/sf/history/adams.html>, writes David Beresford.

To mark the award, Hasselblad has published a book of Goldblatt's photographs. 
My favourite is of a bungee jumper 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/David-Goldblatt-Photographs-Hasselblad-Award/dp/3775719172>
 at the Bloukrans river mouth, on the border of the Eastern and Western Cape.

My attention was drawn to it by an anecdote I had heard. It seems that, in 
designing the book, Hassselblad had inadvertently cropped out the bungee 
jumper. This may sound unlikely until you see the original photograph and 
appreciate that the jumper is the size of a flea. Fortunately the error was 
spotted in time and some swift work done to correct it. The result is an 
exquisite rendering of a (presumed) moment of terror in the life of a bungee 
jumper as he hurtles earthwards in one of the highest leaps of its kind in the 
world. The photograph was vintage Goldblatt: The terror was not to be found in 
the jumper, where most photographers might look for it, but in the vast 
emptiness of the photograph.

Wandering around a retrospective of Goldblatt's work at the Johannesburg art 
gallery last year it was striking that, while most photographers recorded the
apartheid war <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apartheid> in terms of people 
hanged, necklaced, tortured, or otherwise horribly done by, none of this 
violence was evident in his exhibition spanning 51 years.

Not only was there no violence in his photographs, but there was very little 
by way of movement. Instead, the power of Goldblatt was to be seen in a 
photograph which comes closest to what might be described as an action shot; a 
picture of a pile of rubble through which some women are scavenging. They are 
Zulu women, going through the remains from a "Group Areas Act" demolition, 
searching for undamaged bricks to sell to building contractors. To pinch a 
favourite phrase from the writer,Kurt Vonnegut <http://www.vonnegut.com/>: "So 
it goes."


Goldblatt's talent is his ability to evoke a joint humanity; a humanity 
equally good and bad if separated by the apartheid laws. A particularly moving 
example is a photograph which shows a young white boy approaching puberty 
standing behind his seated and smiling, young, black nursemaid. One trailing 
finger touches her shoulder. It is a wistful photograph of what might have been.

The son of a Jewish couple from Lithuania, Goldblatt was born in the Afrikaner 
town ofRandfontein 
<http://www.saexplorer.co.za/general/town.asp?Town=Randfontein>, near 
Johannesburg, where his father owned a men's outfitters. When his father died 
in 1962, David sold the business and devoted his life to photography. It is a 
life which has seen his work hung in prestigious galleries around the world, 
with one exhibition being part of the permanent collection at London'sV&A 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/>.

In his mid-70s, one might fear that Goldblatt's talent risks being lost in the 
digital age. But he has merely adjusted to the world of mega-pixels by scanning 
colour film taken with his 4x5 and 6x6 cameras. The effect is to be seen in a 
stunning series of landscape photographs, where his sometimes caustic sense of 
humour can also be found. One well-known group of photographs are of what is 
possibly the most expensive residential estate in South Africa,Dainfern 
<http://www.dainfern.com/>, where multi-million rand houses pack around a golf 
course designed by Gary Player, all within a high-security stockade.

Goldblatt was fascinated with what seemed to be a conspiracy of silence, by 
both developers and residents, over the estate's most prominent feature Â­ what 
he believes to be the largest sewer in the southern hemisphere. The huge, 
overarching pipe carries some 1.39m cubic metres of sewerage a day from 
Johannesburg's luxurious northern suburbs to a nearby treatment plant. 
Goldblatt, seeing it as a metaphor for post-apartheid South Africa, put an end 
to the silence by hiring a helicopter to photograph the estate in its full 
splendour.


He incorporated some of the developers' PR material into the photographs: "If 
you demand that each breath you take will fill your soul with the fire of life, 
then demand a piece of heaven. Demand a piece of Dainfern."

And so it goes.
 