
We knew we were going to get wet, probably very wet, but it was the kind of 
morning that turns landscape into dramatic theatre; dark clouds unleashing 
torrential showers, then sunshine breaking through gaps in the clouds, sweeping 
across fields and fell side.

The first downpour arrived just as we made our way along the footpath that 
skirts the edge of the dene, a steep-sided cleft in the hillside cut by 
Stanhope burn, clothed with ash, Scots pine, oak and beech. The impact of heavy 
raindrops loosened leaves from the canopy above, sending them spinning down to 
join a carpet of wet beech autumn foliage, as shiny as polished copper, under 
our feet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fthe-kind-of-morning-that-turns-landscape-into-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d21fcc3ea5dc9fed50a402051575466665c6ab%2F0_0_2339_1446%2F2339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20kind%20of%20morning%20that%20turns%20landscape%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fthe-kind-of-morning-that-turns-landscape-into-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20kind%20of%20morning%20that%20turns%20landscape%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fthe-kind-of-morning-that-turns-landscape-into-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d21fcc3ea5dc9fed50a402051575466665c6ab%2F0_0_2339_1446%2F2339.jpg>
 Porcelain fungi growing on a beech trunk. Photograph: Phil Gates 
We waited for the shower to pass. Standing under the shelter of a beech with 
our gaze confined to our immediate surroundings, turned out to be a revelation. 
If we had not been forced to stop we would have walked past the glossy white 
toadstools of porcelain fungus (Oudemansiella mucida), jutting from the trunk 
high above us. Nor would we have seen thebuzzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/17/buzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry>
, hunched in the topmost branches of a dead sycamore in the field beside the 
dene.

Water trickling down the tree trunk pooled at its roots then became a rivulet, 
uniting with others as it flowed past our boots and down the sides of the dene, 
towards the burn below. We could not see it but the sound, of fast-flowing 
water over rocks, told of a torrent swollen by a week of days like this.

Then the clouds parted and for a few moments the falling rain became a silver 
sunlit curtain as it swept across the tree canopy above. Then it stopped, as 
suddenly as it had begun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fthe-kind-of-morning-that-turns-landscape-into-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F804d877cf3bc73417096170c25c37fada65c8228%2F0_0_2339_1419%2F2339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20kind%20of%20morning%20that%20turns%20landscape%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fthe-kind-of-morning-that-turns-landscape-into-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20kind%20of%20morning%20that%20turns%20landscape%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fthe-kind-of-morning-that-turns-landscape-into-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F804d877cf3bc73417096170c25c37fada65c8228%2F0_0_2339_1419%2F2339.jpg>
 Sun breaks through the cloud cover at Stanhope Dene. Photograph: Phil Gates 
In the field there was an aura around the buzzard as, dog-like, it shook water 
from its feathers. Then it stretched its wings and lifted from the branch, 
struggling to find a thermal that would turn slow, ponderous, wing beats into 
an effortless glide.

Within minutes the sun had warmed the dry stone wall across the field enough 
for wisps of steam to rise from it into the cold air, on their way towards the 
clouds, to become rain again, repeating the endless cycle.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 