
This year Australia’s most popular art exhibition, the Archibald prize for 
portraiture, included in their media kit a gender breakdown offinalists 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/prizes/archibald/2016/>: 25 women, 26 men. 
It’s not something they usually do, perhaps because it’s not something they 
usually want to brag about, but 2016 is the first time gender parity has been 
reached in the prize’s 95-year history.

In 2015 there were only 14 female artists among 47 finalists, meaning women 
made up 29%; the year before, it was 31%. The 2016 shortlist represents quite a 
leap and it’s a cause for celebration – but don’t crack out the Bolli just yet. 
The Archibald still has a problem with gender balance and, as you stroll 
through the exhibition of finalists, which opens at theArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery of NSW on Friday, the 
evidence will be literally hanging in front of you.

Exactly a third of the portrait subjects, or sitters, in this year’s 
exhibition are women, up from 32% in 2015 and 28% in 2013; down from 37% in 
2014. In the past 15 years, the average of women sitters is around 30%.

Archibald finalists 2016: from artists to activists to celebrity chefs – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/07/archibald-finalists-2016-from-artists-to-activists-to-celebrity-chefs-in-pictures>
The fact that even this year’s balanced gender pool of painters hasn’t 
produced gender parity on the walls calls attention to a broader pattern in the 
Archies pool: women tend to paint men – or become finalists for painting men – 
more than men tend to paint women.

This year the trend is particularly pronounced: just 12% of the male finalists 
in the Archibald painted female sitters, whereas 44% of the female finalists 
painted men. The average across the previous five years of the prize is less 
extreme, but still pronounced: 43% of the female finalists painted men, 
compared with 24% of male finalists who painted women.

Whatever the reasons, the results are frustratingly consistent. In an 
exhibition that purportedly celebrates Australians “distinguished in art, 
letters, science or politics”, women are not equally represented – not ever. 
And every year it becomes less defensible to have an Archibald prize exhibition 
that fails to achieve its ostensible mission: portraying the face of Australia.

This exhibition is at risk of reaffirming a widespread perception that women 
make a significantly lower contribution to Australian public life than men. In 
fact, if we take the Archibald 2016 finalists as our guide, then no one is more 
important to Australian public life than white men over the age of 50.


What makes it into the exhibition is decided by the Board of Trustees of AGNSW 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/about-us/people/agnsw-trust/>, who judge the 
800+ entries each year without being told whose work they are looking at. The 
11-person board, which includes artists Ben Quilty and Khadim Ali, has just 
four women.

The board’s gender imbalance may have impacted on the portraits that made it 
into the exhibition, but it’s also interesting to look at the entry pool they 
were working from. According to figures provided to Guardian Australia by 
AGNSW, only 306 portraits from the 830 entries featured women, and five of 
those also had a man in the painting. This problem is bigger than the prize 
itself.

So, how to fix it? The quickest way to get more women’s faces on the walls 
would be for the trustees to select more portraits of women for the finalist 
pool – but this solution seems unlikely. In response tomedia criticism 
<http://www.theage.com.au/entertainment/art-and-design/a-boys-club-with-brushes-women-missing-from-the-picture-at-archibald-prize-20100320-qn6u.html>
 over the gender disparity of the 2010 Archibald prize, which featured just 
four female faces among 34 finalists, trustee Anne Fulwood pushed back against 
the idea of quotas,telling Herald reporter Andrew Taylor 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/art-and-design/a-boys-club-with-brushes-women-missing-from-the-picture-at-archibald-prize-20100320-qn6u.html>
: “We’re not about quotas. Basically, and pardon the pun, it’s about face value 
… we see every Archibald entry.”

So on the one hand, there’s the issue of gender parity among the sitters; and 
on the other hand, gender parity among the painters. The fact that it took 
Australia’s biggest art prize 95 years to reach the latter speaks to a wider 
industry problem.

New survey paints grim picture of gender balance in Australian visual arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/australian-visual-arts-survey-finds-gender-imbalance-at-most-levels>
In this year’s Countess Report <http://www.thecountessreport.com.au/>, Elvis 
Richardson analysed the Australian visual arts sector from top to bottom for 
2014, and found that around 74% of art school graduates were women. If you 
drill down into her numbers, the disparity appears even greater for the 
specific discipline of painting – and as far back as 2008, when she started her 
Countess blog, Richardsonwrites of similar figures 
<http://countesses.blogspot.com.au/2008/11/missing-in-action.html>. 

If there are so many more female painting graduates than male, why is 2016 the 
first time we got gender parity in the country’s pre-eminent painting prize?

If it’s simply that women don’t tend to paint portraits, they should be better 
represented in our other prizes, such as AGNSW’s Wynne prize for landscapes 
(24% women finalists in 2016) or the Sulman prize for subject painting, genre 
painting or murals (40% women finalists in 2016, with an average across ten 
years of 37%).

And that’s just the tip of the iceberg: women aren’t represented equally 
anywhere in the Australian art world. Richardson’s analysis of the Art Gallery 
of New South Wales exhibition of female versus male artists in 2014, for The 
Countess Report, paints a grim picture: just 25% of their contemporary solo 
shows that year featured female artists and just 30% of the artists in their 
contemporary group shows were female.

The Art Gallery of New South Wales is not an anomaly. From The Countess Report:

Our data collection on state museums found 34% female artists, 59% male 
artists and 7% collaborations were represented in the exhibitions held in 2014. 
When we looked more closely, we found that of a total of 26 solo exhibitions by 
contemporary artists in state museums, 38% were by female artists, 58% by male 
artists and 4% by collaborations.

When it comes to your state art galleries and museums, you can demand – and 
expect – better representation. The public is the biggest stakeholder in a 
public art collection and gallery, and any institution that persists in failing 
to equitably represent that public will eventually lose its mandate to exist.

• The Archibald prize is announced on 15 July, when the exhibition at the Art 
Gallery of NSW opens to the public
 