
About


David Cross, best known in the UK as the star of Channel 4's The Increasingly 
Poor Decisions of Todd Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/nov/13/increasingly-poor-todd-maragaret>
 and asArrested Development's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> never-nude 
Tobias Fünke (and let us not forget thoseChipmunk movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/dec/23/features.review87>), has three 
albums of standup available on Spotify. There's Shut Up You Fucking Baby 
(2002), Bigger and Blackerer (2010) and this 2004 set, which perhaps serves as 
the best entry point.

Tellingly released by Seattle indie label Sub Pop (Nirvana, the Shins, Flight 
of the Conchords), It's Not Funny was recorded over a run of gigs at Washington 
DC's Improv club. The album finds Cross holding forth on a distinctly 
mid-noughties selection of topics such as the failings of the Bush 
administration, the Iraq war and the evils of cheesy rock bands like 
Evanescence ("I would rather listen to the death rattle of my only child"). Not 
all of it has dated well – some political and pop culture references will 
baffle younger listeners – but on the whole it remains hugely entertaining 10 
years on.


Much of its staying power is down to Cross's Hicksian rage, which has helped 
secure his position as one of the best live comics around. His relaxed delivery 
belies a sharply focused anger, directed in turn at bigoted politicians, 
lazy-thinking patriots, religious hypocrites and faux-sincere grief tourists. 
The closing skit re-imagines Martin Luther King's "I have a dream" speech as 
delivered by George W Bush.


Cross's ear for the absurd and the grotesque, and his heartfelt attacks on the 
stupidity of both the left and the right, ensure It's Not Funny retains plenty 
of resonance, and is far from being a museum piece.

If you enjoyed this


Leo Benedictus <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leobenedictus> wrote about 
Cross's 1999 show The Pride Is Back forComedy Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/06/david-cross-pride-is-back>. Mr 
Show 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mr-Show-Complete-Collection-Region/dp/B000CQQID0/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1402056788&sr=8-2&keywords=mr+show>
, the exceptional sketch series Cross created with Bob Odenkirk, is available 
on Amazon (head to YouTube for a taster). You might want to snap up his 2010 
bestselling bookI Drink for a Reason 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/I-Drink-Reason-David-Cross/dp/0446697710/ref=sr_1_6?ie=UTF8&qid=1402054921&sr=8-6&keywords=david+cross>
 and the DVD ofTodd Margaret 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Increasingly-Poor-Decisions-Todd-Margaret/dp/B005EF29QO/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1402055647&sr=8-1&keywords=todd+margaret>
, which he co-wrote, produced and starred in. He's recently turned to 
directing, with the Alexander Payne-esqueHits 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3145220/> debuting at this year's Sundance 
<https://www.sundance.org/festival/article/david-cross-makes-a-seamless-move-to-director-with-the-dark-comedy-hits/>
.

 