
The Red Wedding award for sudden yet inevitable betrayal

After kicking off her relationship with Guardian Australia by admitting that 
she speaks Dothraki and isbarracking for the Khaleesi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/26/julia-gillard-game-of-thrones>, 
Julia Gillard continued her tribute to Game of Thrones bypenning a piece on 
power, purpose and Labor’s future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/13/julia-gillard-labor-purpose-future>
 that was almost as long (though not quite as bloody) as the books themselves.


A Saturday morning read published the weekend after Labor lost the 2013 
election, Gillard's essay was the first time she had spoken about the 
leadership spill and being swept aside as prime minister:

Losing power is felt physically, emotionally, in waves of sensation, in 
moments of acute distress.”

Months later, in her review of the first episode of the new series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/07/game-of-thrones-parallels-prime-minister>
, Gillard admitted that – like most of us, really – she wouldn’t have minded a 
few dragons at hand while she was in office.


Most educational Thomas the Tank Engine impression
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F14%2Falbo-explains-the-budget-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F13%2F1399987797845%2FAnthony-Albanese-019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budget%202014%3A%20whiteboard%20explainer%20with%20Anthony%20Albanese%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F14%2Falbo-explains-the-budget-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budget%202014%3A%20whiteboard%20explainer%20with%20Anthony%20Albanese%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F14%2Falbo-explains-the-budget-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F13%2F1399987797845%2FAnthony-Albanese-019.jpg>
Awarded to Labor's infrastructure and transport spokesman, Anthony Albanese, 
forattacking the Liberal government’s infrastructure funding  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/may/14/albo-explains-the-budget-video>
using only a pen, a whiteboard, and a cheery “toot, toot” noise.

Most impressive transformation from shambolic laughing stock to dead-eyed 
cricketing assassins

When Guardian Australia launched, the national cricket team was a squad of 
self-destructing pub fighters who wouldn’t know a century if it hit them in the 
face. A hundred times. They dulylost the Ashes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/aug/13/australia-lose-fourth-test-ashes-cricket>
in England before a remarkable turnaround inspired by Mitchell Johnson’s 
destructive bowling and Brad Haddin’s nuggety genius led to awhitewash of 
England in the return series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/17/australia-win-the-ashes-third-test>
. What came next was arguably more impressive as they travelled to face South 
Africa, the world’s No 1 team, in their own backyard. Australia won the series 
2-1on a thrilling final day in the deciding Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/mar/06/australias-win-in-south-africa-beats-the-ashes-for-drama-and-substance>
.

Injured butterfly award for most depressing yet beautifully photographed story
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F26%2Fguardian-australias-anniversary-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F26%2F1401084554541%2F92a1ede4-7d21-4d3c-bcf4-e1b2166824cb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Australia%20first%20birthday%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F26%2Fguardian-australias-anniversary-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Australia%20first%20birthday%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F26%2Fguardian-australias-anniversary-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F26%2F1401084554541%2F92a1ede4-7d21-4d3c-bcf4-e1b2166824cb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Great Barrier Reef, which is threatened by dredging, dumping and climate 
change. Photograph: Robert Harding Picture Library/Alamy 
There has been a flurry of fear about the future of the Great Barrier Reef, 
withdredging and dumping from the Abbot Point port project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/31/great-barrier-reef-dredging-spoil-dumping-approved-abbot-point>
 the focus ofmuch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/southern-crossroads/2013/dec/15/great-barrier-reef-destruction-abbot-point-greg-hunt>
concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2014/jan/31/great-barrier-reef-australia-dredging-abbot-point-coal-export>
. Mike Bowers, Christian Bennett and Oliver Milman created an obituary of 
sorts, in the form of agorgeously rich multimedia article that digs deeply into 
the reef’s past, present and uncertain future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2014/mar/great-barrier-reef-obituary>
.

Most dignified response to idiocy

Adam Goodes rose above racist abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/29/eddie-mcguire-adam-goodes-remarks>
 from a fan and then a crass joke from Collingwood's president, Eddie McGuire. 
He was later named asAustralian of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/25/adam-goodes-wins-australian-year>
 although, sadly, that didn’tstop the abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/20/essendon-ban-supporter-adam-goodes-racial-abuse>
.

Bladder control award for longest continuous liveblog

Awarded to assistant editor Alex Needham for Triple J's Hottest 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jan/26/triple-j-hottest-100-live-blog>
, which he liveblogged continuously for eight and a half hours without leaving 
his desk. We're not sure how.

Most enormous balls on a merino
 The royals meet a ram at the Royal Easter show. Photograph: Chris 
Jackson/Getty Images 
Enough said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/18/old-bloodlines-meet-as-cambridges-put-the-royal-into-sydneys-easter-show>
.

Most enormous balls on a wicket

Awarded to the South Australia bowler Darren Worrall, whose career as a 
cricketer remains significantly more illustrious thanhis career as an artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/18/south-australia-bowler-banned-over-penis-graffiti>
.


Most versatile live blogger

Won by Katharine Murphy, for switching elegantly from her Canberra focus in 
the politics live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/politics-live-with-katharine-murphy>
 to blogging theEurovision song contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/may/11/eurovision-song-contest-2014-as-live-australia>
 without missing a beat. Experience in covering overly dramatic stage shows and 
divas of all kinds may have helped.

Cutest monster
 First Dog on the Moon's adorable, unloved budget 
Awarded to the poor, sad, unloved 2014 budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cartoon/2014/may/21/first-dog-cartoon>
.

Spilled drinks award for awkward timing


On the evening of 26 June 2013, Guardian Australia was all set to hold its 
Canberra launch party. Unfortunately,Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd had other 
ideas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/26/labor-leadership-spill-gillard-rudd-live>
.

Patron of the arts award

When they discovered that sponsors Transfield ran the detention camps on Manus 
Island, numerous artists threatened to pull out of the Sydney Biennale – which 
led to theBiennale and Transfield severing their relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/07/sydney-biennale-chairman-quits-transfield-detention>
.


In response, the arts minister, George Brandis, said artists who turned down 
corporate sponsorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/13/george-brandis-threatens-sydney-biennale-transfield-blackballing>
 – no matter how mucky the source – shouldn't get any government funding either.


Infomercial of the year
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcomedy-politcs-australia-video-a-rational-fear&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F14%2F1397446471029%2FA-Rational-Fear-Make-it-r-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Rational%20Fear%3A%20make%20it%20racist%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcomedy-politcs-australia-video-a-rational-fear>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Rational%20Fear%3A%20make%20it%20racist%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F14%2Fcomedy-politcs-australia-video-a-rational-fear&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F14%2F1397446471029%2FA-Rational-Fear-Make-it-r-016.jpg>
Won by A Rational Fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/a-rational-fear>, for championing 
the best approach to social media if you can't criticise your employer but you 
can be a bigot.

Separated at birth award for interchangeable rhetoric 

A tricky one to award, with entrants including odd couple Eddie Obeid and Tony 
Soprano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/quiz/2013/aug/02/eddie-obeid-tony-soprano-quiz>
, and deadly duoBob Carr and Patrick Bateman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/quiz/2014/apr/10/bob-carr-patrick-bateman-quiz>
. But the winners have to beAyn Rand and Gina Rinehart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/quiz/2013/nov/25/ayn-rand-gina-rinehart>, 
for their almost-identical approaches to the selfishness of man, tax increases 
and the private sector. Rand's poetry was probably better though.


The Braveheart rallying cry award

At the coming World Cup, the Socceroos face Spain, Holland and Chile in a 
group of death so deadly it may as well have been drawn by the Grim Reaper 
sitting in a lake of cyanide while listening to death metal’s greatest hits. So 
you think they’d need a few former players to encourage them before flying out 
to Brazil.Step forward former Socceroos captain Paul Wade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/13/socceroos-world-cup-2014-brazil>
.

"Something happens when you walk across that white line," Wade said before 
Australia named their squad for the World Cup. "As a footballer, we talk about 
the green and gold. As a footballer, you have pride in yourself and your 
performance and helping your mates out. That all comes into play.”

Yes! Aussie mateship! And the green and gold! And pride! And the southern 
cross! And Mitch Johnson! Even though he plays cricket! Give us some more, Paul!

"But right now, without doubt, we're going to get hammered."

Germaine Greer award for destroying the joint

Awarded to Tony Abbott on two counts: firstly for destroying language and 
meaning with therevelation that he is a feminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/04/abbott-australian-women-smashed-glass-ceiling>
, and secondly for proudly destroying the gender binary itself asAustralia’s 
minister for women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/18/tony-abbott-womens-minister-portfolio>
.

Scooby Doo award for biggest mystery
 Lost: 10 tonne, three-storey mango. Photograph: Bowen Tourism 
The town of Bowen was shaken to its core in February by the unexpected 
revelation that itsgiant mango had been stolen overnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/mango-unchained-was-bowens-three--storey-tourist-attraction-really-stolen>
. Thanks to Guardian Australia’s expert metadata investigative work,the true 
culprits were eventually revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/25/stolen-big-mango-recovered-paddock-bowen>
 as spicy chicken purveyors Nando's and not the enterprising if short-sighted 
chutney merchants we were all secretly hoping for.


Most emotional parting

Awarded en masse to the Canberra political bureau, the editor, the deputy 
editor, the production editor, First Dog on the Moon, two subeditors and the 
audience development editor, for leaving their phones behind and entering, 
voluntarily and almost without sobbing, into the budget lockup for six hours 
without the internet. For a digital-only news team, this was a little like 
being in purgatory.


Bang on 7.30pm, the team came out with a scream of "what have we missed?!", 
and immediately publishedapproximately 1,500 stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-budget-2014> about the budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-2014-joe-hockey-delivers-deep-pain-for-little-gain>
 in no time flat – onunemployed young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/young-australians-to-face-six-month-wait-for-unemployment-benefits>
, the$7 GP fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-7-gp-fee-brings-end-to-free-doctors-visits>
 and the probableimpact on Lego families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-2014-how-will-it-affect-you>
, among other things – before settling down to atraditional evening's 
liveblogging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-2014-joe-hockey-speech-live>
 while cradling their iPhones and swearing never to be parted again. Until next 
year, of course.

Calmest reporter
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F09%2Ftony-abbott-calm-down-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F7%2F9%2F1373341020143%2FTony-Abbott--021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Abbott%20tells%20Guardian%20Australia%20journalist%20to%20calm%20down%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F09%2Ftony-abbott-calm-down-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Abbott%20tells%20Guardian%20Australia%20journalist%20to%20calm%20down%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjul%2F09%2Ftony-abbott-calm-down-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F7%2F9%2F1373341020143%2FTony-Abbott--021.jpg>
Awarded to reporter Bridie Jabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bridie-jabour>, who was told to calm down 
by Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jul/09/tony-abbott-calm-down-video>
after she questioned him about claiming $9,000 in travel expenses while 
promoting his book. Video of the event went viral, leading to almost everyone 
on Twitter joining the prime minister in suggesting she calm down. Since the 
exchange she has been a model of impeccable equanimity at all times.

Best dog

Awarded with merit to First Dog on the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/first-dog-on-the-moon>, who joined 
Guardian Australia inApril 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cartoon/2014/apr/07/australia-australian-politics>
 along withBrenda the Civil Disobedience Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cartoon/2014/may/19/first-dog-surveillance>
,Ian the Climate Denialist Potato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cartoon/2014/may/07/first-dog-potato>
 andArthur the Bilby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cartoon/2014/apr/22/first-dog-thank-you-note>
.

Worst dog

Awarded to the dog that attacked a toddler this month in California and was 
resoundingly beaten and chased off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/may/15/cat-saves-boy-from-dog-attack-video>
by a heroic cat.

Award for proficiency in one-handed typing (sponsored by Kleenex)

Won by Barracuda author Christos Tsiolkas, who told a startled audience at 
Sydney writers' festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/25/christos-tsiolkas-do-the-first-draft-orgasm-and-start-editing>
 the key to writing a good sex scene is to "write the first draft, orgasm, and 
then start editing". His interviewer, David Marr, went on to acclaim him as the 
best writer about masturbation in contemporary literature.


Golden clock award for timing a controversial announcement for 5.15pm on a 
Friday

If there’s one thing we’ve learned about Australian politics during the past 
year, it’s that Friday evening is the best time to announce bad news, 
controversial policies or other things you’d rather not have anyone pay 
attention to. Whether it’s deciding tostrip Tasmania’s forests of protection so 
they can be logged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/31/coalition-strip-tasmanian-forests-world-heritage-listing>
, or announcing thatno asylum seekers who arrive by boat will be resettled in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/19/kevin-rudd-asylum-boats-png>, 
both Labor and Coalition seem to agree that if journalists have a busy evening 
planned, it’s best to disrupt it with a late-breaking story.

The final award can’t be given to just one story. Instead it goes to Friday 20 
December, the Friday before Christmas, whenClive Palmer’s mine was given the 
go-ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/20/clive-palmers-galilee-basin-mine-given-green-light-by-greg-hunt>
,internal reviews into three asylum seeker boat sinkings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/20/fatal-asylum-seeker-sinkings-agencies-urged-to-improve-rescue-co-ordination>
 were released, and we all ate candy canes at our desks.

Most moving interview
 Speaking out: Everlyn Sampi. Photograph: Guardian 
In 2002 Everlyn Sampi starred in Rabbit-Proof Fence. Having not spoken to the 
media for a decade,she gave an interview to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/18/rabbit-proof-fence-everlyn-sampi> 
about being abused as a child, her pride in her performance, and her turbulent 
life since the film.

She became such a hero as an actress, but the story she's telling now, about 
her life is even greater act of bravery."

Most incredible story of survival against the odds

In 2013, violent bushfires ripped through Tasmania and engulfed the town of 
Dunalley. The Holmes family sheltered beneath a jetty while the fires raged all 
around. The photograph of that moment was shared around the world.

When Guardian Australia launched, we also launched Firestorm, an interactive, 
multimedia exploration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/may/26/firestorm-bushfire-dunalley-holmes-family>
 of that day, the causes and consequences of the fires, and of the Holmes 
family, who spoke publicly to us for the first time. Late last year that work 
was honoured with aWalkley award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/29/guardian-australia-wins-walkley-award>
 for multimedia storytelling – our first.

The hand jive award for public speaking

Awarded to Kevin Rudd for his superb performance at the first leaders’ debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-news-blog/2013/sep/02/kevin-rudd-qanda-gestures>
 before the election.

Chairman's scholarship for design

Awarded to Frances Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/21/tony-abbotts-daughter-did-not-have-to-pay-for-60000-design-degree>
, on merit.

Operational matters award for services to press freedom

Won by Scott Morrison's media team for redacting 23 questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2013/dec/24/scott-morrison-always-short-on-answers-now-shy-with-questions>
 – mostly from Guardian Australia – in the official transcript of anOperation 
Sovereign Borders press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/dec/20/david-marr-scott-morrison-video>
, at which the immigration minister was pushed ona damning letter from doctors 
on Christmas Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/19/revealed-doctors-outrage-over-unsafe-refugee-patients>
detailing the state of medical malpractice.

"We've had about half a dozen questions from the Guardian today, we might take 
a few from others," Morrison told the media.


Misplaced bravery award for facing down a dead-eyed cricketing assassin
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F27%2Fpiers-morgan-brett-lee-over-cricket&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F27%2F1388118953054%2FPiers-Morgan-bats-an-over-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Piers%20Morgan%20faces%20a%20Brett%20Lee%20over%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F27%2Fpiers-morgan-brett-lee-over-cricket>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Piers%20Morgan%20faces%20a%20Brett%20Lee%20over%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F27%2Fpiers-morgan-brett-lee-over-cricket&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F27%2F1388118953054%2FPiers-Morgan-bats-an-over-016.jpg>
After criticising the England team’s Ashes performance, Piers “the human 
wicket” Morgan faced an over from Brett Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/dec/27/piers-morgan-brett-lee-over-cricket>
 and proved once and for all that Twitter has consequences, that schadenfreude 
isn’t always satisfying, and that people shouldn't stand in front of 
Australia’s bowlers without specialist training.

Organic quinoa award for most Guardian headline

Named for the British article “Can vegans stomach the unpalatable truth about 
quinoa? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/16/vegans-stomach-unpalatable-truth-quinoa>
”, this award celebrates headlines that encapsulate both lifestyle and 
geopolitical issues in a quintessentially Guardian way. “CrossFit: the new 
fitness craze has a lot to tell us about late western capitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/03/crosstfit-the-new-fitness-craze-has-a-lot-to-tell-us-about-late-western-capitalism>
” was, we felt, a particularly strong Australian winner this year.

Special consideration also goes to Jimmy the Exploder, for the first recorded 
use of “mate” in a Guardian Australia headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/05/mate-perth-is-not-a-hipster-city>
.

Three word award

Stop the boats. A new way. A stronger Australia. A brighter future. Three-word 
slogans: best for politics, before the election.Build your own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/05/australian-election-slogan-generator>
.

More tea, vicar? award for family-friendly film
 Matthew Barney and Jonathan Bepler's River of Fundament. Photograph: Hugh 
Glendinning/Gladstone Gallery 
For Matthew Barney's five-and-a-half hour River of Fundament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/matthew-barneys-river-of-fundament-what-was-that-all-about-then>
, which made its Australian debut at the Adelaide festival. Scenes included 
people defecating, a close-up of an anus being licked, Barney being buggered by 
a golden dildo and a snogging session between two pregnant women that 
culminated in one removing her glass eye and sticking it up the other one’s 
backside.

Big Brother award for advancement towards a dystopian future

The primary recipient of this award is, of course, the US National Security 
Agency, for itsservices to internet surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded>
, which have been revealed by Edward Snowden in the Guardian and other 
publications. However, special mention goes to the Australian intelligence 
agency which in 2008offered to share information collected about ordinary 
Australian citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/02/revealed-australian-spy-agency-offered-to-share-data-about-ordinary-citizens>
 with its major intelligence partners, and which alsotried to monitor mobile 
phone calls made by the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and his 
wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/australia-tried-to-monitor-indonesian-presidents-phone>
.


Most #straya event of the year

“A man has escaped conviction and kept his licence after driving a motorised 
esky to McDonald's while drunk on pineapple vodkas and low-carb beers.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/23/esky-rider-drunk-cooler-mcdonalds>

Return of the King award for roadkill toupee
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F14%2Felvis-parkes-festival-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F14%2F1389684457550%2FIan-gets-tips-at-the-Elvi-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20be%20a%20better%20Elvis%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F14%2Felvis-parkes-festival-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20be%20a%20better%20Elvis%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F14%2Felvis-parkes-festival-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F14%2F1389684457550%2FIan-gets-tips-at-the-Elvi-016.jpg>
Awarded to assistant news editor Ian J Griffiths, who slipped into a white and 
gold jumpsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/jan/14/elvis-parkes-festival-video>
and headed to the 22nd annual Parkes Elvis festival this year in search of the 
spirit of Elvis Presley.

Best thing on Twitter award

Since we launched, Guardian Australia has invited the changing hosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/indigenousx> of the 
IndigenousX Twitter feed <http://www.twitter.com/indigenousx> to answer a few 
questions each week on Comment is Free.Warren Mundine, chair of the Indigenous 
Advisory Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/31/qa-with-warren-mundine-on-the-importance-of-role-models-and-education>
,NCIE chairman Jason Glanville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/30/jason-glanville-indigenousx>
 andwriter Siv Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/13/five-questions-to-siv-parker-this-week-on-indigenousx>
 have joined dozens of others at the helm and spoken about their passions and 
hopes.

Most creative redefinition of a progressive Australian digital news site
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F03%2Ftony-abbott-on-abc-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F3%2F1386045873449%2FTony-Abbott-in-Canberra-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Abbott%20accuses%20ABC%20of%20touting%20'for%20a%20left-wing%20British%20newspaper'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F03%2Ftony-abbott-on-abc-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Abbott%20accuses%20ABC%20of%20touting%20%27for%20a%20left-wing%20British%20newspaper%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fdec%2F03%2Ftony-abbott-on-abc-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F3%2F1386045873449%2FTony-Abbott-in-Canberra-016.jpg>
Most committed attempt to define reporting as advertising

See above.

Tin foil extravaganza award for most challenging arts review

In March Alex Needham was tasked with reviewing Tectonics Live, a two-day 
festival of avant garde and classical music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/tectonics-adelaide-program-two-review>
. The first day lasted five hours, but the second went on from 2pm to 11pm and 
involved such challenging turns asCrys Cole <http://cryscole.com/>, whose 
ambient improvisational piece sounded like someone rustling a bag of crisps for 
25 minutes;Marco Fusinato <http://www.marcofusinato.com/>, half an hour of 
feedback played at savagely loud volume, andHammers Lake 
<http://carolyn-connors.com/projects/hammers-lake/>, which featured a women 
screaming, then spitting into a piece of tin foil.


Silver lining award

Picture the scene: election day, 2013. After a hot Saturday out at the polls, 
the whole country was glued to the television –and the internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/07/australian-elections-2013-results-live>
 – watching and waiting as Kevin Rudd prepared to zip for the final time.There 
were graphs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-election-2013-interactive>! There 
were sausages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-food-blog/interactive/2013/sep/06/sausage-sizzle-election-day-map>
! There wasJaymes Diaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/06/liberal-jaymes-diaz-misses-boats>
, who only hasn’t been given his own awards here because heswept the board at 
Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/19/review-of-2013-ashes-rudd-gillard-abbott>
!

Finally, as everyone expected, Tony Abbott was announced as the new prime 
minister, and Ben Pobjie provided thishandy cut-out-and-keep guide to getting 
through the next four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/08/10-ways-to-survive-abbott>
. It remains excellent advice, though Guardian Australia would like to remind 
you to follow point 10 responsibly.

Fastest reverse ferret


In an early interview with Guardian Australia's political editor Lenore Taylor,
Julie Bishop claimed that the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/02/indonesia-people-smuggler-boats-julie-bishop>
 – then in opposition – had privately indicated that Indonesia would cooperate 
on the plan to turn back asylum seeker boats from Australian waters. But after 
the story was published she claimed it was a “beat-up” and that she had been 
selectively quoted. Guardian Australiapublished the relevant section of the 
interview in full 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/insideguardian/2013/jun/03/julie-bishop-indonesia-boats-guardian>
.

Inigo Montoya award for using words that do not mean what you think they mean


Awarded for the repeated use of the phrase “convicted jihadist terrorist” to 
describeSayed Abdellatif, an Egyptian asylum seeker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/07/conviction-egyptian-asylum-seeker>
 who turned outnot to be anything of the sort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/13/interpol-drops-murder-sayed-abdellatif>
.

Amanda Huggenkiss award for best byline

Awarded to writer and film-maker Jimmy the Exploder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jimmy-the-exploder>, for obvious reasons.


Open gap award
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Faug%2F30%2Fdarwin-election-aboriginal-urban-communities-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F8%2F29%2F1377759042123%2FDawn-Adams-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Election%202013%3A%20the%20real%20concerns%20of%20Bagot%20and%20One%20Mile%20Dam%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Faug%2F30%2Fdarwin-election-aboriginal-urban-communities-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Election%202013%3A%20the%20real%20concerns%20of%20Bagot%20and%20One%20Mile%20Dam%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Faug%2F30%2Fdarwin-election-aboriginal-urban-communities-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F8%2F29%2F1377759042123%2FDawn-Adams-016.jpg>
Before the election, Helen Davidson visited two Indigenous communities in 
Darwin, Bagot and One Mile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/30/darwin-indigenous-communities-election-2013>
, to find out how the coming election would affect them. The answer seemed to 
be that it would make little difference; power and water were more pressing 
problems.

I guess you need to be more interested in what happens in the election, and 
whoever gets in. But then again politicians and whoever gets in needs to be 
interested in the issues that Aboriginal people are facing in these 
communities.”

Grauniad award for subediting excellence

The AFR wins this by a landslide for the front page of its special extended 
weekend Anzac Day edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-news-blog/2014/apr/25/apocalyptic-error-puts-the-f-in-afr>
, which sums up one story with the eloquent phrase "World is fukt".

Big data award

In February, Guardian Australia revealed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/19/asylum-seekers-identities-revealed-in-immigration-department-data-lapse>
that the Department of Immigration had accidentally provided the personal 
details of 10,000 asylum seekers as part of a publicly available document. This 
data breach – one of the most serious in Australia’s history – was compounded 
whenScott Morrison subsequently revealed the name and previous location of the 
document 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/20/scott-morrisons-response-asylum-seekers-data-breach-horrible-mistake>
 in press releases and interviews, claiming that it was not “in an easily 
accessible format in the public domain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2014/feb/20/factcheck-three-clicks-to-expose-asylum-seekers-data>
”.

Light the Dark award

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/530a6617e4b06aebce0d01b5/841057> 
Light The Dark Vigil at Federation Square Melbourne 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/530a6617e4b06aebce0d01b5/841057>

One minute silence to honour and remember Reza Barati at Melbourne's 
Federation Square

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Tessa Stogian <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Tessa Stogian> 

24 February 2014, 9:35 

The death of Reza Barati, an Iranian asylum seeker, amid violent disturbances 
at the detention centre on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/18/manus-island-unrest-one-dead-dozens-injured-and-man-shot-in-buttock>
, sent shockwaves through Australia. In the days after his death, details about 
the involvement of G4S guards and local PNG police began to emerge, as did the
first video footage of the night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/01/manus-island-a-war-zone-on-night-of-unrest-video-footage-reveals>
, showing a makeshift hospital for those who had been injured. Hisdistraught 
family spoke about his hopes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/27/reza-baratis-family-we-want-answers-what-did-they-do-to-him>
for his life in Australia:


He went to Australia to seek refuge from his land of dreams, where he could 
have a life and study but instead he was held in captivity and killed.”

In the aftermath, Get Up organised candlelight vigils across Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/light-the-dark-vigils-across-australia-following-asylum-seekers-death>
, and dozens of Guardian Australia readers sent usimages of Light the Dark 
gatherings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/light-the-dark-vigils-for-reza-berati-your-pictures>
, large and small.

Harmless metadata award for oversharing

Awarded to Oliver Laughland for selflessly sharing the intimate details of his 
internet use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/what-can-you-learn-about-me-from-24-hours-of-my-metadata>
for 24 hours, to see what Guardian Australia commenters could uncover about his 
private life.This metadata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/interactive/2013/jun/12/what-is-metadata-nsa-surveillance#meta=1111111>
 – which is collected by the US National Security Agency and Asio, among others 
– encompasses a great deal more than simply“billing data” as Tony Abbott 
claimed at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/02/metadata-should-it-be-dismissed-as-billing-data-or-is-it-personal-material>
, and may put therelationship between journalists and their sources at risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/25/journalists-sources-are-no-longer-safe>
.

Blisteringly sarcastic award for scathing rage
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F05%2Fludlam-slams-abbott-government&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F5%2F1393982991273%2FScott-Ludlam-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scott%20Ludlam%20attacks%20Tony%20Abbott's%20policies%20ahead%20of%20WA%20Senate%20election%20re-run%20%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F05%2Fludlam-slams-abbott-government>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scott%20Ludlam%20attacks%20Tony%20Abbott%27s%20policies%20ahead%20of%20WA%20Senate%20election%20re-run%20%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F05%2Fludlam-slams-abbott-government&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F5%2F1393982991273%2FScott-Ludlam-016.jpg>
Awarded to Scott Ludlam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/05/scott-ludlam-tony-abbott-speech-wa-byelection>
, largely because we're now scared of him.

Emperor Nero award for scientific rigor

Won jointly by Greg Hunt for his use of Wikipedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/24/greg-hunt-wikipedia-climate-change-bushfires>
- rather than hisown department's research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/oct/25/climate-change-linked-to-bushfire-risk-says-environment-department-website>
 - to conclude there was no link between last October's bushfires and climate 
change, and by Tony Abbott for calling such suggestions "complete hogwash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2013/oct/29/climate-change-bushfires-smoking-denial-tony-abbott>
" and for hismasterful summation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/15/abbott-carbon-trading-invisible-substance>
 of carbon emissions trading:

It's a market, a so-called market, in the non-delivery of an invisible 
substance to no one."

Meanwhile, 2013 was Australia's hottest year on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/03/australias-hottest-year-recorded-in-2013>
.

Below the line award for commenting excellence

Awarded to Vecsatious <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12793109>
 forthis thoughtful and compassionate comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/28/work-for-the-dole-this-punishing-forced-labour-policy-will-not-create-jobs#comment-31270538>
 on the effects of unemployment and working for the dole.

Behind every statistic there is a real human being, with real problems and 
issues, unemployed people should not be treated as 'cases' and 'placed' on to 
work schemes, there will always be people in our society who have slipped 
through the cracks, our job is not to punish them or demonise them in the 
media, our job is to provide proper services that will really help them get 
back on track.”

Biggest welcome

In true Time Magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2006/dec/17/youaretimesp> style, 
our final award goes to you, and to all of our other readers, for the warm 
welcome we've received into Australia. Thanks to all of you for an excellent 
year – and here's to many more ahead. Now, what have we missed?
 