
Last week a philanthropy rich list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/feb/07/philanthropy-50-list-donations-improve>
 revealed that in America 36% of charitable donations go to higher education 
institutions. The Chronicle of Philanthropy's annual report showed that 19 of 
the top 50 donors gave £1.6bn to educational charities, and 10 of these 19 
donated to a college which was not their alma mater.

Meanwhile, the UK saw a significant rise in the number of philanthropic 
donations in tandem with the introduction of the now-defunct 'matched funding 
scheme' in 2008. As of March 2011donations had risen by 25% 
<http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20110325204629125>.

With an 80% cut in public spending set to hit universities, can an increase in 
philanthropic donations ease HEIs' reliance on the market for funding?

Chacona Winters Johnson, president and CEO of Detroit Public Schools 
Foundation, certainly believes this to be the case in America. "Today, 
government funds are simply not enough to alone pay for quality public 
education. The state does not allocate enough and local schools districts 
cannot collect enough in taxes to meet the needs of students without additional 
support," she writesin the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/chacona-winters-johnson/detroit-public-school-funding_b_1263320.html>
.

To delve further into this issue, this Friday we're bringing together a panel 
of fundraising and higher education experts to discuss the role of philanthropy 
in universities. Questions such as: What new initiatives are in place to build 
on donations in light of the government cuts? Is the removal of the 'matched 
funding scheme' having an impact on fundraising? And, what more can be done in 
the future to ensure philanthropy remains strong in the turbulent financial 
climate?

Join us at 12pm GMT or post your questions and comments on your experiences 
now. You can also follow the live chat on Twitter using the hashtag #HElivechat

Paul Lanning, principal of RPR Fundraising <http://www.rprfundraising.com/>, LA


Dr Paul Lanning, CFRE, is a principal in the firm RPR Fundraising, LLC, a Los 
Angeles-based consultancy advising education institutions and other non-profit 
organizations nationwide on strategic planning, campaign planning, fundraising, 
and other key elements to sustainability. He formed the firm in 2011 after 
serving as president and CEO of the Foundation for California Community 
Colleges from 2007 to 2011. @paullanning @RPRFundraising

Sam Davies, director of development and alumni at University of Brighton
 <http://www.brighton.ac.uk/>

Sam Davies became Brighton's first director of development and alumni in 
August 2008 tasked with establishing a sustainable development operation and 
imbedding a culture of philanthropy amongst the alumni community. Previously, 
she spent two years managing telephone campaigns at 22 institutions 
(universities and schools) as a consultant. She then returned to Warwick in 
1999 full-time to run their campaigns. @sammyloudavies

Stephen Tall, development director of Education Endowment Foundation 
<http://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/>

Stephen Tall worked on major campaigns for the University of Oxford for 13 
years. During that time, as associate and then acting director of development, 
he helped lead an 85-strong development office as the University passed the 
£1bn milestone in its 'Oxford Thinking' Campaign. In January 2012, he joined 
the Education Endowment Foundation, a new major grant-making charity committed 
to investing £200m over the next 15 years in projects that will raise the 
attainment of disadvantaged children. @stephentall

Ian Wilkinson, sociology lecturer at University of Kent, director of the 
Centre for the Study of Philanthropy, Humanitarianism and Social Justice 
<http://www.kent.ac.uk/sspssr/cphsj/> (CPHSJ)

Iain Wilkinsonis director of the Centre for the Study of Philanthropy, 
Humanitarianism and Social Justice (CPHSJ). In this capacity, he is involved in 
various funded projects relating to the social contexts and consequences of 
charitable giving. The interrelationship between contemporary expressions of 
philanthropy, the politics of humanitarianism and the activities of 
international non-governmental organisations is of particular interest to him 
here.

Kate Hunter, director for CASE <http://www.case.org/> (Council for Advancement 
and Support of Education) Europe

Kate Hunter is executive director for CASE (Council for Advancement and 
Support of Education) Europe. CASE is a membership association supporting 
professionals in fundraising, alumni relations, communications and marketing in 
educational institutions. It co-publishes the annual Ross-CASE survey of 
philanthropic giving to UK universities, and has delivered training to support 
HEFCE's MatchedFunding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/funding> for Voluntary 
Giving scheme. Previously Kate worked in higher education and the arts. 
@kahunter

Richard Norman, head of major gifts, University of Reading 
<http://www.reading.ac.uk/>

Richard Norman leads a team responsible for raising philanthropic support from 
individuals, charitable trusts and foundations, and companies towards the 
University of Reading's priorities in research, teaching and learning, and the 
student experience. He was previously a consultant working on annual giving 
programmes with a range of new and established development offices in higher 
education.

Lori Manders, director of development and alumni relations at UCL <>

Lori Manders joined University College London in February 2011 to take up the 
post of director of development and alumni Relations. She is leading the 
fundraising campaign for UCL and expanding theAlumni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/alumni> relations 
activity. Previously she was director of development and external affairs at 
the University of Aberdeen where she worked for 12 years and led its highly 
successful fundraising campaign which raised over £200m. She is a trustee of 
CASE Europe.

Jos Kievits, director of development and alumni relations at Maastricht 
University <http://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/>

Jos Kievits has worked for Maastricht University for three years and is 
currently director of development & Alumni Relations. His role is to build up 
the development office and hit targets of raising €10 million per year. Jos is 
also director of the Linburg University Fund. He previously worked as head of 
staff to the provincial Governor of Linburg.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 