
The slipway to extinction for the printed press doesn’t seem quite as 
well-greased as digital soothsayers suppose. The latest ABC print sale audit 
shows national papers down only 2.8% year on year and a mere 0.79% on Brexit 
June. All three quality Sundays – theObserver, Sunday Telegraph and Sunday Times
 – sold more copies last month than in July 2015.

And a look at ABC’s six-monthly report (print and online) on 174 of Britain’s 
biggest magazines seems to tell a familiar story. There’s an average drop of 
5.2% year on year to be sure – more grist for the gloom-mongers’ mill – yet 
look a little deeper.

You’ll find a lot of winners among the losers: try House Beautiful, Harper’s 
Bazaar and Esquire. But there’s also a cluster of solid performers gaining a 
little and losing nothing. Here’s theEconomist in the UK, up 3.7%; the 
incredibly resilientPrivate Eye, up 0.8%; The Week, up 0.7%; Prospect, up 3.3%; 
theOldie, up 0.6%; the Times Literary Supplement, up 7.8%. And – bouncing on 
dramatic internet expansion – there’s theSpectator, up 37.9%.

In short, opinion, reportage, analysis and wit still find a market. Words, not 
pictures. Ideas, not celebrity mush. Life, not lists. Just thought I’d mention 
it.

Gawker gawn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fnewspaper-magazine-abcs-gawker-trump-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd41b8a431140bfe701b7e6251a4ece4d28e1c3cb%2F0_77_1909_1145%2F1909.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20remarkable%20resilience%20of%20printed%20words%20on%20paper%20pages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fnewspaper-magazine-abcs-gawker-trump-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20remarkable%20resilience%20of%20printed%20words%20on%20paper%20pages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fnewspaper-magazine-abcs-gawker-trump-bannon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd41b8a431140bfe701b7e6251a4ece4d28e1c3cb%2F0_77_1909_1145%2F1909.jpg>
 The Hulk Hogan lawsuit that closed Gawker was bankrolled by tech billionaire 
Peter Thiel (left). Photograph: Dirk Shadd/AP 
Last month, Gawker Media was American publishing’s 16th-biggest website, with 
434m page views overall. This week, theGawker gossip site (Private Eye with a 
tabloid twist) that began it all will be dead and buried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/18/gawker-to-close-univision-sale> 
– closed by the cumulative weight of third-party lawsuits funded by a vigilante 
Silicon Valley billionaire with his own agenda. Good riddance to bad rubbish? 
You can piously say so if you wish. But goodbye, too, to a great deal of sharp, 
necessary and often brave reporting. Life on the edge not merely punished, but 
extinguished.

Trump’s Nige and Roger show

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fnewspaper-magazine-abcs-gawker-trump-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F423f21aa790522ca34e9d0ea119a73c474c3d166%2F0_44_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20remarkable%20resilience%20of%20printed%20words%20on%20paper%20pages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fnewspaper-magazine-abcs-gawker-trump-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20remarkable%20resilience%20of%20printed%20words%20on%20paper%20pages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fnewspaper-magazine-abcs-gawker-trump-bannon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F423f21aa790522ca34e9d0ea119a73c474c3d166%2F0_44_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Stephen Bannon is expected to take a gloves-off approach to campaigning for 
Trump Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
What do you do if you’re Donald Trump and you’re losing? You persuade Stephen 
Bannon, top dog at Breitbart News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/stephen-bannon-donald-trump-campaign-chief-breitbart>
, the rightwing web news site that loves Nigel Farage, to run your campaign (“I 
have been fought at every step of the way by total amateurs who come to London 
once a month with sandwiches in their rucksacks, to attend Ukip NEC meetings 
that normally last seven hours,” writes a plangent Farage). You get Roger 
Ailes, the hangdog ex-monarch of Fox News to rehearse you for TV debates. And 
what if that doesn’t work either? Maybe hire Nigel direct. He knows a bit about 
winning after all.
 