
African fashion is booming, and so is its web presence. Ever-expanding numbers 
of websites, blogs, e-tailers, Tumblrs and online magazines dedicated to 
African-influenced style represent a field of fashion that is as fast evolving 
as the social and online media that shows it love. A new generation of African 
and diaspora designers have gained attention in recent years, and African 
styles are a perennial trend on international catwalks too. With so much 
information to filter, here are 10 places to begin your African fashion odyssey.

Heritage1960

Heritage1960 offers both an editorial view of global African style and an 
e-commerce arm selling a mix of African-produced and inspired brands, including 
artisanal gems scouted from across the continent by apparel industry maven 
Enyinne Owunwanne. Pick up pieces from Jewel by Lisa, The Summit and Jamhuri 
Wear.
www.heritage1960.com <http://www.heritage1960.com>

Bella Naija

Bella Naija, aka Uche Eze, began her blog in 2006 and it has grown to be one 
of the biggest fashion, entertainment and lifestyle websites in Africa. From
Nollywood gossip 
<http://www.nigeriamovienetwork.com/pages/History-of-Nollywood.html>to red 
carpet glamour, and from shop openings to beauty advice, nothing escapes this 
Lagosian's all seeing eye.
www.bellanaija.com <http://www.bellanaija.com>

Africa Fashion Guide

Jacqueline Shaw's website is pegged as a "social enterprise promoting 
sustainability within Africa's fashion and textile industry". The London-based 
consultant's interest is in promoting ethical and eco-friendly methods of 
fashion production, as her book Fashion Africa also expounds.
www.africafashionguide.com <http://www.africafashionguide.com/>

Aces Date

Look at cute, young people wearing acid wash jeans and heart shaped shades. 
Read DIY guides to making leather shorts or wax print tote. And marvel at 
fashion shoots on water slides. It's all on 4 Aces Date, a wizzy little website 
by Abby, Cookie, Kaven and Ozzie - four self-confessed fashionistas based, 
variously, in Lagos, New York and Washington DC. Who runs the world? Girls!
www.the4acesdate.com/ <http://www.the4acesdate.com/>

One Nigerian Boy
 Street style from One Nigerian Boy Photograph: Terence 
Sambo/onenigerianboy.com 
Terence Sambo trumpets African fashion, design and arts on his site, which 
began as a blog but is now all grown up. Previously based in Lagos, he's 
currently studying in London and is a keen street style photographer too, often 
taking photos of his own attire, which is no mean feat when you think about it.
www.onenigerianboy.com <http://www.onenigerianboy.com>

Marian Kihogo

Stylist and creative consultant Marian Kihogo is one of the best dressed - and 
tallest - figures to be seen prowling around London Fashion Week and beyond. 
Her weblog went live in 2009 and covers fashion, beauty, catwalk shows and 
trends. She hosts a damn good party, too.
www.mariankihogo.com/ <http://www.mariankihogo.com/>

I See A Different You

Three dapper dans from Soweto, Justice Mukheli, Innocent Mukheli and Vuyo 
Mpantsha, fill their Tumblr with arty images of themselves as they travel 
around Africa, usually wearing bow ties and braces, fraternity sweaters and 
slacks. It's a hard job etc etc.
iseeadifferentyou.tumblr.com/ <http://iseeadifferentyou.tumblr.com/>

Fashion Notebook

Nairobi-based blogger Nanci Mwai is as interested in promoting Kenya's 
fledgling fashion scene as she is in global seasonal trends and celebrity 
style. Hot off the press:how to do a natural hair puff 
<http://nanciemwai.com/2012/08/how-to-natural-hair-puff/>.
www.nanciemwai.com <http://www.nanciemwai.com>

Africa Style Daily

Huffington Post columnist Zandile Blay is the brains behind this popular site 
that puts African fashion within a diaspora dialogue about art, music, politics 
and culture. She also makes time to hail Africa's contemporary icons such as 
former UN secretary general Kofi Annan and Tanzanian model and campaigner 
Flaviana Matata.
www.africastyledaily.com/ <http://www.africastyledaily.com/>

Arise Live

Arise Live is the virtual arm of Arise magazine, the London-based global 
African style magazine. Showcasing the best of the bi-monthly title plus films 
and reports from Arise Magazine Fashion Week,and blogs, catwalk reports, news 
and snappy interviews, it's really rather good. Oh, and I edit the magazine. 
Did I mention that?
www.ariselive.com <http://www.ariselive.com>

The Africa Express is a train with over 80 African and Western musicians on 
board that will be touring the UK for a week from 3 September. The Guardian is 
its media partner. Follow life on board atguardian.co.uk/music/africa-express 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/africa-express>
 