
Martin Smith, special adviser, Ingenious <http://www.theingeniousgroup.co.uk/>

It would be misleading to say that Ingenious finances the arts, although we 
are major contributors of philanthropic money, time and expertise to arts and 
education bodies. Primarily we are commercial investors, business builders and 
business operators, but we do collaborate with arts organisations in many 
different ways, both financial and non-financial. What we most contribute, 
apart from money, is leadership thinking and commercial skills.

Very few countries are allocating more public money to the funding of arts and 
culture unless they are very small and very rich (such as Norway and Qatar). We 
can (and should) argue about the direction of cultural policy and public 
funding in the UK, but the general trend is clear and is unlikely to be 
reversed in the foreseeable future. The future of the arts and culture sector, 
in the UK as elsewhere in Europe, will increasingly be about finding new ways 
of using public money to draw in private money in a variety of configurations, 
using a variety of instruments. This is one of the most important functions of 
subsidy: helping organisations to diversify their sources of revenue and thus 
become more resilient.

Being heavily dependent on public subsidy has never been a virtue in itself 
and has too often led to compromised artistic mission. For many organisations – 
and many producers – the transition from the kind of subsidy levels that 
existed in the peak years of the noughties will not be an easy or comfortable 
one. But there is a younger generation of arts professionals who are more 
comfortable with the development of complex collaborative partnerships and 
multiple funding streams.

Collaborative partnerships are easy in principle and usually difficult in 
practice. Trust and mutual confidence are always indispensable preconditions 
for success in a “hits and misses” world (film, theatre, music, galleries) 
where relationships can be – and often are – placed under enormous stress by 
the near inevitability of box-office failure at some juncture.

It’s central to our general argument on policy to recognise there are critical 
forms of artistic and cultural development that the private sector will not 
back because they are too early-stage and thus inherently too risky, as in 
story and script development and workshops. No film development fund ever made 
money to my knowledge!

This kind of activity brings sunk costs, which are invariably irrecoverable. 
Subsidy will therefore always be essential, at minimum, to enable this kind of 
“creative” R&D. This is by no means the only rationale for subsidy – or 
“investment” – but it is the most irreducible.


Alistair Hicks, art adviser and curator, Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.db.com/unitedkingdom/>


The finance industry is more creative than people give it credit for
Theresa Lindsay 
When we devised our art concept in the 1970s our priorities were to create 
stimulating working environments, to break down the ivory tower mentality of 
the office and to support the communities in which we work. Years of pursuing 
this means that we now have one of the best works on paper collections in the 
world. This not only achieves what we intended, but backs our claim that we are 
a bank that thinks about more than just money.

Separately, our sponsorship of the Frieze art fairs <http://www.frieze.com/> 
gives us a great way of entertaining our clients from around the world while 
supporting exciting events in London and New York.

It’s difficult to predict how the relationship between arts organisations and 
the financial sector will evolve, but it’s up to both sides to ensure that it 
does. It’s vital that we keep on thinking of new ways to engage with artists 
and give them a greater platform to make a richer world and question the way we 
do things.


Lex Deak, founder, Tendr <http://www.tendrdeals.com/>


Crowdfunding and the involvement of fans and supporters in the funding of arts 
is on the increase. Away from traditional film financing we are seeing new 
platforms emerge with a specific focus on creative and arts-based projects, 
usually in exchange for rewards over equity. These platforms provide a new 
source of funding but also allow supporters to engage more meaningfully with 
the projects and creative process.

The future of arts funding in this space? It’s likely to be a well-considered 
mix of social, debt and crowdfunding. Across the major crowdfunding platforms 
there have been dozens of projects funded over the past 12 months. One of my 
favourites involved the funding of a newHappy Days production 
<https://www.seedrs.com/post_investment/11086> by Seedrs. Having said this, 
many arts projects do not have the collateral to secure debt funding, so equity 
may only be interesting to those backers with an emotional tie to the project. 
For now I would lean towards social and rewards-based crowdfunding as first 
ports of call.

It’s important to know your audience. For example, if you’re approaching a 
tech-focused VC for funding of a social/arts project with limited financial 
return, you’re talking to the wrong person. However, it would be wrong to think 
ill of the VC for not taking an interest. Ultimately, if you can secure backing 
from an investor that is focused on getting a return then you should expect 
this to be their main driver.

Business plans: tips for arts, culture and the creative industries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/may/29/business-plan-tips-arts-creative-industries>
Crowdfunding should be seen as a complementary part of raising finance and 
support – not as a stand-alone channel. Making clearer cases around the 
financials or benefit of being involved would help to progress many projects 
that I’ve seen. It’s fairly easy to digest the concept and potential impact of 
an arts-based project. It’s often very emotive and will carry the interest to 
the point of understanding the financials, which is often where it falls down 
for us.

I would advise those in the arts seeking financial support to take the same 
approach as other sectors:create a robust business case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/may/29/business-plan-tips-arts-creative-industries>
. If the return is not purely fiscal, quantify the other benefits. If you’re 
planning to seek funding from the crowd, try to secure some funding prior to 
launch, to create some buzz and momentum. Engage your fans and supporters in 
the raise and make them feel part of the process. Keep a few horses running and 
consider a mix of different funding sources – and spend some time looking at 
the various tax reliefs that you can offer investors to sweeten the deal such as
SEIS <https://www.gov.uk/seed-enterprise-investment-scheme-background> and EIS 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-enterprise-investment-scheme-introduction>
.

Theresa Lindsay, head of marketing, Hitachi Capital UK plc 
<http://www.hitachicapital.co.uk/>

Hitachi Capital Consumer Finance has supported the Own Art 
<http://www.ownart.org.uk/> scheme since 2008, helping more than 30,000 people 
purchase more than £25m worth of contemporary art and crafts. We believe that 
the creative industry as a whole is incredibly important to the UK, stimulating 
ideas and innovation across all sectors of industry. Innovation is at the heart 
of our business, from finance to manufacturing, which is why we were happy to 
back this Arts Council England initiative, operated by Creative United.

The finance industry is more creative than people give it credit for and I 
would encourage the arts sector to work more closely with lenders to develop 
new ways for artists and buyers to access finance. In our experience, the more 
closely you work with the sector, the more rewarding it can be for both parties.

Hitachi Capital UK plc is a lending partner of Creative Industry Finance 
<https://www.creativeindustryfinance.org.uk/>, a programme managed by Creative 
United <http://www.creativeunited.org.uk/> and publicly funded by Arts Council 
England

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 