
If you don’t think it’s possible or appropriate to read and listen to music at 
the same time, look away now. We recently coveredthe best background music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jan/20/the-best-music-to-listen-to-while-reading-or-is-it-sacrilege>
 to read to. Here areyour recommendations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jan/06/what-is-the-best-music-to-listen-to-while-reading>
 for specific book-song pairings that not only go well together but, you argue, 
even enhance the reading experience.

Kings of Convenience and Haruki Murakami’s Kafka on the Shore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/08/fiction.harukimurakami>

Our own Sian Cain <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sian-cain>, Books site 
editor, said: “One band and author pairing I think works perfectly isKings of 
Convenience <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kingsofconvenience> with Haruki 
Murakami <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harukimurakami>. I listened to 
Quiet is the New Loud on repeat while reading Kafka on the Shore and it was a 
lovely background to the words. I think Scandinavian pop works well with the 
sparse quiet of Japanese writing.”

Marga added: “ The music of Joe Hisaishi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Hisaishi> is very relaxing and it introduces 
you to the Japanese culture and stories described by Murakami.” And Keranjit 
Kaur:
KERANJIT KAUR (@keran77) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @harukimurakami 
<https://twitter.com/harukimurakami> with any of the music he mentions in his 
novels. Listened to Sinfonietta by Janacek while reading IQ84. :-)
 <https://twitter.com/keran77/status/684828399240638464> January 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/keran77/status/684828399240638464> 
Villagers and Madeleine Miller’s Song of Achilles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/29/song-of-achilles-miller-review>

“While I love Villagers <https://www.theguardian.com/music/villagers> 
everyday, their album {Awayland} was great to readMadeleine Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/madeline-miller>’s Song of Achilles – both 
are filled to the brim with a solemn, wistful longing,” continued Sian.

Beach House and Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>

“I remember reading The Handmaid’s Tale on my morning commute. Every morning I 
would listen toBeach House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jan/24/beach-house-cd-review> full 
blast through my headphones to drown out the din of the train and the other 
commuters. Teen Dream’s keyboards and vocal melodies wash over you in a kind of 
thick and eerie haze. They do not distract you. They allow you to concentrate 
on the words on the page. The lush dream pop simply acts as a backdrop to the 
story, and it is the perfect accompaniment toAtwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>’s tale, especially the 
flashbacks and dream sequences.” –Jack Collins

The Rascals and The Sheltering Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/aug/28/the-sheltering-sky-by-paul-bowles-a-cautionary-tale-for-tourists>
 by Paul Bowles

“Paul Bowles <https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/nov/19/news.obituaries>’s 
most famous novel has a dreamlike quality portraying an ill-advised journey 
into the Sahara by Port Moresby, his wife Kit and his friend Tunner. The 
(Young) Rascals are perhaps most famous for their hitGroovin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AeUWlKc0-tE>, but in truth produced some 
fantastic music and deserve to be better known. Nubia, a jazzy album track 
which features the great Ron Carter on bass, has a hypnotic rhythm which 
complements the story perfectly.” –Salfordexile66
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHYoy6belSBo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHYoy6belSBo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHYoy6belSBo&media=>
Ludovico Einaudi and Hanya Yanagihara’s A Little Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-review>

“When reading a book, I need instrumental music – I can’t be distracted by 
singing along to a song when I am completely immersed in the story, narrative, 
characters, emotions. All of whichYanagihara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hanya-yanagihara>’s A Little Life is rich 
in. I found Einaudi’s Elements to be a perfect accompaniment to the flow of the 
narrative. Sometimes it’s calm and gentle and at other times it builds into 
something stronger, deeper, wild, changing, unpredictable and piercing. The 
book in parts is a harrowing story, incredibly moving and horrific. This album 
captivates all of these emotions and allows one to be navigated through an 
incredible journey.” –Corinne Ayres

Sigur Ros and Andy Weir’s The Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/the-martian-audiobook-hit-rocketed-oscars-glory>

“The whole Ágætis Byrjun album by Sigur Ros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sigur-ros> is atmospheric, and haunting. I 
like the idea of ‘struggle, but peace’ in both the book and the music,” said 
Shahnaz Begum

Pet Shop Boys and Stephen King’s It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/may/28/rereading-stephen-king-it>

“I read It as a 14-year-old just as Actually, the Pet Shop Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pet-shop-boys>’ second album, came out in 
1987. This is a very long novel and, as I was reading it, the record was pretty 
much on constant rotation. The song It Couldn’t Happen Here grew to encapsulate 
the whole novel for me. The orchestration, the lyrics (I didn’t really 
understand what the lyrics were actually about back then), the grandness of the 
song all fit perfectly with the novel. Even today, whenever I hear It Couldn’t 
Happen Here, I am transported to Derry, Maine and I am part of the gang with 
Bill, Ben, Bev, Richie, Eddie, Mike and Stan as we face Pennywise. Ps. Read the 
book, do not watch the awful miniseries.” –PJL

Biosphere and Karl Ove Knausgaard’s A Death In The Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/25/death-in-family-karl-ove-knausgaard-review>


“You can’t pay full attention to both music and a book at the same time. You 
share your attention between the two, which can dilute the enjoyment of both. 
For that reason I prefer to listen to something that is not too obtrusive. 
Something that creates a enveloping atmosphere and it definitely needs to be 
vocal free. This ambient classic by Biosphere does the trick. Both the artist 
and the author are Norwegian and both portray the darker and the lighter 
aspects of life to beautiful effect.” –Lee Garrington

Aphex Twin and Philip K Dick’s Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/29/do-androids-dream-electric-dick-review>

“The sci-fi aspect of this book by Philip K Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philipkdick> sits so well with the 
repetitive, almost futuristic sound of this album byAphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin> [Selected Ambient Works, volume 
1]. I would go as far as to say it is the perfect accompaniment. The album also 
works really well with1984 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/19/100-best-novels-1984-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four-robert-mccrum>
 by George Orwell.” –Matthew Smith

Leonard Cohen and Jonathan Safran Foer’s Everything is Illuminated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jun/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview28>

I have always thought Suzanne to be a second-world-war song. Especially the 
lyrics: ‘There are heroes in the seaweed / There are children in the morning / 
They are leaning out for love / And they will lean that way forever / While 
Suzanne holds the mirror.’ It makes me think of the part where the river 
narrates all the bodies that were thrown in it during the war.Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen>’s song matches the book’s 
magical realism in an extremely moving way. And I think Suzanne is Augustine, 
the woman thatSafran Foer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-safran-foer> goes to search for in 
Ukraine, because when they find her, she “Then gets you on her waveleng / And 
she lets the river answer /That you’ve always been her lover.” –Atiya Abbas
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtIssqxixYp0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtIssqxixYp0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtIssqxixYp0&media=>
Max roach and Richard Dawkins’s The Selfish Gene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/31/the-selfish-gene-richard-dawkins-review>

“Richard Dawkins’s mind-blowing theory perfectly matches with Max Roach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/aug/18/guardianobituaries.obituaries>’s’ 
deep groovie drumming sound. While listening I get the thrill that, somehow, 
something will change as these two pioneers moved away from the boring and 
stupid routine and thoughts. Profound feelings come up while reading and 
listening. The match is absolutely awesome and dazzling.” –Giovanni Giustina

Here are some more pairings you can try:

 * For books with film adaptations, listening to the movie soundtracks while 
reading has worked for many readers. “There are few things cooler (yes, cooler) 
than readingHarry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> whilst 
listening to the soundtrack,” saidLaura Tisdall 
<https://twitter.com/LauraTisdall/status/685044189684482053>. 
 * And the American Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty> 
soundtrack pairs very nicely withThe Secret History 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/18/donna-tartt-secret-history-modern-classic>
 by Donna Tartt, added Guardian Books’sSian Cain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sian-cain>. 
 * “For some reason reading John Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-green> books simultaneously gets the 
Piano Man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gxEPV4kolz0> harmonica stuck in my 
head! Odd,” saidBEF <https://twitter.com/muckyunderwear>. To each his own. 
 * American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> and the 
Talking Heads, said Eve Nixon: because “Patrick Bateman likes them.”

 * The Unbearable Lightness of Being 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/may/01/fiction.johnbanville> by Milan 
Kundera andGrace <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3adFWKE9JE> by Jeff Buckley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jeff-buckley>: “Both book and song are 
ethereal, reflective, beautiful,” said kblue. 
 * Blood Meridian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/14/david-vann-cormac-mccarthy> by 
Cormac McCarthy and the albumF#A#Infinity 
<https://open.spotify.com/album/7sh2Z8jj1iySpHRAnGd9w5> by Godspeed You! Black 
Emperor <https://www.theguardian.com/music/godspeed-you-black-emperor>. “I 
think you need to try it,” said Samuel Horn. We did – it was dark. 
 * Life of Pi <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/may/25/fiction.reviews1> 
“worked extremely well” with Steve Reich’sMusic for 18 musicians 
<https://open.spotify.com/album/1w9O7mS9WEp5xlZUpYbDt9>, said David Brax 
<https://twitter.com/davidbrax/status/685037325718548480>. 
 * “I enjoy reading Paul Auster’s The New York Trilogy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-york-trilogy.html> with Bohren & der Club 
of Gore’sSunset Mission <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Zl5vpy__dQ> album,” 
saidAzrayna Zin <https://twitter.com/Fiery_Flower13/status/685043168165904384>. 
Perfectly thematic and jazzy. 
 * Neil Gaiman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> and Arcade Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> (said Anna Cescon 
<https://twitter.com/anna_cescon/status/685038784979824641>); Fight Club and 
Maximo Park (Liam Mackay 
<https://twitter.com/LiamMackay2/status/685067779423219713>); and for some of 
the classics: Sonny Rollins forFitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fscottfitzgerald>, Tom Waits for Angela 
Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter> and Rammstein for TS 
Eliot <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ts-eliot>’s poetry (said couch groucho 
<https://twitter.com/couchgroucho/status/685071864608210944>). 
 * Finally, Blackwell Books kindly shared the playlist they have put together 
to accompany Marlon James’sA Brief History of Seven Killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
:enjoy 
<https://play.spotify.com/user/blackwellbooks/playlist/6wCjyqRXlQZkAw96N86KMU>. 
Do you agree? Have you tried another excellent pairing you’d like to 
recommend? Please do so in the comments.
 