

Overview



By Jonathan Lee, author of the Wallpaper city guide to Turin

Turin could be the blueprint for the post-industrial city of the future. Once 
Italy’s manufacturing powerhouse, spearheaded by the mighty Fiat, the city 
expanded rapidly beyond its elegant heart of Paris-style boulevards throughout 
the 20th century. But by the 1980s, global competition had put the brakes on 
the city’s economy: more than 100,000 workers lost their jobs and thriving 
factory districts withered to moribund hinterland.
locator map of Turin 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/07/travel_turin/giv-21277C8sqNBYX7wyT/>
But since then this most pragmatic of Italian cities has chosen to invest and 
reinvent with gusto, carving out new cultural spaces, sprucing up old classics 
such asMuseo Egizio <http://www.museoegizio.it/en/> and Del Cambio 
<http://delcambio.it/en/>, and splurging on trams <http://www.gtt.to.it/en/> and
metro trains <http://www.gtt.to.it/en/>. For proof, hop north of the centre to 
Parco Dora <http://www.comune.torino.it/comitatoparcodora/>, a former factory 
district once whirring with the production lines of Fiat, Michelin and carpet 
manufacturer Paracchi. Now completely transformed, the park’s centrepiece is a 
picked-clean skeleton of soaring girders, creating a vast space for kids to 
skate and scoot, play basketball and football, and turn out in their thousands 
for gigs and events such asKappa FuturFestival 
<http://www.kappafuturfestival.it/2015/it/>. 

Head east to find Barriera di Milano 
<http://www.comune.torino.it/urbanbarriera/>, a once-deprived quarter now 
blooming with artists’ studios and microbusinesses in places such as the 1912 
warehouse complex Docks Dora, which is flanked by another showpiece reclamation 
project,Parco Aurelio Peccei 
<http://www.comune.torino.it/verdepubblico/2015/parchigiardini15/nuovo-parco-aurelio-peccei.shtml>
. Just south of Barriera di Milano, in Aurora, lies the nascentLavazza quarter 
<http://nuvola.lavazza.it/>, soon to house the coffee giant’s new HQ, and down 
the road is cultural hubFitzlab <http://www.fitzlab.it/>, artist collective 
Diogene <http://www.progettodiogene.eu/?lang=en> and Teatro Espace 
<http://www.salaespace.it/>. Hugging the other side of the Dora Riparia river 
in Vanchiglia isFoster + Partners <http://www.fosterandpartners.com/>’ 
curvaceous new Campus Luigi Einaudi, while to the west in Borgo Dora is 
performance venueCortile del Maglio <http://cortiledelmaglio.it/> and writing 
schoolScuola Holden <http://scuolaholden.it/en/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437662292666%2F363c289c-bb06-48e1-ae8c-4ce9900f0985-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437662292666%2F363c289c-bb06-48e1-ae8c-4ce9900f0985-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Parco Dora. Photograph: Giulio Giacconi 
Of course, Turin doesn’t get it right every time. To the south, the Olympic 
Village’s shopping complex is an abandoned shell, and while biking around this 
pancake-flat metropolis should be a breeze, the cycle network is patchy and you 
have to sign up in advance before you can pick up a bright yellow[TO]BIKE 
<http://www.tobike.it/> from one of the city’s 116 docking stations.

Top 10 restaurants in Turin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/22/top-10-restaurants-turin-italy> 
Also, it’s important not to overlook two areas that have already “up and 
come”. The gentrifying southern district of San Salvario still offers the best 
bars andapericena in town, particularly around the crossroads of via 
Sant’Anselmo and via Giuseppe Baretti. And a trip further south toLingotto 
<http://www.lingottofiere.it/>, home of the Fiat mothership, is a must, if only 
to relive scenes from The Italian Job on its service ramp. Here you can dine at 
slow food emporiumEataly <http://www.eataly.net/it_en/> and get even closer to 
the future inside Renzo Piano’s ground-breaking “bioclimatic” (naturally 
ventilated and cooled) skyscraper,Intesa SanPaolo Tower 
<http://www.rpbw.com/project/82/intesa-sanpaolo-office-building/>, complete 
with rooftop greenhouse.

Music/clubs/festival scene

By Giorgio Valletta, DJ and co-organiser of electronic music festival Club To 
Club <http://clubtoclub.it/2015-en>

 #raveon at Bunker 
Turin has always been, in spirit, a laboratory. Half of Italy’s best dance and 
electronic music is produced here. If you’re coming for a weekend of 
spontaneous live music, you should definitely head for San Salvario or 
Vanchiglia. The latter quarter is more progressive and artistic, while San 
Salvario offers lots of intimate bars with live music and DJs. For me,Blah Blah 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Blah-Blah-Blah/161124700675496> is the de facto 
central venue. It’s got a rock and indie identity but dips into disco and rave 
too. Hop east across the river Po to findCap 10100 <http://www.cap10100.it/>, a 
new live rock spot attracting a younger crowd.

I have a daily show called Primo Ascolto 
<http://www.radioflash.to/programmi/primoascolto/> on Radio Flash and often 
head to San Salvario’sAstoria <http://www.astoria-studios.com/> to track down 
emerging international artists such as multi-faceted Canadian producer, singer 
and songwriterGrimes <http://www.4ad.com/artists/grimes>. Vaghe Stelle, 
<https://www.facebook.com/vaghestelle> Turin’s leading electronica outfit, also 
plays here.
I Robots aka Gianluca Pandullo’s Turin playlist 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/6pfuwNetc398px3qZ0ej6C> 
In Lingotto, there’s Hiroshima Mon Amour <http://www.hiroshimamonamour.org/>, 
a real institution based in a former school. It made its name by launching 
Torinesi rock, punk, reggae and pop acts before adding electronica to the mix. 
We have a very fertile local electronica scene and one of the most important 
festivals isTOdays <http://www.todaysfestival.com/>, an August (28, 29, 30 in 
2015) three-dayer withsPAZIO 211 <http://www.spazio211.com/> as its key venue.

Two other important festivals are October’s Movement 
<http://www.movement.it/2015/it/>, which majors on house and techno, and Club 
To Club <http://clubtoclub.it/2015-en/>, my November festival, which attracted 
40,000 people last year. We’ve shifted away from DJs a tad towards live 
electronica and guests such as Four Tet, Todd Terje and Jamie xx.

Another must is #raveon at Bunker <http://www.variantebunker.com/> in Barriera 
di Milano, an important club night running from September to June and organised 
byWe Play the Music We Love 
<https://www.facebook.com/WePlayTheMusicWeLove?_rdr=p>.

I think Turin always pushes the agenda musically, but there’s also a 
hedonistic streak. It’s this combination that makes Turin so different and 
inspiring.

Where to eat and drink


By Maurizio Bray, co-founder of food blog Torino by GNAM! 
<http://www.torinobygnam.it/>, with chef Vassily Andrusyshyn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437663319032%2Faea82b86-7571-46f3-b0b5-eb8a3641bf48-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437663319032%2Faea82b86-7571-46f3-b0b5-eb8a3641bf48-2060x1236.jpeg>
 San Salvario is the hotspot for restaurants and innovative cafes. Photograph: 
Daniele Baldi/Demotix 
Historically, the Piemontesi are introverts, but Turin is becoming more open, 
embracing organic wine and food, new ingredients such as lemongrass and ginger, 
and new international flavours.


Although it’s saturated, San Salvario is still the hotspot. I really like La 
Cuite <https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Cuite/104592389624939> (Via Baretti 
11/G 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/La+cuite/@45.0580241,7.6802761,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x1f2fa399893c2e19>
), a vineria and cocktail bar full of young people and serving tapas at 
reasonable prices. A few minutes around the corner isORSO 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/ORSO-Laboratorio-Caff%C3%A8/288837544610941>, a 
2014 coffee “laboratory” serving feisty arabica and robusta from around the 
globe. It’s linked to artisan gelateriaMara dei Boschi 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Mara-dei-Boschi/420566211329859> (Via 
Berthollet 30/H 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Via+Claudio+Luigi+Berthollet,+30,+10125+Torino,+Italy/@45.0580151,7.6837997,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47886d42cd7ad367:0xa0fe2e16d8b46e96>
) – try the mouthwatering, cream-free, marotto chocolate flavour.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437586841605%2F85550dc4-44f6-45c0-bcf8-418a4cebadf4-2060x1147.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437586841605%2F85550dc4-44f6-45c0-bcf8-418a4cebadf4-2060x1147.jpeg>
 Artisan gelateria Mara dei Boschi. Photograph: Daniele Baldi/Demotix 
Traditional Piemontese cuisine is rich and filling, with dishes heavy on 
butter, truffles and broths. Foragnolotti Piemontese and the like, head to 
Ristorante Monferrato <http://www.ristorantemonferrato.com/> (Via Monferrato 6 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Via+Monferrato,+6,+10131+Torino,+Italy/@45.0630653,7.7000928,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x4788729e9b60bb09:0x2b7b8ec8b303a2bd>
), founded in the leafy surrounds of Borgo Po in 1820.

The foodie traveller in Turin, at the Slow Food festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/20/slow-food-festival-turn-salone-del-gusto>
Coming up, I see three big foodie trends in Turin. First, there’s the rise of 
“conscious cuisine”: organic, vegetarian and gluten-freepiatti served in light, 
bright eateries such asBelfood Cucina <http://www.belfoodristorante.com/> in 
San Salvario, (Via Belfiore 15 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Via+Belfiore,+15,+10125+Torino,+Italy/@45.0523122,7.6898573,14.65z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47886d43b7cc3585:0x908308f1f8174473>
) and the centralCristina Perino 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g187855-d2389045-Reviews-Cristina_Perino-Turin_Province_of_Turin_Piedmont.html>
 (Via Carlo Alberto 28 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Via+Carlo+Alberto,+28,+10123+Torino,+Italy/@45.0645884,7.6833364,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47886d68d338c565:0xa481363775786b43>
).

Secondly, there’s an emergence of street food, catering for the city’s growing 
university population. You can tuck intopane con la milza, a fried beef spleen 
sandwich from Sicily, at places such asSole di Sicilia 
<http://www.soledisicilia.eu/> (Via Livorno 6 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Via+Livorno,+6,+10144+Torino,+Italy/@45.0828843,7.6669066,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47886da8ecbe83fb:0xd35a0af08dc5d0b1>
). And thirdly, our food culture is becoming more international. For example, at
Dora in Poi <http://www.dorainpoi.eu/> (Via Catania 21 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Dora+In+Poi+Srl/@45.076025,7.6965175,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47886d7f10205381:0x9cdc4a394e03e247>
) in Vanchiglietta, the restaurant where Vassily and I work, all our base 
ingredients are Piemontese – such as rice, garlic and salmon – but we have 
created dishes with influences from northern Europe, Asia and South America, so 
you’ll see plenty of ceviche, dim sum, ramen-style soup and quinoa. Vassily’s 
minestronedi frutta verdura, tiny pieces of peach, pineapple and mango dotted 
with gianduja chocolate, has changed my life!

I would say Vanchiglia will be Turin’s key emerging quarter over the next 
couple of years. It used to be full of workshops, but the opening ofCampus 
Luigi Einaudi 
<http://inhabitat.com/foster-partnerss-campus-luigi-einaudi-is-an-urban-oasis-with-massive-skylit-courtyards/>
 has swept in places such asPai Bikery <http://www.paibikery.com/>, a bike 
workshop-cum-cafe serving brunches of fruit pancakes and excellent salads. My 
final recommendation isMagazzino 52 
<https://www.facebook.com/magazzino52/info?tab=overview>, a contemporary 
enoteca (wine shop) opened this summer by Graziano Cipriano, serving 
trad-meets-international dishes and a bargain €20 fixed menu.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437662805788%2F8a88c649-1117-4ac5-8599-1df6a1b8ba60-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437662805788%2F8a88c649-1117-4ac5-8599-1df6a1b8ba60-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Pai Bakery. Photograph: Giulio Giacconi 
Torino is really a big village with a provincial feel, but there is a niche 
for people with an appetite for something different. The pace of change is just 
slower than Milan: slow food, slow change.


Arts/creative


By Ginevra Pucci and Stefania Poddighe, co-founders of November art fair 
Flashback <http://www.flashback.to.it/>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437667125171%2F67293995-09b8-46b8-b283-60a3a04eb166-2060x1025.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437667125171%2F67293995-09b8-46b8-b283-60a3a04eb166-2060x1025.jpeg>
 Museo Ettore Fico. Photograph: Daniele Baldi/Demotix 
There’s currently a trend among the young to open new spaces across the city. 
That said, Turin’s creative scene is quite underground, so you have to seek out 
the best work. At its vanguard is the historic quarter of Barriera di Milano, 
which is being transformed by an influx of artists and galleries. The 2014 
opening ofMuseo Ettore Fico <http://www.museofico.it/en/> has proved a tipping 
point. There’s a small exhibition of Fico’s vibrant landscapes, but where it 
really excels is in combining art and design with experimental theatre, dance 
and debates in a modern space. Close by there are lots of studios and galleries 
such asGAS <http://www.gasart.it/pages/index.aspx>, which champions local 
talents like sculptor Fabio Viale. South of here isGalleria Franco Noero 
<http://www.franconoero.com/>, which shows mixed media work by Lara Favaretto 
and others.

“Next, I’d recommend heading south-west to explore established creative 
hotspots such asFondazione Merz <http://fondazionemerz.org/en/>, which is great 
for live music, andFondazione Sandretto Re Rebaudengo <http://www.fsrr.org/>, 
which works closely with young artists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437667226568%2F756de674-a570-4172-8de6-39cde6e4f410-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Turin%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Falternative-city-guide-turin-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437667226568%2F756de674-a570-4172-8de6-39cde6e4f410-1020x612.jpeg>
 An exhibit at Galleria Franco Noero. Photograph: 
facebook.com/pages/Galleria-Franco-Noero 
Across the city, in Vanchiglia, you’ll find affordable works at new galleries 
such asNOPX <http://www.nopx.it/>, which excels at photography, and at Van Der 
<http://www.vandergallery.com/> and Quartz <http://www.quartzstudio.net/>, both 
strong on below-the-radar creatives. Just north over the river is cultural 
centreCripta747 <https://www.facebook.com/Cripta747/timeline>, a hub for 
Italian curators and artists.

Even the upmarket shopping and gallery district around via della Rocca offers 
surprises such as cool clothing storeTAF 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Tiramis%C3%B9-alle-Fragole/155225114533972>, 
and it’s always worth visiting Lingotto’s expos to discover the next big thing 
in design.

We hold our Flashback <http://flashback.to.it/> art fair – which explores 
historical and modern art in a contemporary way – in early November (5-8). The 
whole world comes to town that week because there’s also the design festival
Operae <http://operae.biz/>, art fairs Artissima <http://www.artissima.it/> and 
The Others <http://www.theothersfair.com/#homepage>, and emerging talent 
showcaseParatissima <http://paratissima.it/_/>.

It doesn’t matter when art was made; it’s all contemporary. It’s the emotion 
that it prompts in us today that’s the key.

Readers’ tips and Instagram

There’s no better guide to a city than word-of-mouth recommendations - from 
people who live there and people who have visited. We asked our readers to 
share their favourite experiences andInstagram pictures 
<http://gu.com/p/4bx5z/stw> of Turin. These are just a few with more here 
<http://gu.com/p/4bx5x/stw>:

Il Balon di Torino <http://www.ilbalon.it/> and Gelateria Popolare
Get up early and head down to the Balon behind the Piazza della Repubblica, or 
Porta Palazzo as it’s more commonly known. It’s a big flea market where you 
will find a treasure chest of knick-knacks, cheap second-hand and vintage 
clothes, paintings, electronics, furniture, bikes ... the list goes on. If you 
get tired of rummaging for bargains, stop for a break atGelateria Popolare 
<http://www.gelateriapopolare.com/> for the best ice-cream in the city. 
Hannah Brew
 Il Balon di Torino. Photograph: Hannah Brew 
Egyptian Museum <http://www.museoegizio.it/en/>
You need several hours to explore its four floors and many exhibits – from the 
Book of the Dead to grave goods, and the myriad statues of all sizes. I also 
loved watching ancient carved figures and hieroglyphs being restored by a 
specialist.
Rossi Writes


Mulassano Cafè <http://www.caffemulassano.com/en/>
Built in pure Art Nouveau style and opened in 1907, Mulassano is a little gem 
of a cafe with just a few tables (three inside plus four outside in spring and 
summer). Mulassano invented the “tramezzino” sandwich, similar to those you’d 
find at an English afternoon tea, which every visitor should try.
Fabrizio Zanelli


Instagram snapshots: Turin through the eyes of locals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/27/instagram-snapshots-turin-through-the-eyes-of-locals>
Circolo dei lettor <http://www.circololettori.it/>
A great building in the beautiful Palazzo Graneri della Roccia dedicated to 
the public for reading. Come to be inspired – by the beautiful artwork of the 
building, the antique furniture or the regular events and talks by authors and 
professional speakers. You must ring a bell and enter a code at the gates in 
the courtyard before entering, which heightens the sense of enchantment. It’s 
the perfect spot in the city to indulge in Italian culture.
Lucy Serlenga

Culture, shopping, food and drink
Take a peek inside Palazzo Scaglia di Verrua 
<http://www.museotorino.it/view/s/837c3502cfe14fac968b9dc725a09c81> – it’s a 
gem, like most hidden courtyards in our palazzi. For shopping, go toPiazza 
Benefica market 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Mercato-Piazza-Benefica/142692675775430> and 
grab discounted designer gear and other bargains. At night, check out theJazz 
Club Torino <http://www.jazzclub.torino.it/> in Piazza Valdo Fusi and the 
birreria <http://%20baladin/>next to it for amazing local beers. Look for the 
Maestro del Gusto (Master of Taste) sign of quality outside delicatessens, 
eateries and bars.
Giorgia Pigato

• Thanks to Fondazione Ordine Architetti Torino 
<http://www.to.archiworld.it/OTO/Engine/RAServePG.php/P/26591OTO2112> and Casa 
Filiberto 
<http://www.bed-and-breakfast.it/en/piedmont/casa-filiberto-torino/22636> for 
their guidance and support
 