
My new book, Bodies of Light, follows the heroine Ally from home through 
school to medical training in a hospital in the 1880s, a path away from a 
dysfunctional family towards selfhood defined by success as one of the first 
female doctors in Britain.

I'm interested in writing about institutions because they are almost always in 
some sense utopian projects, attempts to intervene in the ways of the world. 
Schools, hospitals, orphanages, reformatories of all kinds, begin with the idea 
that an organisation could make things better, redress some of the damage we do 
to each other. And usually, whether they succeed in the original aim or not, 
institutions end up doing damage of their own, because power corrupts and 
visions don't work in practice and we are all hopeful but fallen beings.

I find hospitals particularly fascinating because of the harmony or discord 
between the stories of nurses, patients and doctors, and because of the 
complicated relationships between power, suffering and healing. Even in the 
late 19th century of my novel when far more people were born and died at home, 
hospitals were by definition sites of major life events shaped by institutional 
ritual.

1–5: in the asylum
Every novelist loves a madhouse. We spend hours in the company of imaginary 
friends ourselves and the research is more fun and easier to fudge than 
learning about cardiology or neurosurgery.

1. Regeneration by Pat Barker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/pat-barker-regeneration-bookclub>

Set in Craiglockhart Hospital in Edinburgh during the first world war, Pat 
Barker's Booker prize winner focuses on the work of Dr William Rivers with 
victims of shell-shock and trauma. The hospital is a place of healing, where 
there is some space for attempts to redress the damage of war, but it is in the 
end a military institution that exacts the final loyalty of its most ambitious 
employees. In a novel with few female characters, the exploration of different 
kinds of masculinity in a time of war is deeply engaging.

2. One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest by Ken Kesey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/nov/12/guardianobituaries.books>

The fictional child of RD Laing and Foucault, a novel in which the asylum is a 
prison for the punishment of those who have offended social norms without 
breaking the law. There is nothing redemptive about this hospital, where the 
authorities represented by "The Combine" use every tactic from lying and 
manipulation to lobotomy to control patients.

3. Faces in the Water by Janet Frame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jan/30/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>

Frame's writing is always beautiful. A fictionalised account of her own 
incarceration, written with such lightness of touch that it's exhilarating to 
read despite the grim subject.

4. The Bell Jar by Sylvia Plath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/01/sylviaplath>

Bible of generations of clever and misunderstood teenage girls, Plath's 
coming-of-age novel seems to affirm a connection between madness and 
creativity. Esther Greenwood, taking an English degree at an elite women's 
college not unlike Plath's, sees a rapidly approaching choice between marriage 
and a literary career. Unable to commit to either, her actions become 
increasingly chaotic until she attempts suicide and is admitted first to a 
state hospital and then, following the intervention of the novelist who funds 
her university scholarship, to a private institution where she is kindly 
treated by female doctors and nurses. This hospital becomes the complement to 
Esther's college education, a place where she can learn possible modes of 
survival for an intelligent woman in 1950s America.

5. The Quickening Maze by Adam Foulds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/02/the-quickening-maze>

Based on the true and strange overlap of John Clare and Alfred Tennyson in a 
Victorian lunatic asylum (only Clare was a patient), Foulds's novel is a model 
of the beauty that can be achieved with a restricted setting and characters 
dictated by the historical record.

6-10: The best hospital novels explore the relationships between clinical 
healing and less measurable kinds of recovery

6. Cutting for Stone by Abraham Verghese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/09/abraham-verghese-cutting-for-stone>

Something of a blockbuster, set mostly in Addis Ababa where gifted doctors 
wash up one by one in an under-resourced but profoundly humane institution. 
Verghese is a doctor himself, which shows in the depth of the portrayals of 
medical establishments in Ethiopia and the US. Relationships between doctors 
structure a narrative that also explores the limits of what medicine can do for 
individual patients and for nation states. A shame about the pile-up of 
coincidences at the end …

7. The Memory of Love by Aminatta Forna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/18/memory-of-love-aminatta-forna>

In a similar vein to Cutting for Stone, a novel set in Sierra Leone in the 
years after the civil war, where talented local doctors drift reluctantly 
towards emigration while Europeans arrive full of missionary zeal. Adrian 
Lockheart (hard not to hear the echo of Craiglockhart) is a psychologist come 
from London to share expertise in PTSD, is almost overwhelmed by the ubiquity 
of extreme trauma. Kai Mansaray, an orthopaedic surgeon who grew up and lived 
through the civil war, wields more obvious solutions to individual suffering. 
Neither of them shares the complicated and possibly guilty knowledge of Elias 
Cole, an academic who has survived to old age in a brutal regime. Forma 
explores the complicated motivations for "helping people".

8. The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/mar/04/booker-club-english-patient-ondaatje>

Another novel set in a wartime hospital, winning the Booker the year after 
Regeneration. Four damaged people find themselves and each other in an Italian 
villa being used as a field hospital at the end of the second world war. The 
English patient, László Almásy – who is in fact not English – knows that he is 
dying. As he sinks and surfaces on morphine, he tells the story of his affair 
with a married Englishwoman in north Africa. There is no prospect of physical 
healing, for Almásy nor, by the time the atomic bombs have fallen at the end, 
for the world, but narrative has belated and secondary consolations of its own.

9. Middlemarch by George Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/28/middlemarch-george-eliot-martin-amis-as-byatt>

Middlemarch tends to be the one novel taught in medical schools, as if the 
very name ofGeorge Eliot <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot> has 
healing powers. Very little of the novel is set in the town's hospital, but Dr 
Lydgate's project to bring reform to local medical practice represents his 
doomed optimism about the future of provincial life and English medicine.

10. The Magic Mountain by Thomas Mann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/sep/07/fromthearchives.thomasmann>

The literature of the sanatorium probably deserves a list of its own, but 
Mann's classic is one of the first and best studies of institutional life. The 
reader is never entirely sure if the hero, Hans Castorp, is really ill or 
succumbing to the pleasures of institutionalisation. In an Alpine sanatorium 
for tuberculosis at the beginning of the 20th century, the rituals of 
mealtimes, carefully prescribed walks, rests and consultations leave the 
patients little to do but watch each other and try not to think about death.
 