
As anyone looking forward to 68-year-old Dolly Parton's new album and world 
tour will attest, many musicians' best work can come in later life – despite 
how obsessed the industry is with youth and the next big thing. Here, we take a 
look at some of the elder statesmen and women of music, still rocking in their 
sixth decade and beyond, and proving that the older generation can give as good 
as the likes ofthe 11-year-old Willow Smith 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymKLymvwD2U>. But who are your favourite 
artists who have carried on producing new music well past their eligibility for 
a free bus pass? Let us know in the thread below.


David Bowie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S4R8HTIgHUU>

After a ten year hiatus in which he pretty much kept quiet apart from a live 
appearance alongside Arcade Fire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z6c9Ejfu-iU>, 
the 67-year-old musical chameleon burst back onto the scene with 2013'sThe Next 
Day <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/25/david-bowie-next-day-review>
. The critically acclaimed, chart-topping album ended up on many critics' 
albums of the year lists, proving that age is no barrier to creating fresh, 
relevant music.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS4R8HTIgHUU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS4R8HTIgHUU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS4R8HTIgHUU&media=>
Dolly Parton <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5dxGifkqlWY>


The queen of country' 42nd studio album, Blue Smoke 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Smoke_%28album%29>, is released in the UK 
this month – and it's already scored Parton's highest ever charting position in 
the US, received positive reviews across the board.Slate said 
<http://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2014/05/dolly-parton-blue-smoke-review.html>
: "Finding a strong balance between art and slick, Parton continues walking a 
line of what people expect and her heart. She just gets better with age."

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5dxGifkqlWY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5dxGifkqlWY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5dxGifkqlWY&media=>
Bobby Womack <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1UgjV0-bRFA>


Womack <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobby-womack>, legendary 
singer-songwriter, somehow managed to producea hit album  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/dec/03/best-albums-2012-bobby-womack>
during a time when he was hospitalised for pneumonia, and later diagnosed with 
colon cancer, in 2012. (He gavethis interview with Alexis Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/24/bobby-womack-sing-better-before> 
from his hospital bedside). The record, his first original material since 
1994's Resurrection, was produced withDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn> and Richard Russell 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Russell_%28XL_Recordings%29> and released 
onXL <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XL_Recordings>. 

Womack has stated that his passion for music returned 
<http://www.contactmusic.com/news/bobby-womack-thanks-gorillaz-for-inspiring-comeback_1241991>
 after he collaborated withGorillaz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/gorillaz>
. "I told my...driver to pull over and get my guitar and bring a a pad and I 
wrote about 20 songs. My thoughts were running crazy. I was like, 'Thank God, 
that's the feeling I wanted back'."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1UgjV0-bRFA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1UgjV0-bRFA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1UgjV0-bRFA&media=>
Leonard Cohen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rj9ymUBBB60>


Leonard Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> has been 
making music for over four decades, and his is latest album,Old Ideas 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Old_Ideas>, scored the then-77 year old's highest 
ever position in the Billboard chart.The New York Times described Old Ideas as 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/29/arts/music/leonard-cohen-reckons-with-god-in-old-ideas.html?_r=1>
 "an autumnal album, musing on memories and final reckonings, but it also has a 
gleam in its eye. It grapples once again with topics Mr. Cohen has pondered 
throughout his career: love, desire, faith, betrayal, redemption."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drj9ymUBBB60&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drj9ymUBBB60>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drj9ymUBBB60&media=>
Cher <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjPWL-23w-w>


Cher, 68, released her 25th album in 2013, Closer to the Truth 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closer_to_the_Truth_%28Cher_album%29>. The first 
single,Woman's World <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjPWL-23w-w>, hit No.1 on 
the Billboard Hot Dance/Club Songs. The video features Cher wearing a hilarious 
wig made out of streams of newspaper cuttings, and is not to be missed.Idolator 
<http://www.idolator.com/7485605/chers-closer-to-the-truth-album-review> called 
Closer to the Truth: "one of Cher's most engaging albums, a strong collection 
of pop tunes the world would be wise to pick up."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJjPWL-23w-w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJjPWL-23w-w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJjPWL-23w-w&media=>
Johnny Cash <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGrR-7_OBpA>


Despite consistently making terrific music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLP40cmU3D0> throughout a career of almost 
half a century, some ofCash <https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnnycash>'s 
best and most well known songs came late in his career – see his series of 
America albums produced withRick Rubin <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rick_Rubin>
, and seminal covers ofIf You Could Read My Mind 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xEx147n9G1A>, First Time Ever I Saw Your Face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EdSIlVZhsDw>, Hurt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3aF9AJm0RFc> and One 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGrR-7_OBpA>, among others. 


The musician was still active when he died of diabetes complications, aged 73. 
His record,America V: A Hundred Highways 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_V:_A_Hundred_Highways>, was released 
posthumously in 2006 andAmerica VI: Ain't No Grave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/28/johnny-cash-american-vi-cd-review>
 in 2010.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCGrR-7_OBpA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCGrR-7_OBpA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCGrR-7_OBpA&media=> 