
The face of celebrity has changed dramatically in recent years. That’s not a 
cheap shot at Kylie Jenner’s lip fillers – it’s true. Aside from tabloids such 
as the Daily Mail which uphold the old-school ideals of celeb reportage (three 
Cs: credulity, censoriousness and a concerted effort to divide women up into 
their constituent body parts), the advent of the meme age has transformed the 
way we talk about famous people. Where once stars seemed distant, aloof and 
mysterious, the rise of social media has generated an artificial sense of 
closeness.

In the contest of memes, the Olympics takes the gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/14/olympics-lochte-phelps-yuanhui-smooth>
The two worlds collided last month when Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie announced 
their divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/brangelina-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce-love>
. It was a revelation that resurrected the pre-web celeb narrative of Jennifer 
Aniston v Brangelina: the idea that Jolie stole Aniston’s husband and left her 
single, childless and old (well, 35 at the time, but she is a woman). Aside 
from Jolie’s 2012 leg fandango,where her bizarre determination to showcase her 
right leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2012/feb/28/angelina-jolie-right-leg-oscar>
 through a slit in her dress prompted araft of mocking photoshop jobs 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/angelina-jolie-s-leg>, the trio aren’t really 
meme material, being old-school celebs who avoid social media and whose public 
outings usually only projected the one expression: smug marrieds.

Luckily there was still Aniston, whose time on Friends had generated feelings 
of faux-intimacy among fans (it is the ultimate millennial series, after all), 
as well as providing endlessly memeable footage of her expressing the full 
gamut of emotions, all of which meant social media users were able to convert 
the breakdown of a family into viral fun. The resulting memes, mostly 
repurposed Friends screengrabs, consisted of Aniston looking triumphant at the 
demise of the evil Brangelina.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff124cb87c7e39740579cff6a00bb6987bae88c4d%2F0_0_632_877%2F632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff124cb87c7e39740579cff6a00bb6987bae88c4d%2F0_0_632_877%2F632.jpg>
 The New York Post’s reaction to the Brangelina split. Photograph: 
Twitter/@nypost 
Harambe the gorilla: whose meme is it anyway?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/18/harambe-the-gorilla-and-the-month-in-memes>
Notably, US tabloid the New York Post decided to capitalise on this, and its 
cover channelled the proliferation of memes with a picture of Aniston laughing 
under the headline “Brangelina 2004-2016”. That this was widely perceived as 
being excessively crass spoke volumes about the new mode of celebrity coverage. 
The internet may have made our relationship with celebrities more intrusive, 
intimate and presumptuous, but it has been tempered by a tone that is often 
affectionate and amateur; even professional coverage on sites such as Buzzfeed 
makes itself out to be breathless fan art (“23 times Taylor Swift was right 
about life”, etc). Yet a powerful celeb-shaming outlet like the Post simply 
cannot co-opt that mood; when it tries to, it looks try-hard and strange, sort 
of likeAngelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> trying 
to show people her leg.

Slightly more serious than the marital problems of the super-wealthy are the 
recent exploits of a web-based frog. Before Dat Boi and Kermit, the frog meme 
scene was dominated by a single anthropomorphic amphibian.Pepe The Frog began 
life as a character in a 00s comic called Boy’s Club. In the following years he 
gained widespread popularity: his likeness became shorthand for a number of 
“feels” (sadness, smugness, optimism), and his lo-fi Microsoft Paint aesthetic 
made him one of the most visually distinctive characters on the web.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F327e46c3ab049358fad80575146be9e0e65686e7%2F0_56_1023_614%2F1023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F327e46c3ab049358fad80575146be9e0e65686e7%2F0_56_1023_614%2F1023.jpg>
 Pepe the Frog. Photograph: Public Domain 
It’s fair to say then that his trajectory took something of a left-turn in 
September, when theAnti-Defamation League made the decision to declare Pepe a 
hate symbol 
<http://www.adl.org/combating-hate/hate-on-display/c/pepe-the-frog.html?referrer=https://www.google.co.uk/#.V_5paDYrJdA>
. Like most bizarre and depressing things that have happened in recent months, 
it has something to do with one Donald Trump. In October of last year, the 
Republican candidate retweeted a fan illustration that merged his likeness with 
Pepe’s. Then, last month, Donald Trump’s son Donald Trump posted a doctored 
parody of the poster for action film The Expendables on Instagram with the 
reappropriated epithet The Deplorables (a reference to Hillary Clinton 
categorising half of Trump supporters as belonging to “a basket of 
deplorables”). Alongside conspiracy theorist Alex Jones and internet troll du 
jour Milo Yiannopoulos, there stood Pepe the frog. How did he end up there?

It was thanks to the Trump-supporting white nationalist movement widely 
referred to as the alt-right. They have spent the past few years co-opting Pepe 
into their world via a series of racist memes, which in turn made him a symbol 
for those views. It’s a sad demise for a meme that was once a favourite for so 
many. More importantly, it’s a scary indication of the internet-savviness of 
Trump supporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc418b83ad9bc9a5869a3bd727d7cd8c857e1598%2F0_0_626_934%2F626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc418b83ad9bc9a5869a3bd727d7cd8c857e1598%2F0_0_626_934%2F626.jpg>
 Donald Trump reimagined as Pepe the Frog. Photograph: Twitter/@codyave 
Speaking of things that give you nightmares, one unhappy customer recently 
took to Facebook after sampling some Sainsbury’s vegan cheese, telling the 
supermarket to “Call it Gary or something just don’t call it cheese because 
it’s not cheese!” Sainsbury’s responded by mocking up a packet of “Gary” in a 
tweet, which was shared thousands of times by approving users.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3dd38a52ab35a79cf3ec70ab742cd736a11f0ad%2F0_0_631_875%2F631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20Brangelina%3A%20the%20internet%20reacts%20the%20only%20way%20it%20knows%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrangelina-trump-pepe-frog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3dd38a52ab35a79cf3ec70ab742cd736a11f0ad%2F0_0_631_875%2F631.jpg>
 Sainsbury’s “Gary”. Photograph: Twitter/@sainsburys 
It’s a sign of these strange times that broadcasting the fact your products 
don’t do what they say on the tin can still be a masterclass in marketing and 
also an important lesson for shops: next time someone criticises your product 
on sicial media, don’t play it down – make it a meme.
 