
Time to move on. That was the message from the home secretary when she 
announced that the government would not be holding apublic inquiry into the 
clashes between police and miners at the Orgreave coking plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
during the year-long pit strike 32 years ago. Different world in 1984, said 
Amber Rudd. It was a long time ago. No point in raking over the past.

The site of the coking plant is now Sheffield University’s hugely successful 
advanced manufacturing centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/08/orgreave-hope-miners-fought-lost>
, a place that brings together academics and business to ensure the best 
research has a commercial end product. To the extent that there was ever a plan 
in the 1980s, this was it. The mines, the shipyards, the textile mills and the 
engineering plants were being shut down because they could not compete but 
would be be replaced by gleaming-new centres of high-tech industrial excellence.


'Half of UK deficit is result of job destruction in older industrial areas'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/half-of-uk-deficit-is-result-of-job-destruction-in-older-industrial-areas>
We know now that Sheffield’s advanced manufacturing sector is the exception 
not the rule. The story of the past 30 years has been the relentless 
hollowing-out of industrial Britain, the single biggest change to the British 
economy in the postwar era. It is a continuing saga that was still in its early 
stages when Margaret Thatcher sent in the cavalry to deal with the striking 
colliers.


That there will be no public inquiry into what happened that day in 1984 at 
least shows some consistency. Why? Because there has never been a satisfactory 
explanation for why Britain’s industrial heartlands were allowed to rot in the 
subsequent three decades either.


Gordon Brown noted last week  
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/devolution/2016/11/revolt-regions-could-gordon-brown-s-federal-uk-plan-become-labour-brexit>
that the UK has in effect become two countries, with the prosperous south-east 
decoupling from a permanently struggling north. Brown was right about that, but 
de-industrialisation continued apace during his time as chancellor and prime 
minister.

Manufacturing’s share of the economy has almost halved since Labour came to 
power in 1997. Since the mid-1990s, the north-west has shed 212,000 
manufacturing jobs – almost two-fifths of the total. Productivity in London is 
30% above the national average; in all the other big cities of the UK – 
including Manchester, Glasgow, Liverpool and Sheffield – it is well below the 
national average. What’s more, the gap between London and other UK cities has 
got bigger over the last decade despite the impact of the financial crisis on 
the City.

As manufacturing declined, so the financial sector grew more powerful. 
Financial liberalisation was going on apace when the factories were closing in 
the name of market forces in the early 1980s; within 18 months of the miners’ 
strike ending the City was being transformed and expanded by Big Bang.

All advanced economies have seen the size of their manufacturing sectors 
shrink since the 1980s. Bruce Springsteen was singing about lost jobs in the 
American rust belt inMy Hometown, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77gKSp8WoRg> 
a song that came out in the year of Orgreave, and blue-collar anger and 
resentment has been a big factor in the 2016 race for the White House.


The Republicans and Democrats failed blue-collar America. The left behind are 
now having their say | Thomas Frank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/republicans-and-democrats-fail-blue-collar-america>
But the decline has been far more pronounced in Britain. America remains a 
formidable industrial power, with world-beating companies across a range of 
sectors. The same could not be said of the UK, where the loss of manufacturing 
capacity has resulted in a chronic balance of payments deficit and an economy 
over-reliant on debt-driven growth.

The deleterious consequences of this profound change in the economy were kept 
hidden for a surprisingly long time. First, the windfall from North Sea oil 
disguised a growing manufacturing trade deficit and allowed governments to 
massage the jobless figures by shifting people off unemployment benefit and 
into long-term sickness.

Labour had a different approach between 1997 and 2010. It took the tax 
receipts from asset-price booms in the south and recycled them into higher 
public spending in the north. Then the bubbles went pop, the money ran out and 
the cuts began.

A new report by Christina Beatty and Steve Fothergill from Sheffield Hallam 
University 
<http://www4.shu.ac.uk/research/cresr/sites/shu.ac.uk/files/cresr30th-jobs-welfare-austerity.pdf>
brings the story up to date. They show how the destruction of industrial jobs 
has fuelled spending on welfare benefits and in turn intensified the budgetary 
problems of successive governments.

The trends of the last three decades are captured in a series of maps of the 
UK, which show the concentrations of industrial job losses, incapacity-related 
benefit claimant rates, spending on tax credits, and the anticipated losses by 
2020-21 of all the welfare reforms introduced since the coalition government 
came to power in 2010.
Job losses 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/job_losses-zip/giv-1406RjzOXiorOqPV/>
The maps are pretty much identical. Major job losses since the early 1980s 
were heaviest in the central belt of Scotland, the north-east of England, along 
a line that stretches along the M62 from Liverpool to Hull, and extends 
southwards down the M1 into the Midlands. There is a similar distribution for 
incapacity benefits, tax credits and projected losses from welfare cuts.

Spending power was removed from these older industrial areas 30 or so years 
ago and has never been replaced. Employment rates lag well behind those in the 
more prosperous parts of Britain and well-paid jobs in factories or in the 
mines have been replaced by low-paid jobs in call centres and distribution 
warehouses. The problem is a lack of effective demand, and cutting welfare 
benefits will make the problem worse not better.

Beatty and Fothergill have had a decent stab at calculating how much the 
destruction of industrial Britain in the 1980s is costing the state. They add 
up the higher incidence of people on incapacity-related benefits, the greater 
reliance on tax credits and other top-up payments, and the higher levels of 
claimant-count unemployment and estimate the total is £20bn-£30bn. Part of the 
difficulty in being more precise is that there is no hard and fast definition 
of what constitutes older industrial Britain.

Even if the lower estimate is right, it is still a colossal sum. As the report 
notes: “The financial crisis of 2008 is not the defining event in Britain’s 
recent economic history, nor even the main cause of the present budget deficit. 
The source of many current problems lies deeper in the destruction of Britain’s 
industrial base in the 1980s and all that has flowed from it.”

George Osborne talked when he was chancellor of creating a “northern 
powerhouse”. Theresa May has made all the right noises about reviving the 
struggling parts of Britain. Yet, the truth is that Britain does not really 
have an active regional policy. It has competition between poor areas for 
relatively small dollops of money and it has devolved power to local government 
that will give them the responsibility of implementing cuts. This, though, does 
not remotely match up to the scale of the challenge of making up for the 
mistakes and the neglect of the past.

Policymakers should read this report. So should anybody who wants to 
understand where Britain is economically, financially and politically. It 
explains a lot.
 