
Before Diego Maradona’s second goal against England in 1986 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2014/jun/06/diego-maradona-solo-goal-england-1986-brick-animation-world-cup-video>
, the greatest goal in Argentinian history had been scored by Omar Orestes 
Corbatta in a 4-0 win over Chile in qualifying for the 1958 World Cup.

Lionel Messi back in Argentina squad after reversing retirement decision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/lionel-messi-argentina-reversing-retirement-decision>
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> already led 2-0 
when Corbatta beat his marker, took the ball round the goalkeeper, waited for 
another Chilean to approach, dribbled past him and then, as the crowd urged him 
to finish the move off, with the goalkeeper and two other defenders charging 
back, dummied to shoot, leaving all three on the ground before finally stroking 
the ball over the line. El Gráfico called it “the most impossible piece of play 
ever” and a painting of the goal hangs in the lobby of the offices of the 
players’ union.

But Corbatta’s was a tragic and sadly typical tale. What’s worst about it is 
that there was no one freakish event that precipitated the misery, no car crash 
or murder, no one betrayal or moment of catastrophic bad fortune: he was just a 
man with a majestic talent that propelled him into a sphere in which he was 
ill-equipped to cope.

At football, he was a genius; at life a disaster. Born in Daireaux, a small 
town in the Pampas a little under 300 miles to the south-west of Buenos Aires, 
he moved with his family to La Plata at an early age following the death of his 
father. He never learned to read or write, a fact of which he was ashamed: 
later in life, he spoke of how humiliated he would feel when team-mates 
discussed something they’d read in a newspaper or a magazine, but at the time 
he disguised his illiteracy by keeping a newspaper beside him whenever he was 
interviewed. The Racing captain Pedro Dellacha eventually taught him how to 
scrawl a signature.

Even as he became famous he remained painfully shy, particularly around women. 
Taking pity on him, his team-mates introduced him to a blonde woman who was 
crudely described as “una chica que hacía la calle” – a girl who did the 
street, expecting them to have a brief fling that would build up Corbatta’s 
confidence. Unexpectedly, he fell in love with her and they married, moving to 
a house in Banfield. But one day in 1959, Corbatta returned home to find she’d 
gone and the house had been stripped. “There weren’t even any spiders left,” he 
said.

He had, at least, overcome his shyness with women. Tita Mattiussi, the 
legendary manager of Racing’s youth hostel, told the story of Corbatta climbing 
over the wall at six o’clock one morning after a hectic night out. Mattiussi 
dunked him in a cold bath three times, but still heard Corbatta telling 
team-mates not to pass to him because he felt so dizzy he wasn’t sure he could 
stand up. “But when he woke up,” Mattiussi said, “he played like a beast and 
scored two goals.”

Corbatta’s private life may have been a mess, but on the pitch he prospered, 
playing with the humour that characterised the golden age, anecdotes 
coagulating around him. On one occasion, in aclásico against Independiente, 
Corbatta found himself man-marked by Alcides Silveira and, followed everywhere, 
couldn’t get into the game, so he dashed off the pitch and hid briefly behind 
the police who lined the front of the stands. In a game for the national team 
against Uruguay in 1956, he’d so exasperated Pepe Sasía with his showmanship 
that the forward waited for him to be fouled, ran over and kicked him in the 
face. Corbatta lost two teeth; he never had them replaced.

Corbatta became noted as a penalty specialist, famed for his knack of sending 
the goalkeeper the wrong way. Of 68 he took in his career, he scored 64. “At 
penalties,” he said in an interview with El Gráfico, “I killed them all. I 
stood near the ball so the keeper could not react. I never stood directly 
behind the ball – always to the side. I struck it with the inside of the right 
foot in the middle, always with a sharp blow. And I would duck my head so the 
goalkeeper didn’t know which way I was going to shoot, and I would change when 
I saw what he did. And when he moved, he was a dead man.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fargentina-omar-orestes-corbatta-angels-dirty-faces-jonathan-wilson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6989c07bf47122cfbe77af9ad6d79bb65eedbaea%2F0_125_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sad%20story%20of%20Omar%20Orestes%20Corbatta%2C%20scorer%20of%20Argentina%E2%80%99s%20second%20greatest%20goal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fargentina-omar-orestes-corbatta-angels-dirty-faces-jonathan-wilson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sad%20story%20of%20Omar%20Orestes%20Corbatta%2C%20scorer%20of%20Argentina%E2%80%99s%20second%20greatest%20goal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fargentina-omar-orestes-corbatta-angels-dirty-faces-jonathan-wilson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6989c07bf47122cfbe77af9ad6d79bb65eedbaea%2F0_125_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Northern Ireland’s goalkeeper Harry Gregg is sent the wrong way by Argentina’s 
Omar Orestes Corbatta as he scores from the penalty spot during Argentina’s 3-1 
win in the 1958 World Cup group stage. Photograph: AP 
Boca Juniors bought Corbatta for 12 million pesos in 1963, a payment that 
Racing invested in expanding their stadium and developing their training base. 
Already, though, drink was beginning to take its toll.

On a tour of Europe, the defender Carmelo Simeone was assigned to keep an eye 
on Corbatta. He was sure he’d kept Corbatta away from alcohol until one day he 
looked under his bed and found a pile of empty beer bottles.

Corbatta played in only 18 league games for Boca before leaving for Colombian 
side Independiente Medellín in the dying days of the El Dorado league.

In Colombia, his second wife left him, he ran out of money and he became ever 
more dependent on alcohol.

When he returned to Argentina at the age of 34, he was a relic of the player 
he had been, playing for San Telmo in the second division and then Italia 
Unidos and Tiro Federal de Río Negro in the lower leagues, the need for money 
and his lack of other skills forcing him to put off retirement as long as 
possible. “There are no friends in football,” he said, “especially when you’re 
in a bad way. They all disappear.” Many would say he didn’t want to be helped. 
His money gone, he took to living in a bar near the Fiorito hospital in Buenos 
Aires, sleeping beneath the counter in two drawers that had been knocked 
together. “My sister came to get me,” he said, “but I didn’t want to go back to 
La Plata. At night I’d get a magazine, look at the pictures and that would 
distract me a little so I could sleep. I spent everything I had. I gave a lot 
away without looking who I was giving it to.”

At the age of 38, when he finally retired from the professional game, he moved 
to Benito Juárez, a small town just south of the capital, where he lived in a 
shack, playing occasionally for two local sides.

Drunk, homeless and penniless, with four marriages behind him, Corbatta ended 
up sleeping in a changing room at El Cilindro, paying his board by working with 
the youth teams, his example a devastating reminder of the transitory nature of 
footballing glory. He died, aged 55, in 1991. Two years later, the street 
leading to the stadium was named after him.

This is an edited extract from Jonathan Wilson’s history of Argentinian 
football, Angels with Dirty Faces 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/angels-with-dirty-faces.html>, which is 
published by Orion
 