
Silicon Valley, with its roots in a counter-culture of dreamy cyber-gurus and 
anti-establishment hackers, has always thought itself different. As Steve Jobs 
put it, they are “the crazy ones, the misfits, the rebels, the troublemakers, 
the round pegs in square holes”. Unlike Wall St, so the press releases said, 
they did no evil.

For nations looking to replicate the success of the Valley, the question has 
long been asked: why don’t we have a Google, an Apple or a Facebook. It was 
asked again on BBC’s flagship Today programme this morning. The question is a 
good one. Tosome the answer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-37400411> is 
money – there’s a lack of patient, long-term capital in the City – and 
entrepreneurial culture, a lack of “crazy ones”. Public money, in the form of 
defence spending and top-class research universities, made Silicon Valley. The 
advent of the personal computer as a tool for individual liberation introduced 
a culture of ethical egotism. With the arrival of social media, digital 
technology now considers itself a force for global good. It helps that science 
feels like a religion with a priesthood whose canonical texts cannot be easily 
understood by policymakers. Little wonder information technology has become one 
of the western world’s most lightly regulated industries. The result is 
ruthless, red-in-tooth-and-claw capitalism. Many of the tech revolutionaries 
have simply invented new ways to extract huge profits by unregulated means.

Despite the rhetoric of competition and markets, the ultimate aim of the tech 
evangelists is often to create monopolies which are the quickest ways to 
profit. Free social tools are concentrating wealth in the hands of a few 
programmers and investors. In search, that’s Google (revenues $75bn). In social 
media, that’sFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> (1.65 
billion users, sales $5bn). In online retail it’s Amazon (last quarter profits 
of almost $900m).

Politicians don’t want to end up defending the past. But they need to regulate 
global giants in the national interest. Last year when Britain’s 
Conservative-led coalition lifted the restriction on homeowners letting out 
their property for less than three months, it was supposed to benefit the
“sharing economy” 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/new-rules-mean-londoners-can-earn-thousands-by-renting-rooms-on-sites-like-airbnb-10033375.html>
. Instead, thebig winner is Airbnb 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/home-affairs/opinion/64659/karen-buck-mp-short-let-deregulation-will-drive-rents-london>
, the room booking app, which appears to bebenefiting as flats get taken off 
the market to cater for high-paying short lets 
<https://news.rla.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/The-Rental-Revolution-What-is-the-Sharing-Economy-doing-to-the-PRS.pdf 
https://news.rla.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/The-Bedroom-Boom-Airbnb-and-London.pdf>
. This keeps prices high and makes it harder for low- and middle-income 
residents to live there.

Despite claiming to reinvent travel, the secret behind Uber, the tax-hailing 
app, is that it circumvents local rules around safety and insurance. London 
mayor Sadiq Khan’s plans to regulate the firm’s drivers is a good step to 
privatise costs the app sought to socialise. Uber’s use of customer data is 
instructive. Itknows a person is more willing to accept higher or “surge” prices
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/05/22/uber-app-can-detect-when-a-users-phone-is-about-to-die/>
 when their phone is about to run out of battery – but says it doesn’t use this 
information to charge higher prices. We have no way of checking that. Uber, 
like other algorithm-driven firms, should be asked to reveal such practices, 
something that the government could look at during the passage of the digital 
economy bill. Today, an algorithm is increasingly likely to be your boss or 
tell you what to read. We should not be creating companies that ruthlessly 
exploit consumers and workers. Big data that sorts us into piles of “worthy” 
and “unworthy” needs to be transparent. We don’t need Silicon Valley; we need 
responsible capitalism.
 