
Hand of God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/04/hand-of-god-ron-perlman-wrestles-with-morality-and-religion-in-amazons-new-drama>

Hand of God is Amazon’s biggest new launch since Transparent, but it’s a much 
harder sell. A drama about a corrupt judge who responds to a loved one’s 
suicide attempt by convincing himself that God wants him to become a violent 
vigilante sounds new, but the marketplace is already saturated with dark dramas 
about troubled male antiheroes, and people have a finite amount of time to 
watch them.


 *  Amazon, showing now 
Downton Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>

And now, the end is near. We’ve had five glorious years of sumptuous period 
water-treading, but Downton Abbey is preparing to bow out. If the trailers for
the sixth and final series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/13/downton-abbey-series-six-preview-tears-turmoil-period-drama-final-run>
 are any indication, the whole thing is going to be comprised of nothing but 
endless weeping and John Lewis ballad covers. But this matters little to the 
Downton faithful. Will the posh one ever find happiness? Will the sad butler 
ever find happiness? Will Maggie Smith burst out of her skin and reveal herself 
to have been Kenneth Williams all along? These are the questions they want 
answered.


 *  ITV, from 20 September Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxf0YgnV0mdg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxf0YgnV0mdg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxf0YgnV0mdg&media=>
The Last Man on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/01/the-last-man-on-earth-high-concept-post-apocalyptic-comedy>

This half-hour show stars Will Forte and Kristen Schaal as survivors in a 
post-apocalyptic world, and it feels like the apex ofgolden age TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/22/kevin-spacey-tv-golden-age>. 
It’s taken all the tropes of a prestige drama – the high-concept premise, the 
serialised plot, the unlikable male lead – and seamlessly transplanted them 
into a comedy. It also helps that Last Man is one of the funniest shows in 
years. Dave seems to know what a hit it has on its hands: after holding on to 
the first series for far too long, the new run will air less than 24 hours 
after its US broadcast.

 * Dave, 28 September 
Homeland <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/homeland>

At this stage, you’d be stupid to get excited about a new season of Homeland. 
For all anyone knows, it might end up being a lumpen 24 clone about a wayward 
teenager like the second and third runs were. It might be a flaccid letdown 
like the fourth. It might literally contain no story whatsoever, like the last 
episode of the fourth run. And yet,the new season has a trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/28/trailer-watch-first-look-at-homeland-season-five>
 full of action and gorgeous shots of Berlin. Best of all, it’s full of Saul.

 *  Channel 4, date TBC  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441790650932%2Fbd35d3bf-63a5-45ea-b55c-54a10a80646e-2060x1452.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441790650932%2Fbd35d3bf-63a5-45ea-b55c-54a10a80646e-2060x1452.jpeg>
 Robert Louis Stevenson’s Jekyll and Hyde gets a slick update. 
Jekyll and Hyde

On the surface, this is ITV transparently doing a Sherlock: taking a 
well-loved – and much-adapted – piece of popular literature and sexing it up 
something rotten. However, Jekyll and Hyde looks like it might be one of 
autumn’s biggest highlights. It promises to be an intriguing mix of mystery, 
fantasy, sci-fi and horror. It stars Tom Bateman and Richard E Grant. And, most 
excitingly of all, it’s byCharlie Higson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/13/charlie-higson-enemy-young-bond-interview>
, who’s barely put a foot wrong in his entire career.

 * ITV, October 
Eternal Glory

This Brit-spin on a format already successful on several European networks 
will prompt memories for UK viewers ofSuperstars 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ch_OawiLG6s>. Richard Bacon hosts a 
location-based (Croatia) game show, in which eight “champion” athletes compete 
in a series of physical and mental challenges, with one going home each week. 
It would be a surprise if cycles don’t feature in one challenge but whether or 
not the show can become The Great Croatian Bike-Off will depend on the level of 
competitors it can attract. Ominously, an attempt to revive Superstars failed 
because the top rank of sports stars proved uninsurable for trivial TV.

 * ITV, October Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx2B5d-8H588&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx2B5d-8H588>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx2B5d-8H588&media=>
 Watch the 10-minute preview of The Muppets that ‘was never meant to be seen by 
the public’ – video 
The Muppets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/09/the-muppets-mockumentary-tv-series-sky-1>

If nothing else, the return of the Muppets deserves to go down in history as 
the show that gave you the most angst since Better Call Saul was announced. On 
the one hand, it’s great that our fuzzy friends are back where they belong. On 
the other, the 10-minute teaser released in July made the whole thing look like 
a shameless Modern Family rip-off.

 *  Sky 1, October 
The Dresser

The stand-out item in a BBC season devoted to theatre is the pairing of Ian 
McKellen andAnthony Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> 
(long lost to movies) in a new version of Ronald Harwood’s play, which features 
the dressing-room conversations between an ageing Shakespearean actor of the 
old school (based on Donald Wolfit) and the backstage assistant who tends to 
his wigs, costumes and ego. Directed by former National Theatre boss Richard 
Eyre, the project might as well be subtitled “keep the licence fee”, but 
promises rich pleasures.

 * BBC2, October  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441790868650%2F866e4917-e5a6-4cde-b09f-96ebf5ee3424-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441790868650%2F866e4917-e5a6-4cde-b09f-96ebf5ee3424-2060x1375.jpeg>
 Will series two of The Leftovers step in from the dark? Photograph: HBO 
The Leftovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/30/hbo-the-leftovers-intense-unpredictable>

To call the first season of Damon Lindelof’s grief-stricken rapture drama a 
hard watch would be an understatement – it began with a teenage girl crying as 
her friend joylessly masturbated next to her, and then got darker – which is 
why some are calling this year’s series a reboot. The cast has been overhauled, 
and the whole thing will now take place in Texas. Whether it will work is 
anyone’s guess. Let’s just hope The Guilty Remnant understand the mechanics of 
interstate travel.

 * Sky Atlantic, October 


River

A classy crime drama remains every network’s must-have autumn accessory, and 
this dark six-part detective story boasts talent that gives it the potential to 
become this season’s Happy Valley or Broadchurch. Written by Abi Morgan (The 
Hour), it gives Nicola Walker (Last Tango in Halifax) the lead role she has 
long deserved. And importing Swedish actor Stellan Skarsgård acknowledges the 
Scandi-envy from which UK mystery fiction currently suffers. The stand-out cast 
also includes Eddie Marsan as a killer who eludes the cops.

• BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>, mid-October

American Horror Story: Hotel

American Horror Story hasn’t been scary for years. Weird? Yes. Creepy? 
Sometimes. Camp? Unbelievably. Butthe anthology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/15/american-horror-story-box-set-review>
 hasn’t tapped into its all-out sense of suffocating fear since the Asylum 
series. Will this new incarnation, set in a hotel built by a serial killer, 
manage to recapture old glories? Some of the details released so far (there 
will be packs of creepy children and people sewn into mattresses) sound 
promising. Others (the magisterial Jessica Lange has been replaced byLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/19/lady-gaga-drops-the-shock>) much 
less so.

 * FOX, 20 October  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441791088408%2Fe25ba1c2-029b-4128-8dce-14b569c07790-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441791088408%2Fe25ba1c2-029b-4128-8dce-14b569c07790-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Nicola Walker and Sanjeev Bhaskar star in Unforgotten Photograph: PR 
Unforgotten

The previously underrated Nicola Walker gets a deserved double promotion to 
top-billing by leading this ITV crime drama as well as the BBC’s River. 
Scripted by a reliable 9pm-suspense writer Chris Lang (Undeniable, A Mother’s 
Son), Unforgotten begins with the discovery during building work of the bones 
of a murder victim who has lain undetected for 40 years. The cold-case 
investigation, led by Walker andSanjeev Bhaskar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/06/actors-sanjeev-bhaskar-and-alan-alda-on-their-special-relationship>
, is helped with its inquiries by a cast that includes Trevor Eve and Tom 
Courtenay, an actor rarely sighted on TV.

 * ITV, October 
Chewing Gum

Last year, young Hackney-born actor-writer Michaela Coel made a strong impact 
at the National Theatre withChewing Gum Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/19/chewing-gum-dreams-theatre-review>
, a monologue about a young black woman’s experience of education, music, sex, 
religion and politics in London. Minus the last word of the title, Coel’s 
six-part comedy drama takes a version to the small screen. .

 * E4, October 
Brett: A Life With No Arms

One of TV’s most distinguished documentarians, Roger Graef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/07/filmmaker-roger-graef-puts-social-justice-in-focus>
, revisits, 50 years on, the subject of his first-ever film, One of Them Is 
Brett. The name of the sequel perhaps illustrates a shift in the medium’s idea 
of what makes a good title. The subject, Brett Nielsen, was born without upper 
limbs as a result of the antenatal drug thalidomide. The first film recorded 
his rejection of prosthetic arms; the new report shows the life he has managed 
without them, including an impressive range of careers and relationships.

 * BBC1, October 
The Fear

The latest TV talent show is a sort of Britain’s Got Zombies, in which 
aspiring makers of horror films compete to convince expert judges they should 
win the prize of making a 30-minute shiver flick.

 * BBC3, late October  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441799662300%2Ff229d6be-3a9f-42f6-90fa-83121f45c8dc-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441799662300%2Ff229d6be-3a9f-42f6-90fa-83121f45c8dc-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Robert Webb, left, and David Mitchell in Peep Show Photograph: PR 
Peep Show

One of C4’s longest-running hits, this radical take on the flat-share sitcom 
has featured intermittently in the schedules in recent years due to the other 
commitments of actorsDavid Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/02/david-mitchell-interview-observer-column-lessons-modern-life-victoria-coren>
 and Robert Webb, as well as writers Jesse Armstrong and Sam Bain, whose 
student drama Fresh Meat is another C4 hit. This ninth series is billed as the 
last, and fans will be fascinated by whether the scripts contrive to leave Mark 
and Jeremy separately or together – and whetherOlivia Colman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman>, as the original love 
interest, might reappear.

 * Channel 4, November 
First Cut

There have been many documentaries about lives transformed by medical 
emergency but film-maker Leonardo Machado explores for C4’s impressive factual 
strand a particularly horrifying example: Alex Lewis was given a 3% chance of 
survival after developing septicemia that could be halted only by removal of 
his limbs and part of his face. Following Lewis from hospital to his attempt to 
rebuild a life at home, the film - though raising questions of visual tact in 
what the viewer is shown - promises to be a memorable examination of resilience.

 * Channel 4, date TBC 
The Frankenstein Chronicles
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441791370167%2F8089de1a-4f3f-4c8c-af8b-2de58664fc31-1358x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441791370167%2F8089de1a-4f3f-4c8c-af8b-2de58664fc31-1358x2040.jpeg>
 Sean Bean stars in The Frankenstein Chronicles Photograph: Rainmark Films / ITV
ITV’s post-Downton drama strategy seems to include a detour into the 19th 
century fiction library that has previously been most visited by the BBC. With 
a new Jekyll and Hyde adaptation elsewhere in the schedules, The Frankenstein 
Chronicles is a six-parter that plays with Mary Shelley’s original in the way 
that Showtime’sPenny Dreadful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/07/gloomsday-reckoning-penny-dreadfuls-bloody-great-season-two-finale>
 used literary archetypes. Sean Bean plays a Peeler in 1837 London who is 
called to a body washed up from the Thames that turns out to be a pseudo-human 
stitched together from cadaver parts. The show aims to tie together the 
audiences for crime and horror.

 * ITV Encore, November 
Transparent

As one of the first hits of Amazon’s streamed TV service, Jill Soloway’s 
domestic drama rapidly stood out for the quality of writing and acting (Jeffrey 
Tambor getting the role of his career, very late into it). There is also the 
freshness of its central premise: the impact on an American family when a 
70-year-old retired professor begins transgender reassignment. Its second 
season comes with a promise of more focus on the supporting cast, and it rivals 
House of Cards for the title of best TV series never shown on TV.

 * Amazon, 4 December 
Dickensian

In his pioneering of serial form and exaggerated characters, Charles Dickens 
has been an obvious influence on TV soap. NowTony Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/20/tony-jordan-tv-writer-underrated>
, a key writer on the Albert Square show, has reversed the circuit with a 
project that approaches the work of the BBC’s house novelist in a more original 
way than the traditional rotating adaptations of the canonical novels. In the 
20 half-hour episodes, characters such as Mr Micawber, Scrooge and Oliver Twist 
break free from their books and run into each other.

 * BBC1, Christmas  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441791238296%2Fd4695d3d-221e-4077-8810-a5fdee06731f-2060x1346.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hottest%20TV%20shows%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftv-autumn-arts-preview-2015-peep-show-downton-abbey-muppets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441791238296%2Fd4695d3d-221e-4077-8810-a5fdee06731f-2060x1346.jpeg>
 Bringing glamour back … War and Peace is the BBC’s next flagship costume drama 
Photograph: BBC 
War and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/12/war-and-peace-first-look-images-bbc-tolstoy-adaptation>

One strand of the BBC’s charter renewal policy this time around seems to be 
reassuring remakes of the sort of thing it did when the licence fee and the 
BBC’s future were shoo-ins:Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark> has already come back, a 
Civilisation remake has been mooted, and now the corporation offers a new 
adaptation of the 1869 Tolstoy novel that made people feel good about the BBC 
in 1972. Some have already muttered that the new version has been given only 
360 minutes of airtime rather than the 900 minutes back in the day, but drama 
moves faster and sharper than it used to. A bigger question is whether a mix of 
American (Paul Dano, Gillian Anderson) and British (Jim Broadbent, Brian Cox) 
actors playing Russians can find a convincing overall idiom.

 * BBC1, January  