
REM have no time for Donald Trump using their music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/10/rem-blast-donald-trump-using-music-us-presidential-campaign>

At the risk of adding to the media’s hysteria surrounding Trump’s presidential 
campaign, this story is too good to ignore. Trump walked out to REM’s It’s the 
End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine) at a rally on Wednesday – and 
the Georgia band weren’t at all happy. Frontman Michael Stipe not only called 
Trump’s bid in the US presidential race a “moronic charade of a campaign”, but 
stated that none of the candidates were to use REM’s music. In a short 
statement posted on Facebook, the band also reminded voters not to let all the 
razzle-dazzle distract them from the core issues at the heart of their 
country’s future.
Hakim (@hakimbriki) 
@m_millsey <https://twitter.com/m_millsey> pic.twitter.com/pgP3X9PZ6V 
<http://t.co/pgP3X9PZ6V>
 <https://twitter.com/hakimbriki/status/641751146302935040> September 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/hakimbriki/status/641751146302935040> 
China blocked Bon Jovi’s scheduled gigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/china-blocks-bon-jovi-gigs>

The band must have been living on a prayer (sorry) if they thought they could 
play their set of gigs in China next week. LikeMaroon 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/17/maroon-5-dalai-lama-tweet-may-have-led-to-cancelled-china-concerts>
,Oasis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/mar/03/oasis-china-banned-concerts-tibet>
 andBjörk <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/05/china.musicnews> 
before them, Bon Jovi’s perceived sympathies towards the Dalai Lama may have 
contributed to the gig cancellations. In Bon Jovi’s case, the band reportedly 
played in front of a Dalai Lama backdrop in 2010. Whatever the reasons may be, 
fans in Shanghai and Beijing will have to swallow their disappointment.

Billie Hologram? Lady Day’s likeness is headed to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/10/billie-holiday-hologram-headed-to-new-yorks-apollo-theatre>

Remember how creepy the Tupac hologram was when it appeared onstage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TGbrFmPBV0Y> at Coachella festival in 2012? 
Prepare to be freaked out even further when a Billie Holiday hologram debuts at 
New York’s Apollo theatre this autumn. A likeness of the jazz and blues icon is 
set to feature as part of the theatre’s continuous daytime programming, 
possibly speaking on tours of the venue. Why the world needs this is beyond me, 
but remembering the incredible legacy Holiday left behind as a performer and 
singer is a good thing.

The Who cancelled gigs because Roger Daltrey is unwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/the-who-cancel-four-tour-dates-due-to-roger-daltrey-illness>

Easy, now – there were a couple of comments along the lines of, “He’s old!” 
under the first Guardian article about this unfortunate turn of events. 
Daltrey’s voice may sound as impressive as ever, but he’s been forced to derail 
the Who’s US tour on account of an “unspecified virus”. The band are due to 
reprise the tour on 24 September in Portland, Oregon, after cancelling four 
dates between 14 September and 21 September.

Ringo Starr debuted a photo collection in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/ringo-photos-beatles-national-portrait-gallery-launch-book-exhibition>

Star(r)s, they’re just like us: they too take photographs, then tuck them away 
and forget about them for years. In this case, the former Beatles drummer 
unveiled a collection of old photos at London’s National Portrait Gallery – and 
used the exhibition launch as an opportunity to implore Yoko Ono, Olivia 
Harrison and Paul McCartney to “dig out the negatives” from years past. Top 
points to Starr for, as ever, appearing to throw shade by implying he couldn’t 
just pick up the phone and speak to any of them directly rather than through 
the press.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-week-in-music-banned-bon-jovi-sam-smiths-spectre-billie-hologram-and-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c195da594d057e976f4340d333c6f4db2c2838a%2F52_335_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20week%20in%20music%3A%20banned%20Bon%20Jovi%2C%20Sam%20Smith's%20Spectre%2C%20Billie%20Hologram%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-week-in-music-banned-bon-jovi-sam-smiths-spectre-billie-hologram-and-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20week%20in%20music%3A%20banned%20Bon%20Jovi%2C%20Sam%20Smith%27s%20Spectre%2C%20Billie%20Hologram%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-week-in-music-banned-bon-jovi-sam-smiths-spectre-billie-hologram-and-more%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c195da594d057e976f4340d333c6f4db2c2838a%2F52_335_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
 Ringo Starr has been going through the old photos. Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
An Aretha Franklin doc was banned from the Toronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/08/aretha-franklin-movie-banned-from-toronto-film-festival-as-well-as-telluride>

Well, this is awkward. Anyone who owns gospel album Amazing Grace will already 
be familiar with Franklin’s seminal vocal performance. But the sessions 
featured on the album were also filmed by late director Sydney Pollack and are 
now at the centre of a legal wrangle. On the one hand, the film’s producers 
want to showcase the footage that languished for decades, when Pollack failed 
to sync the video and sound recordings first captured in 1972. On the other, 
Franklin maintains she wants no part in her likeness being used for profit – 
agreeing to the album was one thing, but Franklin doesn’t want the film to be 
released. It’s been banned so far from both Telluride and Toronto film 
festivals, but I get the feeling the battle’s not yet over.

Ice Cube brushed aside criticism of the NWA film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/08/ice-cube-straight-outta-compton-critics-dr-dre-nwa-movie>

You may remember a recent controversy attached to NWA biopic Straight Outta 
Compton. Journalist Dee Barnes, who knew the rap group and interviewed them in 
the 90s, alleged that Dr Dre had not only physically assaulted her, but that 
his violence – and the group’s misogyny – had beenairbrushed out of the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/19/straight-outta-compton-ignores-dr-dre-abuse-of-women-say-two-former-victims>
. In response, on Tuesday Cube told those critical of the box office hit to “do 
their own version of the NWA story”. Elsewhere this week, he alsodefended Iggy 
Azalea’s credibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/07/ice-cube-gives-iggy-azalea-nod-of-approval-she-makes-dope-songs>
 as a rapper, saying she “makes dope songs”. In fairness to Cube, most of us 
are guilty of having listened to Fancy at some point last year, though Iggy’s 
15 minutes of fame may soon be over.

Sam Smith is going to sing the next Bond theme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/08/sam-smith-confirm-sing-theme-new-james-bond-film-spectre>

Warbling pop-soul singer Smith was finally confirmed to record the theme for 
forthcoming Bond film, Spectre. Smith firstcyptically hinted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/07/sam-smith-hints-bond-theme-spectre>
 at the new gig on Instagram on Sunday, before confirming the news on Tuesday 
with a followup post. He follows Adele to join the ranks of Tina Turner, Sheryl 
Crow (that one was a banger), Madonna and Shirley Bassey. “The name’s Smith. 
Sam Smith – and not the brewery, come on mate.”

The Faces reunited onstage for the first time in 39 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/07/rod-stewart-fronts-the-faces-first-gig-forty-years>

Rod Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rodstewart>, Ronnie Wood and 
Kenney Jones – the three surviving members of the Faces – played a one-off 
charity gig in Surrey last weekend. They rattled through a seven-song set in 
aid of a prostate cancer charity, and generally seemed in good spirits about 
the whole affair. No love lost about Simply Red’s Mick Hucknall briefly 
replacing Stewart in past live shows, then?

Damon Albarn thinks Adele’s new album is a little dull  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/10/damon-albarn-new-adele-album-very-middle-of-the-road>

As the anticipation builds around Adele’s long-delayed followup to 21, here’s 
Damon Albarn to quash expectations. The Blur frontman says he worked with Adele 
on five songs, which may or may not be used for the album,now set to be 
released in November 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/magazine-feature/6678365/adele-new-album-fall-preview>
. He told the Sun: “I heard the work she did with my friend Brian, aka Danger 
Mouse. It’s very middle of the road.” Perhaps there wasn’t enoughelephant on it 
<http://www.nme.com/news/damon-albarn/87975>. But for anyone who needs a 
glimmer of hope, Ed Sheeran is on hand. He recentlytold Capital FM 
<http://www.franchiseherald.com/articles/33380/20150727/adele-new-album-release-date.htm>
: “I haven’t heard it, but everyone I know who’ve worked on it is just like, 
‘Dude … that record!’ Apparently it’s really good.” Whose opinion do you trust 
the most?
 