
Africa Express presents … Terry Riley’s In C Mali  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_FXQ68ZkWVw>

Its 1964 premiere in San Francisco – with wannabe composer Steve Reich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/steve-reich> pulse-anchoring the performance 
by punching out top C on a keyboard – heralded the onset of what would become 
known as minimalism. But far from being a relic of experimental music’s past, 
Terry Riley’s In C remains open to constant reinvention. This 50th-anniversary 
performancepairs musicians from Mali (Adama Koita, Bijou, Modibo Diawara, et 
al) with Africa Express mainstays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/terry-riley-in-c-mali-minimalism-african-style>
 such as Brian Eno and Damon Albarn, who collectively make good on Riley’s 
invitation to journey through 53 melodic fragments, each musician progressing 
at their own pace. The profound clarity of the recording walks your ears inside 
an orgiastic heterophony of meshed-together lines. And this is the funkiest In 
C on the planet.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_FXQ68ZkWVw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_FXQ68ZkWVw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_FXQ68ZkWVw&media=>
Colin Webster, Andrew Lisle, Alex Ward – Red Kite  
<http://rawtonkrecords.bandcamp.com/album/red-kite>

Something wonderful freshly mined from the coalface of British free 
improvisation, saxophonist Colin Webster’s new trio features Alex Ward 
(electric guitar) and Andrew Lisle (drums). Around the 5’21” mark, the 
musicians make a collective, split-second decision to dive from raggedly 
sustained drones – led by Webster’s overblown, strained saxophone – into the 
unknown of shell-shocked, pointillistic exclamation marks and sonic burps. Free 
improvisation can feel like a mysterious art form looking in from the outside: 
rules that must remain unspoken, rituals unfolding with masonic secrecy. But 
the rhythm of free improv is listen, respond, listen, respond, and this 
improvised structure finds inscrutability working hand in hand with sound logic.

&lt;a href="http://rawtonkrecords.bandcamp.com/album/red-kite"&gt;Red Kite by 
Colin Webster / Andrew Lisle / Alex Ward&lt;/a&gt; 
Rutger Zuydervelt – Sneeuwstorm  
<http://machinefabriek.bandcamp.com/album/sneeuwstorm>

Colin Webster appears here, too, alongside fellow saxophonist Otto Kokke, 
their improvisations mulched into a soundscape by Dutch electronic composer 
Rutger Zuydervelt, who usually trades under the moniker Machinefabriek. 
Sneeuwstorm was assembled via a generative process. Zuydervelt asked Webster 
and Kokke to improvise over an electronic framework, and then their 
improvisations were cut up, folded in, looped and moulded around the sounds of 
Zuydervelt’s electric guitar and other miscellaneous field recordings – layers 
of recorded history that are reflected in Zuydervelt’s tiered, poly-temporal 
structure.

&lt;a 
href="http://machinefabriek.bandcamp.com/album/sneeuwstorm"&gt;Sneeuwstorm by 
Rutger Zuydervelt&lt;/a&gt; 
Laurie Spiegel – East River Dawn from The Expanding Universe  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zIqS5_bh4nM>

Chicago-born composer Laurie Spiegel turned her back on the New York modern 
composition scene when, during the early 1980s, she felt music that had once 
revelled in open-ended possibility was beginning to be filed into neat genres. 
A piece like East River Dawn, from her classic album The Expanding Universe 
could not have existed without the influence of early minimalist music, 
typified by Terry Riley’s In C. But its chattering arpeggios, spawned and 
filtered electronically, speak with a harmonic clarity and voice that is 
entirely her own.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzIqS5_bh4nM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzIqS5_bh4nM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzIqS5_bh4nM&media=>
Oren Ambarchi – Live Knots 
<https://soundcloud.com/pan_recs/oren-ambarchi-live-knots-excerpt-pan-53>

Live Knots finds Australian guitarist Oren Ambarchi reimagining Knots, the 
centrepiece of his2012 album Audience of One 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/16320-audience-of-one/>, stretching its 
form and slipping discrete blocks of strings under his guitar’s slipstream of 
harmonic overtones and intricately evolving drones – which either cushion the 
sound or throw it into harmonic crisis. Drummer Joe Talia keeps unobtrusive 
time, which, given that Ambarchi’s guitar is hovering like a sound cloud, opens 
up an intriguing paradox: pulse normally gives music a heartbeat, but here 
pulse becomes subservient to time that is developing in extended, uncountable 
paragraphs.

John Cage and Leonard Bernstein – Atlas Eclipticalis 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nky14InylDM>

The story so far: Leonard Bernstein, who had been devising a whole season of 
avant-garde music for the New York Philharmonic’s 1964 season, decides to go 
for broke by programming John Cage’s Atlas Eclipticalis. The work requires his 
orchestral musicians to learn notes that apparently sit awkwardly on their 
instruments, which is bad enough, but when they realise their contributions 
might not even be heard because Cage is using chance procedures to switch their 
contact microphones on and off, Bernstein needs to quell a full-scale 
orchestral mutiny. Cage thoroughly disapproved of this awkward, nervy 
performance – but Bernstein’s painfully patient and articulate introductory 
speech is all the more remarkable when you consider that his own stylistic 
sympathies lay firmly somewhere between bar lines and key signatures. A slice 
of experimental history more often talked about than actually heard.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnky14InylDM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnky14InylDM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnky14InylDM&media=>
The Recedents – Wishing You Were Here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cxhxILw7ABg>

The Recedents – Lol Coxhill (saxophones, electronics, voice), Mike Cooper 
(guitars, electronics, objects) and Roger Turner (drums, percussion, 
electronics) – were a British free-improvisation trio with a history that 
stretched back to the early 1980s. The group came to a sad end in 2012, with 
the death of Coxhill; but their razor-sharp counterpoint of instrumental 
brilliance, pitched against bawdy humour, proffered an alternative view of a 
music that could, given even half a chance, feel po-faced and earnest. Wishing 
You Were Here is a new five-CD box set that might rescue the reputation of a 
group that has been unfairly footnoted.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcxhxILw7ABg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcxhxILw7ABg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcxhxILw7ABg&media=>
John Lely – The Harmonics of Real Strings 
<https://soundcloud.com/anothertimbre/the-harmonics-of-real-strings-3>

This is music of process, rather than arrival. British composer John Lely asks 
cellist Anton Lukoszevieze to produce seamless glissandi by gradually sliding 
up the full length of a string, soft finger pressure being the order of the 
day. There are four strings on a cello and four separate realisations featured 
on this new CD released by the Another Timbre label. Although nothing much 
“happens”, Lely and Lukoszevieze immerse listeners in sound, as the 
concentration necessary to trace the path of the glissandi opens ears to other 
nuances of timbre and touch.


Aura Satz – Dial Tone Operator  
<https://soundcloud.com/kevin-holmes-47/dial-tone-drone-excerpt-by-aura-satz>

Aura Satz has described herself as an artist who works with sound – not to be 
confused with a “sound artist” – and one of her preoccupations is exploring how 
sounds might be prised away from, or work independently of, their source. Dial 
Tone Operator is from her project about female telephone operators of the 
1950s, exploring how their work connecting voices from disparate parts of the 
UK was eventually usurped by the automated telephone signal. This brief piece 
consists of entirely familiar sounds – but lines get crossed, signals are 
interfered with and lines of connection are lost.

Amy Cimini and Katherine Young – Architeuthis Walks on Land 
<https://soundcloud.com/architeuthiswalksonland>

Chicago-based Katherine Young, or “bassoon colossus” as I once semi-flippantly 
referred to her in a review, improvises here with violist Amy Cimini, that 
basic viola and bassoon palette augmented with toy instruments and electronic 
gizmos that are used to erect walls of layered sound while bolstering their 
instruments’ basic capabilities. Young’s bassoon can rock and spew sound forth 
with the power of Jimi Hendrix’s wah pedal. The whole album is here; personally 
I’m drawn back to The Assayers, a rude chunk of visceral white noise, enough to 
challenge anyone’s stereotypical image of either instrument.

 