
I gaze through the railway carriage window, past the banana leaves to the 
stepped Deco parapet of the stark white studio lot opposite. Sixty years ago, 
Sam Goldwyn stood astride the parapet in the vicious mid-afternoon California 
sun and yelled at his writers to drop their cocktails and get back to work. I 
am in the Formosa Cafe on the corner of Formosa Avenue and Santa Monica 
Boulevard, Hollywoood.

The lot facing us was the United Artists Studio and the mob-run cafe gained a 
reputation there as the place where you could cash your pay cheque, order a 
cocktail and place a bet. Lana Turner supposedly dated the gangster proprietor.

Most of the black and crimson walls are hidden by signed photos of the stars 
who have haunted the place: Marilyn, Lucy and Desi, Groucho and Clifton Webb. 
Colonel Tom Parker chews a cigar butt, squinting from his grainy portrait. 
Above Elvis's favourite booth is a glass cabinet containing statuettes of him 
in various stages of obesity. He once tipped a waitress with a brand new 
Cadillac. Our waitress grumbles that stars don't tip that way anymore.

The food is eccentric. Essentially, it is Szechwan, but with weird 
combinations. The tuna tartar is on nachos. The stir-fried scallops are on 
sun-dried tomato linguini. It tastes as if there may be mayonnaise on the top.

The flavours are all right, but we are sitting at the table where Sinatra 
scoffed chicken chow mein after scoring an Oscar for From Here To Eternity. We 
are not here for the food.

My friend who brought me here is a director, but seems so Brooklyn in this 
West Coast scene. In Hollywood tradition, conversation turns into gossip: who 
did what, who did who and what did them in. The slightly vain lead singer, who 
was unhappy with his hair product when he saw the video edit and had his 
fauxhawk enhanced by computer; the beautiful and much sought-after dancer known 
as Supahead; groupie video libraries; how to shoot big butts; what PCP does to 
you; who's a good guy, who's a dick - everyone knows. Ah, yes, there's the 
booth where that scene from LA Confidential was shot. I glance down at the 
Formica tabletop. Miles Davis soothes from the speakers. Hollywood isn't 
supposed to be real, but this place. Seems. So. Vivid.

I know that I will be back home in my empty flat in Glasgow in 48 hours. From 
this angle, it is that which does not seem real.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 