
The van arrived at the village hall at 2.30pm sharp, ready for the two actors 
and the stage manager to start arranging the lights and sound before the 
evening performance. But the hall had been double-booked, and the bridge club 
were inside, refusing to budge.


This happened last week on our production of This Land 
<http://www.pentabus.co.uk/thisland>, a new play about fracking and energy that 
tours the country over the next few months. It’s a classic example of the 
unexpected trials and delights you find when making theatre for community 
spaces rather than theatres. The space isn’t automatically ours just because 
we’re the “artists”. It’s a shared space – theirs, ours, everyone’s. It’s a 
space people rightly feel connected to and proprietorial over because they know 
it so well. It’s where they go for birthday parties, pilates, music nights, 
parish meetings or, indeed, bridge club. It’s a space packed with recollections 
of great nights out, a community memory bank.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db_odxw4shCw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db_odxw4shCw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db_odxw4shCw&media=>
 Watch the trailer for This Land 
Plenty of people experience theatre in this kind of venue instead of (or as 
well as) more traditional theatre venues. Their reasons for going to a play in 
the village hall are varied and nuanced. It’s about seeing shows close up, 
supporting the hall, championing the community, thanking the promoter, seeking 
out more shared memories. It’s also about having direct personal contact with 
the artists, watching them set up, eating together, talking to them afterwards, 
even helping with the get-out. Audiences often span generations, coming 
together to experience the same event.

It would be a mistake to assume these audiences don’t crave and recognise 
quality in the same way an urban audience might. The rural touring circuit has 
masses of excellent theatre, music, comedy and dance. Audiences are 
sophisticated, intelligent, aware. They are also refreshingly non-cynical, 
culturally engaged but not culturally saturated. Not trying to boast about or 
snobbily dismiss what they’ve seen, but wanting to understand the artist’s 
intentions, to properly engage with the ideas presented and discuss them with 
the actors and each other afterwards.


Not cosy, not safe, no tractors: the plays redefining rural theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/mar/08/a-nations-theatre-rural-touring-forum-farnham-maltings>
We commission new plays specifically for village-hall audiences. We believe in 
taking plays with local relevance into the heart of a community. The promoter 
is always taking a big risk by booking an unknown new play (often about an 
emotive issue), so we have a responsibility to work with the promoter and their 
audience long before the show itself, and long afterwards too. This means our 
writers see plays in village halls, talk to audiences and promoters, research 
and test ideas in community spaces. The writer’s contract can include technical 
necessities such as “there must be an interval” (village halls need to make bar 
money), as well as creative ones such as “you can’t do fourth-wall naturalism”, 
as it would be strange to pretend the audience isn’t there.

Our producer runs copy, title and image ideas past trusted promoters before we 
go to print. It’s the same for our design teams. There are clauses in their 
contracts about get-in and get-out times – crucial when you’re doing months of 
one-night touring. Designers make a model box of the van, so we know the set 
will fit and can work out the best way to pack it. Actors practise get-ins and 
outs as part of rehearsals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fvillage-hall-theatre-pentabus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab9a54cae1a3f4f99ab2fb63ab7b48b5e5efebf%2F0_33_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20village%20hall%3A%20home%20to%20bridge%20clubs%2C%20bingo%20and%20groundbreaking%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fvillage-hall-theatre-pentabus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20village%20hall%3A%20home%20to%20bridge%20clubs%2C%20bingo%20and%20groundbreaking%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fvillage-hall-theatre-pentabus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab9a54cae1a3f4f99ab2fb63ab7b48b5e5efebf%2F0_33_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
 Community spirit … This Land. Photograph: Richard Stanton. 
It all means the art and the process of making it is specific to village 
halls. This forges a deeper connection between the work and the audience, with 
shared responsibility and investment. We all take the risk together. Which is 
crucial if we want to keep small-scale touring dynamic and current. We don’t 
always get it right, but we’re trying to plan better, react quicker and listen 
deeper.


And the bridge club? Well, after a short negotiation, the game finished as the 
set was being (quietly) brought in. Everyone had a cup of tea, and the club 
members came to the show in the evening. Community space shared communally, for 
the benefit of everyone.


 * This Land <http://www.pentabus.co.uk/thisland>, a co-production by Pentabus 
and Salisbury Playhouse, is at the Ledbury Market theatre on 18 March, the 
Worcester Arts Workshop on 19 March, then touring until May.  