
In his address to Rutgers this week, Obama will continue a long tradition of 
giving acommencement speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/09/obama-howard-university-speech-activism>
 to students. His task is the same as that of speakers before him: to share 
wisdom and ease the transition of college kids into adult reality.

Most such speeches are long forgotten. A few become viral hits; others stand 
the test of time.



As commencement season ploughs on, here are some favorites from respected 
figures of public life. Feminist author Gloria Steinem’s speech in 1987 touches 
on everyday unseen politics, Ira Glass talks about his parents’ thwarted 
aspirations and Czech philosopher Vaclav Havel questions the purpose of 
politicians.

They all advocate looking to the future. Novelist David Foster Wallace, in his 
distillation of life and learning 
<https://web.ics.purdue.edu/~drkelly/DFWKenyonAddress2005.pdf>, sums this up 
quite nicely: “Your education really is the job of a lifetime. And it 
commences: now.”

Jill Abramson at Wake Forest University, 2014

We human beings are a lot more resilient than we often realize. Resilient and 
perseverant. And there are so many examples of this. For me professionally, my 
heroes are Nan Robertson, a ground-breaking reporter at the New York Times, and 
Katharine Graham, the publisher of the Washington Post, which broke the 
Watergate story. They both faced discrimination in a much tougher, more 
male-dominated newspaper industry and they went on to win Pulitzer prizes.


I coauthored a book about Anita Hill, who testified about sexual harassment 
before an all-white, all-male Senate judiciary committee in the 1990s. The 
senators portrayed her as being, as one of her detractors so delicately put it, 
“a little bit nutty and a little bit slutty”. She turned that potential 
humiliation into a great career teaching at Brandeis University and writing 
books that tell truth to power. Anita was one of the many people who wrote me 
last week to say they are proud of me. Those messages are so appreciated.

Some of you have faced danger or even a soul-scorching loss, but most of you 
haven’t. And leaving the protective cocoon of school for the working world must 
seem scary. You will have a dozen different jobs and will try different things. 
Sure, losing a job you love hurts, but the work I revere, journalism that holds 
powerful institutions and people accountable, is what makes our democracy so 
resilient. And this is the work I will remain very much a part of.

When I was leaving my office for the last time, I grabbed a book off my shelf, 
Robert Frost: Speaking on Campus. In closing, I’m going to leave you with some 
wisdom from the Colby College commencement speech the great poet gave in 1956. 
He described life after graduating as piece of knitting to go on with. What he 
meant is that life is always unfinished business, like the bits of knitting 
women used to carry around with them, to be picked up in different intervals. 
And for those of you who have never knitted, think of it as akin to your 
Tumblr: something you can pick up from time to time. My mother was a great 
knitter and she made some really magnificent things. But she also made a few 
itchy and frankly hideous sweaters for me. She left some things unfinished. So 
today, you gorgeous, brilliant people, get on with your knitting.

Read the speech in full 
<http://apps.npr.org/commencement/speech/jill-abramson-wake-forest-university-2014/>

Arnold Schwarzenegger at the University of Southern California, 2009

Now, of course, people ask me all the time, they say to me: “What is the 
secret to success?” And I give them, always, the short version. I say, “Number 
one, come to America. Number two, work your butt off. And number three, marry a 
Kennedy.”


And what I mean by that is, so many young people are getting so much advice 
from their parents and from their teachers and from everyone. But what is most 
important is that you have to dig deep down, dig deep down and ask yourselves, 
who do you want to be? Not what, but who.

I was lucky growing up because I did not have television, didn’t have 
telephones, I didn’t have the computers and the iPods. And, of course, Twitter 
was then something that birds did outside the window. I didn’t have all these 
distractions and all this.

And I recognized very quickly that inside my head and heart were a burning 
desire to leave my small village in Austria – not that there was something 
wrong with Austria, it’s a beautiful country. But I wanted to leave that little 
place and I wanted to be part of something big, the United States of America, a 
powerful nation, the place where dreams can come true.

I knew when I came over here I could realize my dreams. And I decided that the 
best way for me to come to America was to become a bodybuilding champion, 
because I knew that was the ticket the instant that I saw a magazine cover of 
my idol, Reg Park. He was Mr Universe, he was starring in Hercules movies, he 
looked strong and powerful, he was so confident.

So when I found out how he got that way, I became obsessed, and I went home 
and I said to my family, “I want to be a bodybuilding champion.”

Activists on Obama's speech to Howard graduates: 'It's one for the ages'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/09/obama-howard-university-speech-activism>
Now, you can imagine how that went over in my home in Austria. My parents, 
they couldn’t believe it. They would have been just happy if I would have 
become a police officer like my father, or married someone like Heidi, had a 
bunch of kids and run around like the Von Trapp family in The Sound of Music.

The things that the agents said would be totally a detriment and would make it 
impossible for me to get a job all of a sudden became an asset for me – all of 
those things: my accent, my body and everything.

So it just shows to you: never listen to that you can’t do something. And: 
“You have to work your way up, of course, run for something else first.” I 
mean, it was the same when I ran for governor, the same lines, that you have to 
work your way up – it can’t be done. And then, of course, I ran for governor 
and the rest, of course, is history.

They said you have to start with a small job as mayor and then as assemblyman 
and then as lieutenant governor and then as governor. And they said that’s the 
way it works in a political career. I said, “I’m not interested in a political 
career. I want to be a public servant. I want to fix California’s problems and 
bring people together and bring the parties together.”

So, like I said, I decided to run. I didn’t pay attention to the rules. And I 
made it and the rest is history.

Read the speech in full 
<http://www.graduationwisdom.com/speeches/0067-schwarzenegger.htm>

Gloria Steinem at Tufts University, 1987
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a7a875846977e2866acb0581398dfb35911f5c%2F0_0_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20commencement%20speeches%3A%20from%20Jill%20Abramson%20to%20Neil%20Gaiman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20commencement%20speeches%3A%20from%20Jill%20Abramson%20to%20Neil%20Gaiman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a7a875846977e2866acb0581398dfb35911f5c%2F0_0_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Gloria Steinem. Photograph: BFAnyc.com/REX/Shutterstock 
A person who has experienced something is almost always far more expert on it 
than are the experts. A corollary is that any process including only experts, 
with no contribution from those with personal experience, will probably go 
wrong. An extension is that our educational system is long on book learning, 
but short on apprenticeship. A further extension is that our social policy is 
long on theorists, and short on organizers.


For a personal example: I wish someone had warned me that book learning, as 
valuable and irreplaceable as it may be, can also make you self-critical, 
reverential and otherwise fearful of acting. (Of course, this is especially 
true if you are female, or a different race or ethnicity, and nobody in the 
books looks like you – but I hope you have had more inclusive textbooks than I 
did.)

So whatever you want to do, just do it. Don’t worry about making a damn fool 
of yourself. Making a damn fool of yourself is absolutely essential. And you 
will have a great time.

Politics is not just what goes on in the electoral system, or in Washington. 
Politics is any power relationship in our daily lives. Anytime one human being 
is habitually powerful over another, or one group over another, not because of 
talent or experience, but just because of race, or sex or class – that’s 
politics. So when we look at the fields of your state and mind, and see that 
one color of human beings owns them, and another color works on them as migrant 
labor, that’s politics. When we find a hundred of one kind of human being in 
the typing pool, and a few of another in the boardroom, that’s politics. When 
children have only their father’s name, that’s politics. When most men have 
only one job, while most women have two – one inside the home and one outside 
it – that’s politics, too. And when students of color are still in smaller 
proportion than are people of color in the population, or women are a lesser 
percentage of dentists and engineers, or men a lesser proportion of physical 
therapists and nutritionists, that’s politics.


For both women and men, progress probably lies in the direction we haven’t 
been. For women, it may lie in becoming more active in public life. For men, it 
may lie in playing a real part of private life. But for both, the pleasure and 
reward is becoming a whole human being.


I wish I had realized this earlier. It means progress is not always a straight 
line, in which we must defeat or outstrip others and there is only one winner. 
Progress is a circle in which we strive to use all our talents and complete 
ourselves. Potentially, we are all winners.

It is time to carry out the greatest mission and legacy of our culture: that 
we are the world’s biggest experiment in multicultural and multiracial living. 
Our fragile planet needs to learn exactly this lesson of cherishing each 
other’s differences. This campus is imperfect, but it is far better than the 
world outside it, and the world could be much more like it – with politicians 
as open to visitors as are the deans in the hall I face; women heading 
newspapers and governments as they do here, and commitment to mutual support 
and non-violence.

Bigger is not better. America’s military might is not our best legacy.

One more point. This is the last period of time that will seem lengthy to you 
at only three or four years. From now on, time will pass without artificial 
academic measure. It will go by like the wind.

Whatever you want to do, do it now. For life is time, and time is all there is.

Read the speech in full <http://gos.sbc.edu/s/steinem1.html>

Ira Glass at Goucher College, 2012

My parents, throughout my 20s when I was working in public radio, they 
completely opposed everything that I was doing working in public broadcasting. 
Somehow, my parents are the only Jews in America who do not listen to public 
radio. They thought I should be a doctor. I was a pre-med student, among other 
things. Their idea for my life was to have some kids and live here in the 
Baltimore suburbs where I grew up, like their parents’ kids. I hope this is not 
embarrassing to say this: I had my own national radio show; I had been on David 
Letterman; there had been a New York Times magazine article about me before 
they stopped suggesting medical school was still an option.


And to their great credit, they changed. I think one of the most difficult 
things for a parent is to readjust what their kids should be with what their 
kids want to be. And I think when you’re the kid in that situation, it’s really 
easy to be glib and just want your parents to catch up to who you’re turning 
yourself into. And in my case, my parents, they were worried about money. My 
parents both grew up in really, really poor households, really financially 
insecure. They saw that I was making no money, and it just pushed all of their 
buttons, and they were really, really worried. When I was in my 20s, things 
were said between us that ...

My mom passed away a few years ago of cancer, and there are things I said in 
my 20s – I mean, we made up well before then – but there are things I said to 
her, and to both my parents, in my 20s that I still regret as we fought over 
what I was doing. I would just say to you guys, as your parents catch up to 
you, like I think my parents caught up to me with as much grace as anybody 
could ... don’t be a dick.

There’s a show on HBO that I admire a lot called Girls. It’s about what it’s 
like in the years after college when you’re trying to make a life for yourself. 
It’s about what you guys are about to launch yourselves into. Every single fact 
about that show is completely different from my life when I was in my 20’s, but 
the essence of that show feels exactly the same. What’s great about that show 
is that it’s a completely unromantic view of what your life is about to be. The 
young women on that show, they flounder, they pretend to know what they’re 
doing when they absolutely don’t. They strongly believe things that are 
transparently untrue. I myself spent years – years – in a terrible kind of 
politically correct phase where I travelled to Nicaragua and called it 
“Niquragua” to observe the Sandinista revolution firsthand.

You will be stupid. You will worry your parents as I worried mine. You will 
question your own choices. You will question your relationships, your jobs, 
your friends, where you live, what you studied in college – that you went to 
college at all – and the thing I want to say is: that is totally OK. That is 
totally normal. If that happens, you’re doing it right.

Read the speech in full 
<http://www.goucher.edu/commencement/past-commencements/ira-glass>

Martin Scorsese at NYU Tisch School of the Arts, 2014

Any of you, whether you’re actors, writers, directors, painters, dancers, 
musicians, all of you in different disciplines, but every one of you are 
engaged in the same struggle. To preserve that initial desire, that animating 
impulse, that brought you here and will carry you along.

The thing is, your position is never secure. So what you have to make secure 
and guard with your life, because it is your life, is the same pure creativity 
that brought you here and that brought me here, too. It’s the one thing that’s 
got to carry you through so irresistibly that sometimes it seems like it’s 
barely in your control, and, you know, mostly it shouldn’t be.

There’s a way that the force of disappointment can be alchemized into 
something that will paradoxically renew you. You either learn it or you’re 
undone by it.

It’s the work of the old masters, whoever your masters are, really, that 
remind you that you have to be singular, inflexible, unyielding in your own 
work so that even the struggle, that very struggle to achieve, becomes its own 
reward. The hard simple ability to continue is a kind of blessing.

You can’t do your work according to other people’s values.

I’m not talking about “following your dream”, either. I never liked the 
inspirational value of that phrase. Besides being sentimental, it’s beside the 
point. Dreaming is a way of trivializing the process. The obsession that 
carries you through the failure as well as the successes. If you’re dreaming, 
you’re sleeping, and it’s important and imperative to always be awake to your 
feelings, your possibilities, your ambitions, and don’t get hung up on the 
consequences.

The seductions of the rewards are as risky as the temptations of anger and 
self-doubt.

Theodore Roosevelt said, in 1910, in another springtime, at another university:

“It is not the critic who counts. Not the man who points out how the strong 
man stumbles. Or where the doer of deeds could have done them better. The 
credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena. Whose face is marred by 
dust and sweat and blood. Who strives valiantly, who errs, comes short again 
and again because there is no effort without error and shortcoming. But who 
does actually strive to do the deeds. Who knows great enthusiasms; the great 
devotions. Who spends himself in a worthy cause. Who at the best knows, in the 
end, the triumph of high achievement. And who at the worst, if he fails, at 
least fails while daring greatly. So his place will never be with those cold 
and timid souls who neither know victory nor defeat.”

You may be shy. You may be tentative. And even, at times, you may be fragile. 
But you have to protect your own voice, your creative spirit, no matter what it 
costs. That takes tenacity, confidence, and resilience.

I still find that trying to weave together into a visual narrative and cutting 
together two pieces of a film – two different images. When they come together 
in a way that’s unique and that’s different, something you hadn’t expected, 
that’s surprising and revelatory. It’s still exhilarating to me. It’s still 
satisfying. It’s still fulfilling. It’s still worth it.

Read the speech in full 
<http://apps.npr.org/commencement/speech/martin-scorsese-new-york-university-tisch-school-of-the-arts-2014/>

Neil Gaiman at the University of the Arts, 2012

I will pass on some secret freelancer knowledge. Secret knowledge is always 
good. And it is useful for anyone who ever plans to create art for other 
people, to enter a freelance world of any kind. I learned it in comics, but it 
applies to other fields too. And it’s this.

People get hired because, somehow, they get hired. In my case, I did something 
which these days would be easy to check, and would get me into trouble, and 
when I started out, in those pre-internet days, seemed like a sensible career 
strategy: when I was asked by editors who I’d worked for, I lied. I listed a 
handful of magazines that sounded likely, and I sounded confident, and I got 
jobs. I then made it a point of honour to have written something for each of 
the magazines I’d listed to get that first job, so that I hadn’t actually lied, 
I’d just been chronologically challenged ... You get work however you get work.

People keep working, in a freelance world, and more and more of today’s world 
is freelance, because their work is good, and because they are easy to get 
along with, and because they deliver the work on time. And you don’t even need 
all three. Two out of three is fine. People will tolerate how unpleasant you 
are if your work is good and you deliver it on time. They’ll forgive the 
lateness of the work if it’s good, and if they like you. And you don’t have to 
be as good as the others if you’re on time and it’s always a pleasure to hear 
from you.

When I agreed to give this address, I started trying to think what the best 
advice I’d been given over the years was.

And it came from Stephen King twenty years ago, at the height of the success 
of Sandman. I was writing a comic that people loved and were taking seriously. 
King had liked Sandman and my novel with Terry Pratchett, Good Omens, and he 
saw the madness, the long signing lines, all that, and his advice was this:

“This is really great. You should enjoy it.”

And I didn’t. Best advice I got that I ignored. Instead, I worried about it. I 
worried about the next deadline, the next idea, the next story. There wasn’t a 
moment for the next fourteen or fifteen years that I wasn’t writing something 
in my head, or wondering about it. And I didn’t stop and look around and go, 
this is really fun. I wish I’d enjoyed it more. It’s been an amazing ride. But 
there were parts of the ride I missed, because I was too worried about things 
going wrong, about what came next, to enjoy the bit I was on.

That was the hardest lesson for me, I think: to let go and enjoy the ride, 
because the ride takes you to some remarkable and unexpected places.

We’re in a transitional world right now, if you’re in any kind of artistic 
field, because the nature of distribution is changing, the models by which 
creators got their work out into the world, and got to keep a roof over their 
heads and buy sandwiches while they did that, are all changing. I’ve talked to 
people at the top of the food chain in publishing, in bookselling, in all those 
areas, and nobody knows what the landscape will look like two years from now, 
let alone a decade away. The distribution channels that people had built over 
the last century or so are in flux for print, for visual artists, for 
musicians, for creative people of all kinds.

Which is, on the one hand, intimidating, and on the other, immensely 
liberating. The rules, the assumptions, the now-we’re-supposed-to’s of how you 
get your work seen, and what you do then, are breaking down. The gatekeepers 
are leaving their gates. You can be as creative as you need to be to get your 
work seen. YouTube and the web (and whatever comes after YouTube and the web) 
can give you more people watching than television ever did. The old rules are 
crumbling and nobody knows what the new rules are.

Read the speech in full <http://www.uarts.edu/neil-gaiman-keynote-address-2012>

Seamus Heaney at the University of Pennsylvania, 2000
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd4ae7b7621a855274d3318e6b4f0cfc99468245%2F0_15_5368_3221%2F5368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20commencement%20speeches%3A%20from%20Jill%20Abramson%20to%20Neil%20Gaiman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20commencement%20speeches%3A%20from%20Jill%20Abramson%20to%20Neil%20Gaiman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd4ae7b7621a855274d3318e6b4f0cfc99468245%2F0_15_5368_3221%2F5368.jpg>
 Poet Seamus Heaney. Photograph: Kazam Media/REX/Shutterstock 
I have always loved, for example, the story of the anthropologist who was 
doing field work in a community of the Inuit people living up close to the 
Arctic circle. “Why,” the anthropologist asked a wise woman of the tribe, “why 
are all your songs so short?” And the wise woman replied: “Our songs are all so 
short because we know so much.” In other words, the experience of living as a 
single people in a single place, where each new generation follows the same old 
paths – such an experience produced a wonderful, enviable confidence about the 
reliability and the knowability of the world.


But that experience of living in a closely knit, ethnically homogeneous, 
hermetically sealed culture is everywhere a thing of the past. The Amish 
carriage now shares the highway with the Mercedes car; the Australian bushman 
may still go walkabout, but he goes connected up to his Walkman; the recluse in 
the beach hut north of Sausalito may look like a beachcomber, but he is 
probably an internet millionaire.

Living in the world of the year 2000 means that you inhabit several different 
psychic and cultural levels at the same time. And the marvellous thing about us 
as human beings is that we have been provided with a whole system of 
intellectual and imaginative elevators that whisk us from floor to floor, at 
will and on whim ...

There is a dreamlike quality to every commencement day. But the veil trembles 
more mysteriously if you are graduating in the year 2000. It makes you wonder 
if the date is a destiny or an accident. A turning point in your life has 
coincided with a turning point in our era. It is like the moment when a tide 
has risen to its highest and then rests: everything is at the full and yet 
everything is volatile. And for the duration of this moment, you are held 
between two worlds. It’s like those few seconds when you pause and hold the 
pose, and are photographed standing between your parents and your professors ...

You stand between whatever binds you to your past and whatever might be 
unbounded in your future.

One kind of wisdom says, “keep your feet on the ground. Be faithful to the 
ancestors.”

Remember the short songs of the wise woman. Another says: lift up your eyes. 
Spread your wings. Don’t renege on the other world you have been shown.

All of you are likely to be caught between these conflicting wisdoms, and 
indeed you are unlikely ever to be able to choose confidently between them, now 
or in the future. And so my advice to you is to understand that this in-between 
condition is not to be regarded as a disabling confusion but that it is rather 
a necessary state, a consequence of our situation between earthly origin and 
angelic potential.

Read the speech in full <http://www.upenn.edu/pennnews/current/node/1003>

Vaclav Havel at Harvard University, 1995
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3133d3f290b23ae38c1c0c1e6524f5825c437e07%2F0_0_2562_1537%2F2562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20commencement%20speeches%3A%20from%20Jill%20Abramson%20to%20Neil%20Gaiman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20commencement%20speeches%3A%20from%20Jill%20Abramson%20to%20Neil%20Gaiman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbest-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3133d3f290b23ae38c1c0c1e6524f5825c437e07%2F0_0_2562_1537%2F2562.jpg>
 Former Czech Republic President Vaclav Havel. Photograph: David W Cerny / 
Reuters/Reuters 
It is my belief that this state of affairs contains a clear challenge not only 
to the Euro-American world but to our present-day civilization as a whole. It 
is a challenge to this civilization to start understanding itself as a 
multicultural and a multi-polar civilization, whose meaning lies not in 
undermining the individuality of different spheres of culture and civilization 
but in allowing them to be more completely themselves. This will only be 
possible, even conceivable, if we all accept a basic code of mutual 
coexistence, a kind of common minimum we can all share, one that will enable us 
to go on living side by side. Yet such a code won’t stand a chance if it is 
merely the product of a few who proceed to force it on the rest. It must be an 
expression of the authentic will of everyone, growing out of the genuine 
spiritual roots hidden beneath the skin of our common, global civilization. If 
it is merely disseminated through the capillaries of the skin, the way 
Coca-Cola ads are – as a commodity offered by some to others – such a code can 
hardly be expected to take hold in any profound or universal way.


The veneer of global civilization that envelops the modern world and the 
consciousness of humanity, as we all know, has a dual nature, bringing into 
question, at every step of the way, the very values it is based upon, or which 
it propagates. The thousands of marvellous achievements of this civilization 
that work for us so well and enrich us can equally impoverish, diminish, and 
destroy our lives, and frequently do. Instead of serving people, many of these 
creations enslave them. Instead of helping people to develop their identities, 
they take them away. Almost every invention or discovery – from the splitting 
of the atom and the discovery of DNA to television and the computer – can be 
turned against us and used to our detriment. How much easier it is today than 
it was during the first world war to destroy an entire metropolis in a single 
air raid? And how much easier would it be today, in the era of television, for 
a madman like Hitler or Stalin to pervert the spirit of a whole nation? When 
have people ever had the power we now possess to alter the climate of the 
planet or deplete its mineral resources or the wealth of its fauna and flora in 
the space of a few short decades? And how much more destructive potential do 
terrorists have at their disposal today than at the beginning of this century.

I do not believe in some universal key or panacea. I am not an advocate of 
what Karl Popper called “holistic social engineering”, particularly because I 
had to live most of my adult life in circumstances that resulted from an 
attempt to create a holistic Marxist utopia. I know more than enough, 
therefore, about efforts of this kind.

This does not relieve me, however, of the responsibility to think of ways to 
make the world better.


Even in the most democratic of conditions, politicians have immense influence, 
perhaps more than they themselves realize. This influence does not lie in their 
actual mandates, which in any case are considerably limited. It lies in 
something else: in the spontaneous impact their charisma has on the public.

The main task of the present generation of politicians is not, I think to 
ingratiate themselves with the public through the decisions they take or their 
smiles on television. It is not to go on winning elections and ensuring 
themselves a place in the sun till the end of their days. Their role is 
something quite different: to assume their share of responsibility for the 
long-range prospects of our world and thus to set an example for the public in 
whose sight they work.

Their responsibility is to think ahead boldly, not to fear the disfavor of the 
crowd, to imbue their actions with a spiritual dimension (which of course is 
not the same thing as ostentatious attendance at religious services), to 
explain again and again – both to the public and to their colleagues – that 
politics must do far more than reflect the interests of particular groups or 
lobbies. After all, politics is a matter of servicing the community, which 
means that it is morality in practice. And how better to serve the community 
and practice morality than by seeking in the midst of the global (and globally 
threatened) civilization their own global political responsibility: that is, 
their responsibility for the very survival of the human race?

I don’t believe that a politician who sets out on this risky path will 
inevitably jeopardize his or her political survival. This is a wrongheaded 
notion which assumes that the citizen is a fool and that political success 
depends on playing to this folly. That is not the way it is. A conscience 
slumbers in every human being, something divine. And that is what we have to 
put our trust in.

Read the speech in full 
<http://apps.npr.org/commencement/speech/vaclav-havel-harvard-university-1995/>

Melissa Harris-Perry, Wellesley College, 2012

If you’ve read The Velveteen Principles, then you know that everything that 
you need to know about how to have an authentic, successful life is actually 
conveyed in the book The Velveteen Rabbit.

I thought, I’ll do a little riff on Mo Willems with The Pigeon Principles 
series. You know the Pigeon books? Don’t Let the Pigeon Stay Up Late. Don’t Let 
the Pigeon Drive the Bus. (I’m sorry, I have a 10-year-old; this is what I 
read.) At first glance Pigeon is selfish and whiny, manipulative ... but if you 
read the pigeon with love, we will see that the pigeon actually gives us clues 
about how to be persuasive, kind, adventurous, and assertive. It would have 
been a great speech—I was going to tell you how to look at your own sometimes 
whiny, narcissistic self with love and actually find your best selves 
underneath all that fragility.

Now I do have to say, thank God that Kate and Haley said Beyoncé before I did. 
It is an indication that you are truly a part of Nerdland if you too love 
Beyoncé! Beyoncé ... OK! So after I’d gotten through the great men’s advice and 
the pigeon parables, I thought, how about hip-hop? I mean, who better to give 
advice to young graduates going off into recession-era America than rappers?

We’ve got KRS One asking, “Who gets weaker? The king or the teacher / It’s not 
about salary – it’s about reality.” It’s good, right? It’s a nice message – you 
know, pick the thing you love that makes a difference, not self-importance.

We’ve got The Roots – right? And in their track, “Thoughts @ Work,” they say: 
“F--- gettin’ money, for real, get freedom.” That’s a good message, right? 
Right. Follow your passion, don’t follow the money.

And then of course I got to the most important piece of hip-hop advice ever 
dispensed by that prophet the Notorious BIG. “Never get high on your own 
supply.”

At that point I decided maybe the hip-hop lecture was ill advised.

In a few moments you’re going to walk across this stage and you’re going to 
have your accomplishments acknowledged in the acquisition of a certification 
that youknow something.

But even as you accept your hard-won degree, I encourage you to embrace the 
reality that you know almost nothing.

I love my iPad. I’m reading my lecture right now from my iPad. I love that it 
streams books and knowledge and information to me, Matrix-like, at a moment. 
Like, toowoosh! Anything that I need to know. But it is important for me to 
pretty regularly just go stand in the library. It is anawe-full experience 
standing in a library. I think of myself as quite accomplished. I’ve written 
two books – heh-hey. But when you stand in the library and you are surrounded 
by those stacks of all of those thousands of volumes of texts of things that 
you know nothing about, written in languages that you cannot decipher, on 
topics you can barely fathom, it is humbling.

So remember, ignorance is not your enemy. Only complacency with ignorance is 
to be resisted. Never become so enamored of your own smarts that you stop 
signing up for life’s hard classes. Remember to keep forming hypotheses and 
gathering data. Keep your conclusions light and your curiosity ferocious. Keep 
groping in the darkness with ravenous desire.

Read the speech in full 
<http://www.graduationwisdom.com/speeches/0113-harris-perry-best-pieces-of-commencement-advice.htm>
 