
A strange confluence of events: it just so happened that, virtually on the eve 
of the launch ofCif belief <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief> 
site, Ariane Sherinelaunched her atheist bus campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising>. I 
say "her", but as she would be the first to say, it's as much yours as hers. 
This was an idea that materialised from an idle "wouldn't it be nice?" piece of 
musing by Ariane on "a comment-is-free website 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/guest_contributors/article5003070.ece>
" (Dear Joan, let me send you the url).

All credit to Ariane: after commenters on her original piece proposing an 
atheist ad campaign on London buses expressed their support, she took it up and 
ran with it. That meant finding out about placing the ads and the cost of doing 
so, thinking about the wording, and then – stroke of genius – winning the 
support (in matching funding up to £5,500) of Richard Dawkins and his 
foundation. But the rest is history, because – thanks to Cif givers – the 
target funding was far exceeded before breakfast after Ariane's post went live 
on Monday at 7am. It also broke Cif records, the thread eventually closing with 
more than 2,000 comments.

Her feet have hardly touched the ground since, and when I last spoke to her, 
Ariane was understandably a bit frazzled, if elated. Sheblogged for us again on 
Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/23/atheist-bus-campaign-ariane-sherine>
 with a campaign update, after being up all night checking the fine print of 
the Advertising Standards Authority's code, having spent the previous two days 
rushing from radio interview to TV studio.

At time of writing, the total raised was heading north of £100,000 (not 
including gift aid or the Dawkins contribution). Many of you have taken the 
opportunity to suggest additional ways of taking forward the atheist bus 
campaign, given the unexpected level of funding. You can count on Ariane 
keeping you posted on plans and developments here.

Meanwhile, it just goes to show that the themes of religion, faith, belief, 
unbelief, atheism, agnosticism, what you will, still have the power to involve 
us and engage us deeply. (Mind you, we'd have to be pretty thick not to have 
noticed some interest in this on Cif before now.) But for those of you with a 
special interest, please joinAndrew Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/andrewbrown> – now not only 
blogging, but busily editingCif belief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief>. 

The atheist bus campaign definitely made a nice change from thinking about 
collapse of the banking system, world recession, shenanigans on super-yachts, 
and the rest. But the bread-and-butter of Cif continues, of course, with the 
recent series on "A new Bretton Woods" and, this week, with "After New Labour", 
looking ahead to the second Commentisfree/Soundings panel debate, starring MPs 
Harriet Harman and Jon Cruddas, Chuka Umunna and Jeremy Gilbert (further detail 
and booking informationhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/aug/21/1>). And then there's 
the small matter of the US presidential election drawing to its conclusion on 
November 4-5 – along with our Washington-based colleagues, Cif will be staying 
up, so please join us for state-by-state comment as the results come through.

Which reminds me: much has been much said about how professionally – and 
gainfully – the Obama campaign has used the web as a fundraising tool. On a 
more modest scale, the atheist bus campaign has raised a six-figure sum via 
Cif, but I wonder whether a party political cause could ever match such an 
enthusiastic reception, let alone make as much money. In a country generally 
liberal and lackadaisical about religious observance (certainly, by comparison 
with the US), we seem to care much more about the big philosophical questions 
than we do about the big political ones. Or am I wrong? You tell me.

Perhaps more fruitfully, if you have any bright ideas for other campaigns like 
Ariane's, we're all ears. Sadly, I suspect the beauty of the atheist bus 
initiative was its spontaneity as a "Cif community" enterprise; premeditated, 
these things lack the necessary authenticity. But hey, prove me wrong, please.
 