
Everyone from NME to the Sydney Morning Herald agreed: Tame Impala’s Let It 
Happen was the tune of the year. A “mesmerising song”according to the Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/music/2015-song-of-the-year-let-it-happen-by-tame-impala-20151214-glmv17.html#ixzz3v0DvBXNO>
, “that could introduce an explanation of 2015.”

The music was sprawling and psychedelic, with a very danceable beat while the 
lyrics were almost yogic, extolling the virtues of yielding to the flow of 
life. For months, I played it over and over – as if the song had a meaning and 
a message that was peculiar to the times, a portent of sorts.

David Marr's review of 2015: terror fears and shark scares, but Australia 
carried on regardless
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/24/david-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless>
The falcon had long ago stopped hearing the falconer and I wondered if in this 
song there contained a message: was this how to live? You just go with the flow?

You can go with the flow or you can push against it. But now, all around, 
there seemed to be an uneasy apprehension that we were in a flow we should not 
go with. This was the year of pushing back against the currents; against things 
that felt wrong, evil or cruel.

We rose up time and time again this year. We pushed back: against Adam Goodes 
being booed at the football, against the execution of Andrew Chan and Myuran 
Sukumaran in Indonesia, against the shrinking resources allocated to women’s 
refuges, against attacks on the ABC and Q&A, against the treatment by the 
Abbott government ofGillian Triggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gillian-triggs>, and then – later – 
against Abbott himself.

It wasn’t just here in Australia, either. In January, after the Charlie Hebdo 
attacks, there were3.7 million people on the streets of Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/11/paris-france-anti-terror-rally-massive-show-unity>
, world leaders linking arms, marching in a way that suggested the formation of 
a new army – a people’s counter-insurgency.

What started in Ferguson, USA, last year continued into 2015, civil rights 
activists pushing back against police shootings, while race politics coalesced 
and fizzed for a time around the curious case ofRachel Dolezal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/rachel-dolezal-today-show-interview>
, the white woman who wanted to be black.

As the year unfolded, a million refugees pushed a path through Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/22/lesvos-humanitarian-operations-compassion-refugees-continue-to-arrive-by-sea>
, to destinations unknown.

But by the time November came around, by the time of the Bataclan slaughter in 
Paris, we were spent and heartbroken. No one marched, they just built shrines.

2014 was a year when the news just rolled in (let it happen, let it happen) 
and what could we do with the pace of everything except be dumb spectators, 
bearing witness to a horror show of chaos and disorder? The disappearance of 
MH370, Joe Hockey’s cruel budget, the Ebola plague, the shooting down of MH17, 
fighting in the Ukraine, more than 2,000 killed in Gaza, the Lindt café siege.

How could we not expect that something toxic about 2014 would seep into the 
next year?

Yet the push back of 2015 was less a sustained, contained fight from which 
political and social movements were born and was instead a series of 
skirmishes. They were scrappy, fueled by anger and heat, febrile and moving 
quickly, yet shifting little.

Through our avatars on social media we surged white-hot to the centre of 
whatever was happening (Adam Goodes, George Pell, Scott Morrison, Sam Frost). 
And then when that thing passed, we rushed to the next and did not look back.

I saw it close up as co-founder of the Mercy Campaign started in 2012 to fight 
for clemency for two Australians on death row, Andrew Chan and Myuran 
Sukumaran. There were the years of trying to get attention, the incremental 
accumulation of likes on Facebook, the infrequent media inquiries and running 
as the last item on SBS news before they went to sport or weather. Then in late 
2014 and 2015 both men received rejections of their clemency appeals and the 
story was in the hot zone.

And on it rolled: 58 days in that particular news cycle (it wasn’t Tame 
Impala, it wasThe Presets Ghosts  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Di5AT4MI6BY>
that ran in my inner ear from January to May: “Once I was a very young man, and 
very young men are none to clever/ sailed across to faraway lands/ and faraway 
towns of tin and terror”) until it reached its irrevocable conclusion on 28 
April.
 Tame Impala – Let It Happen 
Mercy’s campaign servers had crashed from the weight of web traffic, those 
managing the social media could, after a time, only observe the tide of 
messages and comments on our Facebook with a sort of awe. YouTube was filled 
with tribute songs people had made for the guys. Politicians of both stripes – 
some with tears in their eyes – spoke in parliament and gathered at dawn for a 
cold Canberra vigil. Muftis made mercy dashes and TV crews decamped to Jakarta 
and Central Java.


Then it was over. 

Autumn turned into winter and the soil was tilled. No one was talking about 
executions anymore. It was like it never happened. We move onto the next 
skirmish and the next outrage, as hungry and rangy as wolves.

The process of engagement and dissent now resembles the death of a star 
<http://www-astro.physics.ox.ac.uk/~podsi/SN_sketch5.pdf>: “There is no more 
fuel to burn and make it shine. Soon its massive dense core is bound to 
collapse under its own weight.”

What else could we do? This year we had to push back. It was such a cruel year.

It was the year Iranian Kurdish asylum seeker Fazel Chegeni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/how-australias-immigration-detention-regime-crushed-fazel-chegeni>
 – wretched, gone mad, incarcerated for an indefinite term – died on Christmas 
Island after an escape attempt.

It was the year eight men were led to the killing fields of Nusa Kembangan, 
bound, a cross drawn on their chests to mark the spot, and shot.

It was the year Isis released a video of Jordanian hostage Muath al-Kasasbeh  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/04/isis-muadh-al-kasasbeh-death-jordan-revenge-mood>
being burned to death while locked in a cage.

It was the storming of the central library at Mosul and the destruction of 
100,000 books, manuscripts, and newspapers. It was thebeheading of the 
81-year-old Syrian archaeologist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/isis-beheads-archaeologist-syria>
 who hid information from Isis about the location of hidden treasures in 
Palmyra.

All this – how can we just let it happen? Pushing back is a good thing, 
particularly when the world’s gone bad.

Twelve months of sexist jerkery - and those who stood up to it | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/23/twelve-months-of-sexist-jerkery-and-those-who-stood-up-to-it>
But pushback without real feeling and commitment behind it is just outrage. 
Here’s the flare of the fuel burning up before it dies, there’s the heat and 
the fury – bright and warm but only for an instant.

In Tame Impala’s song, there’s a verse that resonated. It’s about a Bedouin 
wind whipping around, carrying away everything that wasn’t bound.

Maybe 2016 will be the year of engagement, where we become bound. Our 
shattered attention spans could be healed and recalibrated over summer and then 
we could make a New Year resolution to stay with something – one thing – and we 
could work on that.

Why don’t we try to seek something more, something deeper and more profound 
than mere outrage? Let’s stay with an issue, after the fire has passed through 
it, and work for real change.
 