
The Queen’s runner Dartmouth will go to post with a favourite’s chance in the 
King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes at Ascot on Saturday after Postponed, 
odds-on for the race on Wednesday morning, was ruled out of contention by a 
respiratory infection.The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> has won 
the race named in honour of her parents only once, in 1954, and will hope to 
bridge a 62-year gap just weeks after celebrating her 90th birthday.

Dartmouth, the winner of the Group Two Hardwicke Stakes at Royal Ascot  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/dartmouth-dramatic-hardwicke-stakes-queen-elizabeth-ii-royal-ascot>
last month, was the second-favourite at around 6-1 after he was added to the 
field at a cost of £75,000 on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/dartmouth-the-queen-king-george-vi-queen-elizabeth-stakes-horse-racing>
, behind Postponed, a 1-2 chance to win the race for the second year running.

Dartmouth entry for Queen in King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/dartmouth-the-queen-king-george-vi-queen-elizabeth-stakes-horse-racing>
The shape of the race was transformed in a moment when Roger Varian, 
Postponed’s trainer, revealed on his website that the five-year-old had failed 
to show his usual sparkle on the gallops. <http://www.varianstable.com/>

The King George was first run in 1951, a year before the Queen’s accession, 
and the monarch took the fourth running of the race with Aureole, who was bred 
by her father. Aureole had finished second in the 1953 Derby behind Pinza, who 
took the King George the same year. The closest the Queen has come to a second 
success in the race was in 1974 when Highclere, successful in the 1,000 Guineas 
and French Oaks earlier in the season, finished second to the outstanding 
Dahlia.

In what is now a very open renewal of Ascot’s midsummer showpiece, Dartmouth 
is top-priced at 9-4 to give Sir Michael Stoute, his trainer, a record-breaking 
sixth success in the race, while Highland Reel, who finished just a head behind 
him when second in the Hardwicke, is an 11-4 chance to reverse the form.Wings 
Of Desire, the Dante winner at York in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/midterm-fifth-frankie-dettori-dante-stakes-wings-of-desire>
 and the only three-year-old with a credible chance, is 9-2, while Erupt,fifth 
home in last year’s Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/04/frankie-dettori-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe-golden-horn>
 is 5-1 and it is 20-1 bar the four.

“Up until this point, Postponed had not given us any worry during his training 
regime,” Varian, who took over the training of Postponed last autumn, said on 
Wednesday morning. “However, we felt Postponed did not work with his usual zest 
[on Wednesday morning] and a subsequent scope showed he is suffering from a 
respiratory infection. 

“This news is very disappointing and it is a real shame for Sheikh Mohammed 
Obaid [Postponed’s owner], the team and the racing public that he will not line 
up on Saturday.

Francesca Cumani announced as ITV Racing co-host for Flat season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/19/francesca-cumani-itv-racing-co-host-flat-season>
“But, as is always the case, the interests of the horse must come first. If he 
is not 100%, the only sensible thing to do is not to run.”

Postponed has won all three of his starts since joining Varian’s stable from 
his near-neighbour Luca Cumani, who saddled him to record a narrow success in 
last year’s King George.

Postponed’s last two victories have been at Group One level, in the Dubai 
Sheema Classic at Meydan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/california-chrome-stunning-win-meydan-dubai-world-cup-horse-racing>
 in March and aneasy success in the Coronation Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/04/the-derby-2016-live> at 
Epsom in early June.

Postponed moved to the head of the market for the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe 
following his success at Epsom and remains favourite for the showpiece event of 
European racing, to be held at Chantilly on 2 October.

“We will let the horse recover from this setback before making a plan of where 
he runs next,” Varian said. “We still have many big days ahead to look forward 
to.”
 