
The Eiffel Tower <http://www.greatbuildings.com/buildings/Eiffel_Tower.html> 
after a nuclear attack. A catastrophic collision between two cranes. A giantMr 
Messy <http://www.themistermen.co.uk/mr_men/mr_messy.html>. The Godzilla 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godzilla> of public art.

The ArcelorMittal Orbit <http://www.arcelormittalorbit.com/planning> has been 
called many things between March 2010, when this extraordinary Olympic 
eyecatcher was announced, and its completion this week.

"You can like it or loathe it," says Richard Henley, the Arup 
<http://www.arup.com/> engineer charged with realising Anish Kapoor 
<http://www.anishkapoor.com/> and Cecil Balmond <http://balmondstudio.com/>'s 
striking design. "But it's a really good example of how we can create, shape 
and make innovative structural designs in Britain and in a very short space of 
time. It's been fun getting the Orbit up, but it's also been an intensely busy 
time and a big emotional effort."

When engineers – rather self-deprecating professionals – speak of emotional 
effort, you know they have pushed themselves very hard indeed. Visually, the 
Orbit may be difficult to come to terms with, although once people are able to 
reach its double-deck viewing gallery and cafe next summer, many may well be 
persuaded by its unfamiliar charms. "You walk down a saucer-like dip into the 
shade at the bottom of the tower and then up into the bell-shaped entrance",

" says Kathryn Findlay <http://www.ushida-findlay.com/>, the architect brought 
on to the team to help make the Orbit a building as well as an artwork. "As you 
go up in the lifts, it gets lighter and brighter and you see and feel all this 
amazing red structure whirling – waltzing – around you. And when you get to the 
top, there's not just a huge vista all around, but a big hole in the centre of 
the viewing platform so you can look back down on the steelwork. It's quite 
wild!"

The 115 metre (377ft) sculpture was always meant to walk on art and 
engineering's wild side. Boris Johnson might have been thinking more along the 
lines of a latterdayTrajan's Column 
<http://www.learner.org/courses/globalart/work/213/index.html> when entries for 
the Olympic sculpture were judged in 2009, but Kapoor and Balmond were out to 
push boundaries. The two have collaborated several times, with the help of 
Arup, on giant artworks, includingMarsyas  
<http://www.hightexworld.com/en/projects/featured/kapoor-sculpture-marsyas>, a 
shocking red PVC membrane stretched across the Turbine Hall of Tate Modern nine 
years ago, andTenemos 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/tees/content/articles/2008/07/10/temenos_feature.shtml> 
Britain's biggest sculpture across the docks at Middlesbrough this summer.

The Orbit is in a different league, not simply because of its scale, but 
because it was planned as a habitable sculpture – theStatue of Liberty  
<http://www.statueofliberty.org/default_sol.htm>is another – and one that would 
live on for generations after the London 2012 Olympics. Taking their cues from 
the Eiffel Tower,Tatlin's Tower 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tatlin%E2%80%99s_Tower> [Russia's unbuilt 
monument to the Third International], theTower of Babel  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tower_of_Babel>and their own imaginations, Kapoor 
and Balmond plotted a radical new take.

"Anish and I were thinking how do you beat the Eiffel Tower?" says Balmond. 
"But then reality hit, with budgets. We didn't exactly come down to Earth, 
although we reduced the height by 50 metres or so, but we began to explore what 
could be different in a tower. We came up with the idea of an orbiting 
structure on the edge of the vulnerable, one where the form looks tenuous. A 
structure that was not obvious to read."

This way of thinking and visualizing out loud led to the improbable, if 
perfectly stable, structure you see today at Stratford between theOlympic 
Stadium <http://www.london2012.com/olympic-stadium> and Zaha Hadid's Aquatics 
Centre <http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/london-aquatics-centre/>. "We 
knew we were moving away from pure sculpture and from architecture and 
engineering," says Balmond, "and we knew there'd be a hostile, or confused, 
reaction at first. That happened to Eiffel, too. It wasHans-Ulrich Obrist 
<http://edge.org/memberbio/hans_ulrich_obrist> [of the Serpentine Gallery] who 
said, we should think of the Orbit not as art or engineering but as a 
'laboratory of space'. We jumped on the phrase!"Balmond joined Arup in 1968. He 
became the global engineering firm's deputy chairman and formed the Advanced 
Geometry Unit within it in 2000. This enabled him to explore radical forms of 
structure including the Pedro y Ines Bridge in Coimbra, the beautiful 2002 
Serpentine Gallery pavilion with Toyo Ito and the imposing China Central TV 
headquarters , in Beijing, with Rem Koolhaas and OMA. Balmond left Arup at the 
end of 2009 to form his own practice, although he has continued as a consultant 
on the Orbit.

Although nothing like this orbiting tower had ever been built before, the 
timetable was about as tight as Eiffel's had been in Paris or Joseph Paxton's 
when he created the Crystal Palace.Very few drawings and even fewer models were 
made. "Although we did make a beautiful wax model of the final design; this was 
done through 3D computer printing. Lakshmi Mittal has it now," says Balmond.

"The Orbit had been well thought through at the concept stage," says Richard 
Henley, "with an eye for working down from the big picture to the individual 
components that would make it work structurally and visually. What I like about 
the finished work is that it's more painterly than you might expect. I was 
standing under it the other week. It was very sunny and you could look up and 
see the way that all the different sized parts and tiny changes in details made 
it look like the way you see an painting close up in an art gallery; all those 
thousands of brushstrokes."

"Originally, Anish and I had thought of making the structure as smooth as 
possible," says Balmond. "This wasn't possible because the cost of doing so 
would have been too high, but we came to like the textured quality you see 
close up. You can see the effort involved in its construction. It's a bit like 
carpentry in steel."

Essentially, the Orbit is a swirling tube of red steel tube cut up and bolted 
together from many sections. The raw material, 65% of it recycled from scrap, 
came from 38 ArcelorMittal mills around the world.

It has been rolled and cut by computer-guided machinery, at Watson Steel 
Structures in Bolton, Lancashire. The computer-cut steel components were 
transported by lorry, toLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and 
re-erected like pieces of a giant Meccano set. "We designed the tower so that 
it could be assembled in sections each 4.5 metres high," says Balmond. "There's 
been no scaffolding; each piece has been lifted and connected to the next. It's 
been a clean process," says Balmond. Construction has been delayed only by 
weather; the sections could not be lifted in strong winds.

"We used computer programming to test the tower under wind-loading," says 
Henley. "We knew it would sway – all tall structures do – but we needed to keep 
this within comfortable limits. We did the testing using Southampton 
University's 'shaking table'." This might sound like a fairground ride, but the 
"shaking table" is a piece of equipment that can simulate what it is like to be 
on a building as it moves in the wind. The decision was made to fit the Orbit 
with a tuned mass damper, a device installed at the top of tall buildings that 
swings in the opposite direction from the sway of the wind, stabilizing the 
structure below.Having found effective ways of shaping and making the Orbit, 
the big question faced by the artists and engineers was how could it be made to 
work like a building? With a café in the mix as well as a lobby, lifts, stairs, 
heating, lighting, service ducts, lavatories, wastepipes and a generator of its 
own, the Orbit was always going to more complex than Henry Moore's King and 
Queen or Anthony Gormley's Angel of the North.

Findlay, well known for her adventurous use of geometry in buildings in Japan 
and Britain, was commissioned to make this "laboratory in space" work as a 
building. "It's been a case of integrating all those parts – stairs, service 
ducts – that make the Orbit habitable," she says. "And of seeing it through 
planning permission. It's been fascinating work, but sometimes you'd look at 
drawings and think, they're incompatible with what Anish and Cecil mean. So we 
had our aesthetic 'Clash of the Week' moments, but I think it's all come 
together and makes visual sense."

Visceral sense, too. When people ride the Orbit's lifts or scamper up and down 
its 455 stairs, I think they will embrace this challenging structure just as it 
embraces them in its writhing steel arms. It may even effect buildings of the 
future just as the Eiffel Tower and the Crystal Palace did.

"I think there's a feedback loop in all our projects", says Philip Dilley, 
chairman of Arup. "We're quite used to engineering dramatic and unusual 
structures like the Bird's Nest stadium 
http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/feb/11/architecture.chinaarts2008 
for the Beijing Olympics [with Swiss architects Herzog de Meuron 
www.herzogdemeuron.com/ and Chinese artist Ai Weiwei http://www.aiweiwei.com/], 
and Cecil and Anish's sculptures. There's a pragmatism involved in realising 
them, but the artistry has been maintained in all them, and we're proud of 
that. We can do the maths and the testing to make unusual structures work, and 
safe, but we're getting more interested in art projects of this calibre that 
can inform engineering and architecture."

Boris Johnson wanted the ArcelorMittal Orbit "to arouse the curiosity and 
wonder of Londoners". It may well do more than this. Jokes, barbs and insults 
aside, the Orbit might just push architecture into fresh, and perhaps 
unsettling, adventures. It may well take some while to adjust to its new ways.

You will have to wait, though, until the Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> themselves before you can 
experience it for yourself.
 