
The Guardian Digital Department has worked with our Education Centre to 
deliver a new educational programme, the Guardian Coding Workshop.

Set up by the department’s diversity group, the workshop aimed to introduce 
people from lower socio-economic backgrounds to the tech industry. Attendees 
were recruited through the Guardian’s community partners like the Copenhagen 
Youth Project, and charities like Generating Genius and the Social Mobility 
Foundation. Ages ranged from 17 to 26, including sixth-form students and people 
in full-time employment.

While there are many technical courses, workshops, and meetups available 
throughout London, they mostly focus on young children or people who already 
know the basics. Courses and bootcamps that do offer free opportunities for 
adults are often incompatible with working life. This means they are only 
practically available to people who have the financial security to live without 
working for long stretches of time. The aim of our workshop was to get people 
started by removing the barriers of the availability of a space for learning, 
access to computers, the cost of eating while attending a course and conflicts 
between course times and working life.

Figuring out what to teach

This was challenging. We had four developers from the department volunteer to 
decide what we should teach. Involved were Gareth Trufitt, Susie Coleman, Max 
Spencer and Natalia Baltazar. We met up for an average of two hours every other 
week. As Susie wasn’t able to teach on the day, Jon Norman stepped in to 
mentor, and help finish off the workshop.

As no one had experience developing a curriculum, we struggled. The only 
things we accomplished in the first few months was coming up with who would 
attend the workshop, and which language we would teach.


Two months away from the workshop, still undecided about what would be taught, 
we finally decided to instead adapt an existing curriculum. Natalia reached out 
to Gregory Loyse who used to teach Python at City Lit in London. Using his 
original curriculum as a starting point we all dived in, changing it to suit 
our needs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa30b9166a27a167ab0cbc415f9c5b707f688eccb%2F0_215_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20coding%20workshop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20coding%20workshop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa30b9166a27a167ab0cbc415f9c5b707f688eccb%2F0_215_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Investigating solutions with students at the Guardian Coding Workshop 
Photograph: Maria-Livia Chiorean for the Guardian 
The most important thing for us was to replace the majority of the technical 
language, especially for the first day. The last thing we wanted to do is 
overwhelm students using terminology they wouldn’t know yet. The technical 
terms we did keep we made sure to explain as plainly as possible. We ran 
sections of the course with non-coders and updated the language and exercises 
where things were confusing.

It was also important that there were lots of small activities or challenges 
throughout the day to keep people engaged. We spent much of our time creating 
small programming problems. It was important to challenge the students, but not 
introduce too many new concepts at once.


The next problem to solve was how we wanted to start each day. Since our goal 
was to show the students what it feels like to work as a developer, we didn’t 
want them just sitting at the computer all day. It was essential that we also 
had them collaborate with each other. For this reason we created two offline 
morning challenges.


Another addition to the workshop is that two volunteers each day with 
different positions in the department come down and present a quick talk on 
their job, and how they got to where they are now. The goal of these quick 
talks was to demonstrate the diversity of ways people who work in tech have 
entered the field.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8299477c29510d89e725f1bc0109b4caca15c9a%2F0_173_5181_3109%2F5181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20coding%20workshop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20coding%20workshop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8299477c29510d89e725f1bc0109b4caca15c9a%2F0_173_5181_3109%2F5181.jpg>
 Mentor helping student debug a problem at the Guardian Coding Workshop 
Photograph: Maria-Livia Chiorean for the Guardian 
In the end it all came together and we felt good about what we had 
accomplished. By now the pain and stress of developing the curriculum has just 
about faded. Maybe we will even do it all over again next year.

What was the course like to teach?

When the students arrived in the morning, it was great to see that they were 
as excited to be there as we were. After making our introductions and getting 
everyone set up, we jumped into the workshop, starting with our offline 
challenges.

We designed these challenges to work as both fun ice-breakers for the students 
to play around with and as pointers toward the problems we’d be tackling 
programmatically later on.


One challenge involved the students using a restricted set of instructions to 
guide a turtle figure through various mazes on a grid. This went down really 
well and the final task - constructing a maze to be solved by the other teams - 
injected a (probably) healthy dose of competition into the mix.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed83d52cfca3b83fb5f97d207f1efc8fe79c2af1%2F0_0_3712_4640%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20coding%20workshop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20coding%20workshop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-guardian-coding-workshop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed83d52cfca3b83fb5f97d207f1efc8fe79c2af1%2F0_0_3712_4640%2F3712.jpg>
 Taking notes during talks at the Guardian Coding Workshop Photograph: 
Maria-Livia Chiorean for the Guardian 
During the challenges and the course, we encouraged the students to work in 
pairs or small groups as much as possible. Working in this way meant that each 
student had someone on their level that they could ask for help and it 
generated a lot of self-led discussion throughout the workshop. As mentors, it 
was often tempting to jump in and provide the answers, but letting the 
discussion play out naturally led to a far more fluid and rich learning 
experience.


The talks from volunteers across the Guardian digital team demonstrated to the 
students just how varied the roles can get within technology and led to some 
great discussions around how to get into those areas. Talking with the students 
afterwards also helped us to understand more about what they wanted to do and 
where their interests might lie.


Overall, the students were really keen to learn as much as they could during 
the workshop and patiently worked through a lot of the material we’d prepared. 
Unsurprisingly, it turns out that teaching the fundamentals of programming in 
three days is quite difficult, but the students seemed happy with the variety 
of the content and made a lot of progress regardless.


From our perspective, it was really refreshing to see people learning the 
concepts we are now so familiar with and grappling with them in entirely novel 
and insightful ways. It was a lot of work and there are of course areas that we 
can improve, but we think that each student left with a better idea of what 
being a developer is like and the possibilities open to them.

 