
1. Monument Valley

What we say: Beautiful puzzler Monument Valley 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ustwo.monumentvalley> won 
bags of critical acclaim in 2014, deservedly. It’s a surreal shape-shifting 
game that sees you guiding a mysterious princess through a series of 
impossible-architecture levels by tapping and swiping. Short, but wonderfully 
sweet.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMe4ymG_vnOE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMe4ymG_vnOE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMe4ymG_vnOE&media=>
2. The Room Two

What we say: The original The Room was one of the best puzzlers on Android, 
and its sequelThe Room Two 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.FireproofStudios.TheRoom2> 
continued the quality. “A physical puzzler, wrapped in a mystery game, inside a 
beautifully tactile 3D world,” as its developer put it, this was 
carefully-crafted 3D puzzling with plenty of head-scratching challenge.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsoyeCXKQ6_Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsoyeCXKQ6_Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsoyeCXKQ6_Q&media=>
3. Clumsy Ninja

What we say: Clumsy Ninja 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.naturalmotion.clumsyninja> 
was the best new character in an Android game this year, thanks partly to 
spiffing animation. His game is all about training the little guy to be a lot 
less hapless, from popping balloons and trampolining to playing basketball – 
with Clumsy as the ball. Joyful.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrithJfqxcbs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrithJfqxcbs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrithJfqxcbs&media=>
4. The Walking Dead

What we say: Telltale Games’ Walking Dead games are gripping, polished 
adventure titles that adopt a TV-style episodic format to tell their stories. 
You’ll want to binge-play them just as you might binge-watch the 
zombie-apocalyptic show that they’re based on. And while I’ve chosenSeason One 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.telltalegames.walkingdead100>
 for this roundup,Season Two follows on perfectly 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.telltalegames.walkingdead200&hl=en_GB>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXDqTjsO9I0A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXDqTjsO9I0A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXDqTjsO9I0A&media=>
5. Threes!

What we say: Threes! 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=vo.threes.exclaim> might have 
been the most moreish Android game of 2014: a puzzler so simple in theory you 
wondered why no one had thought of it before. As it turned out, lots of people 
thought of it afterwards: there are hundreds of Threes! clones. But the 
original, adding 1s and 2s together, then 3s and upwards, remains the most 
addictive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYonTc2jLXEA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYonTc2jLXEA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYonTc2jLXEA&media=>
6. 80 Days

What we say: 80 Days 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.inkle.eightydays> sits in 
between books and games as a piece of work: a retelling of Phileas Fogg’s 
journey around the world in 80 days, with an added layer of steampunk culture 
and technology. There’s plenty of reading, but also plenty of decision-making 
as you plot a route and explore the cities along the way.

7. Hearthstone: Heroes of Warcraft

What we say: Right at the end of 2015, already-classic card-battler Hearthstone
 <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.blizzard.wtcg.hearthstone> 
made its way from iPad to Android tablets. It’s a deep, engrossing strategy 
game, but perhaps the best thing about it is the way it makes the genre 
accessible for newcomers too, with a well-designed tutorial.

8. Leo’s Fortune

What we say: Leo’s Fortune 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.leosfortune> won a design 
award from Apple this year, and its Android version was every bit as good as on 
iOS. A lush platform game with excellent level design, controls and visuals – 
and bags of charm too.

9. Surgeon Simulator

What we say: Surgeon Simulator 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bossastudios.ss13touch> was 
of the goriest games on Android this year, even though (in theory) you were 
trying to avoid the bloody bits. This port of the popular PC game saw you 
operating on “the world’s unluckiest patient”, transplanting teeth, eyes and 
double-kidneys with some... unorthodox equipment.

10. TwoDots

What we say: Dots was brilliant. Its sequel, TwoDots 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.weplaydots.twodotsandroid>, 
was brilliant too. An ideal pick-up-and-play puzzler, as you connected coloured 
dots over 135 levels, challenging friends as you went. Some purists still 
prefer Dots’ more open-ended formula, but TwoDots was sufficiently different to 
pick up its own fans.

11. Best Fiends

What we say: Released right at the end of 2014, Best Fiends 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.supercell.boombeach> is a 
polished puzzler that sees you matching coloured items to battle slugs, 
upgrading your own critters as you progress from level to level. And yes, the 
difficulty level starts getting genuinely... fiendish once you’re into the 
thirties and fourties, level-wise.

12. Boom Beach

What we say: Boom Beach 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.supercell.boombeach> was the 
third game from Supercell, the developer that’s enjoyed huge success with Clash 
of Clans and Hay Day. It was more like the former with its mix of 
base-building, defence and attack, except with a military theme rather than the 
fantasy characters of Clash of Clans.

13. Thomas Was Alone

What we say: Already a hit on browsers, PCs, PS3 / PS Vita and iOS, Thomas Was 
Alone <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bossastudios.twadroid> 
brought its solitude to Android this year too. And while a platform game where 
you play a rectangle called Thomas might not sound appetising, this is a lovely 
piece of work.

14. Fish Out Of Water!

What we say: Developer Halfbrick made its name with Fruit Ninja, but Fish Out 
Of Water! 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.halfbrick.FishOutOfWater> 
deserves to sit alongside that casual classic. It sees you skipping a group of 
colourful fish across the waves, each with their own bouncing pattern. Your job 
is to make them go as far as possible, while being scored by crab judges. 
Sounds weird, plays excellently.

15. Twisty Hollow

What we say: In an app store stuffed with match-three puzzlers, Twisty Hollow 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=air.com.arkadium.twistyhollow> 
was a breath of fresh air: a puzzle game involving rotating circles to match 
different items and characters, creating goods for a fictional town. It had 
originality and verve in spades.

16. Skylanders Trap Team

What we say: It needed a pretty powerful Android tablet and lots of space – 
2.5GB – butSkylanders Trap Team 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.activision.skylanders.trapteam>
 was stretching the platform to good effect. A proper, full-blown Skylanders 
game to match the console version, complete with its own joypad and portal 
stand so that kids could use their physical Skylanders toys.

17. Candy Crush Soda Saga

What we say: Yes, the Candy Crush games have plenty of haters. But they have 
even more fans playing on the sofa, on the train, in the loos at work... For 
them,Candy Crush Soda Saga 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.king.candycrushsodasaga> was 
a sequel worth playing: the same sweet-swapping action, but with new touches 
(rising soda and hidden bears, for example) to provide new appeal.

18. Football Manager Handheld 2015

What we say: Still the top football management franchise in the world, on 
smartphones and tablets as on computers.Football Manager Handheld 2015 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sigames.fmh2015> was well 
worth paying for even if you owned the last version, with its revamped match 
engine, tweaked scouting system and an in-game data editor for players who 
can’t resist the urge to give themselves some artificial assistance.

19. XCOM: Enemy Within

What we say: XCOM: Enemy Within 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tt2kgames.xcomeu> was 
expensive at just under a tenner, but you got plenty of value for money from 
this mobile port of the engrossing sci-fi strategy game. Tooling up your 
cyber-soldiers was part of the fun, but careful tactical planning – i.e. not 
just blundering around shooting – was key to getting the most out of it.

20. Game of Thrones

What we say: What a year for developer Telltale Games, whose Walking Dead 
games (see earlier) were accompanied byGame of Thrones 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.telltalegames.gameofthrones100>
, an official adventure based on the TV show. For fans, it was an absorbing 
chance to play within the world without just rehashing the plot. And for 
newcomers to GoT, it was an excellent introduction too.

21. Kingdom Rush Origins

What we say: It’s traditional to talk about fending off hordes of enemies in 
tower defence games, but it’s fair to say Android gamers are also used to 
facing hordesof tower defence games on the Google Play store. Kingdom Rush 
Origins 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ironhidegames.android.kingdomrushorigins>
 is one of the very best, though: fun and challenging in equal measure.

22. Angry Birds Transformers

What we say: Can Angry Birds have a hit with games that don’t play like the 
traditional Angry Birds games? Rovio tried hard in 2014, although the jury’s 
still out on its performance. But quality-wise,Angry Birds Transformers 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.rovio.angrybirdstransformers>
 was great: stompy robots (in disguise) shooting merry hell out of blocks and 
bots.

23. République

What we say: République 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.camouflaj.republique> was 
one of a number of games in 2014 proving that Android – and mobile in general – 
is perfectly capable of delivering rich, console-style games as well as casual 
fare. This stealth-action-puzzler featured a beautifully-realised world, and 
lots of originality.

24. World of Warriors

What we say: World of Warriors 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mindcandy.warriors> is the 
work of Mind Candy, the company behind children’s virtual world Moshi Monsters. 
This game was for an all-ages audience, though, as you collect and train 
warriors from various historical periods, then send them out to fight. 
Well-crafted and very playable.

25. World of Tanks Blitz

What we say: World of Tanks has been very popular on PC, but this year the 
multiplayer tank-battler crossed over to Android asWorld of Tanks Blitz 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.wargaming.wot.blitz>. It’s 
very much focused on that multiplayer aspect too, with seven-on-seven tank 
battles and a big battalion of vehicles to choose from, according to military 
taste.
 