
It is an exaggeration to talk of the pace of reform at the World Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank> and the International Monetary 
Fund, for there has been almost none to these, the so-called “Washington 
institutions” that, together with the US Treasury, have both sustained and 
constrained the global economy since 1945. How to reflect the changing balance 
of economic power has been endlessly discussed but rarely implemented.

That is why countries that had hardly any economic profile three-quarters of a 
century ago but are now giants, such as China, are starting to change it from 
the outside. The creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank,to which 
21 countries signed up in Beijing on Friday 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/10/24/uk-china-aiib-idUKKCN0ID08O20141024>, 
is in part a product of this frustration. The new bank will be both a rival to 
the existing Asian Development Bank, an offshoot of the Washington 
institutions, and potentially a complement to them.

The bank is relatively small, the majority of its $50bn startup capital  
<http://www.thestar.com.my/Business/Business-News/2014/10/24/Malaysia-joins-20-countries-to-start-Asian-Infra-Investment-Bank/?style=biz>
coming from China. But if and as it grows, it will give China the clout in 
regional financing that membership of the ADB has not allowed it to wield, in 
spite being a generous capital provider to it. The problem is that the United 
States has been cool towards a development that would increase China’s soft 
power and economic influence, particularly in south-east Asia, and would upset 
Japan, which holds the presidency of the ADB.Japan has kept its distance 
<http://www.ndtv.com/article/world/china-india-among-21-countries-to-sign-memorandum-on-regional-development-bank-611230>
, while Australia, Indonesia and South Korea, although they have been in 
discussions, were not at the founding meeting. So there is a power play under 
way in which, as in other areas, Chinese assertiveness is being resisted by 
America and its close Asian allies.

What is not in contention is that the Asia-Pacific region needs more 
infrastructural funds. For that reason alone, a reinforcement of this kind 
should be welcomed.

Strategically, the United States cannot keep on shoring up an obsolete 
economic order in Asia.China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is not 
withdrawing from the Washington institutions, it is supplementing them. Unlike 
certain other aspects of China’s policy, this development is properly seen in 
the context of the “peaceful rise” which China’s leaders have proclaimed. This 
is a case for accommodation, not confrontation.
 