

 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/28868332@N03/4601580643>
Facebook: become a fan. Photo by TeX HeX <http://flickr.com/photos/texhex/> on 
Flickr.Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/deed.en>
A quick burst of 18 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology 
team

join diaspora >> diaspora.com <http://joindiaspora.com/>
"A privacy-aware, personally controlled, do-it-all distributed open source 
social network". Could be interesting. Does 'distributed' mean 'peer-to-peer' 
and so not need for tons of servers?

Staying in Control of Your Facebook Logins >> Facebook official blog 
<http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=389991097130>
Better notifications of people trying to log into your account who aren't you. 
Plus a system which will show a photo of a friend (hard to spot for fakes; easy 
for you).

Video: Facebook Privacy Settings: How To Fix Your Profile In 2 Minutes >> 
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/05/13/facebook-privacy-settings_n_575732.html>
Two minutes of your time. "Here's everything you need to know to go back to 
the old days when you could control your privacy on Facebook with just a few 
clicks."

Conficker: The Enemy Within >> The Atlantic magazine 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2010/06/the-enemy-within/8098/>
It first appeared on 20 November 2008, hit 500,000 Windows PCs in its first 
month and grew to more than 6m computers. Possibly the patch that fixed it - 
which appeared before the worm - gave its writer a clue to what to create. But 
it goes beyond that: the second version of Conficker used MID-6, a new and 
super-secure encrpytion system that had only been proposed a month earlier. In 
short: Conficker is infecting an unknown number of computers (perhaps 100,000; 
perhaps 12 million) and nobody knows what it's about or who wrote it or who 
controls it.

Facebook is a utility; utilities get regulated >> Danah Boyd 
<http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/05/15/facebook-is-a-utility-utilities-get-regulated.html>
Microsoft researcher Boyd writes: "Your gut reaction might be to tell me that 
Facebook is not a utility. You're wrong. People's language reflects that people 
are depending on Facebook just like they depended on the Internet a decade ago. 
Facebook may not be at the scale of the Internet (or the Internet at the scale 
of electricity), but that doesn't mean that it's not angling to be a utility or 
quickly becoming one."

However, even with that, Facebook still isn't a utility.

Facebook and "radical transparency" (a rant) >> danah boyd 
<http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/05/14/facebook-and-radical-transparency-a-rant.html>
Yes, her again. "The battle that is underway is not a battle over the future 
of privacy and publicity. It's a battle over choice and informed consent. It's 
unfolding because people are being duped, tricked, coerced, and confused into 
doing things where they don't understand the consequences."

Is there a happy ending to Scotland's Minority Report? >> Guardian Law blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/afua-hirsch-law-blog/2010/may/16/scotland-crime-minority-report>
Scottish police are identifying events "such as Rangers matches" when domestic 
violence levels tend to peak... and then showing up at [peoples'] homes. Yes, 
it is a bit pre-crime.. though without the telepaths. Philip K Dick would laugh 
quietly.

Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg: Growing Something Big Out Of Something Small >> 
Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/2010/05/14/sheryl-sandberg-mark-zuckerberg-social-media-forbes-woman-leadership-facebook.html>
Facebook COO "Sandberg spoke to ForbesWoman Publisher Moira Forbes about 
keeping up with the tech world's furious pace of change while still making time 
to meet with every employee at Facebook."

Do computer screens upset your sleep patterns? >> CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/2010/TECH/05/13/sleep.gadgets.ipad/index.html>
"There's growing concern that these glowing gadgets may actually fool our 
brains into thinking it's daytime. Exposure can disturb sleep patterns and 
exacerbate insomnia, some sleep researchers said in interviews."

Steve Jobs Offers World 'Freedom From Porn' >> Valleywag 
<http://gawker.com/5539717/>
Steve Jobs apparently exhanges emails with Ryan Tate, from Valleywag. It looks 
as though Jobs doesn't like being on the geek hate list

New Entry-Level MacBook Leaked [Video] >> Mashable 
<http://mashable.com/2010/05/15/new-macbook/>
"The machine's CPU was upgraded to a 2.4GHz Intel Core 2 Duo processor, 
increased from 2.26GHz in the previous generation, and graphics were given a 
shot in the arm with a NVIDIA GeForce 320M GPU. These updates will be the first 
for the MacBook since October 2009."

Apple Responds >> Jeffrey Zeldman 
<http://www.zeldman.com/2010/05/14/apple-responds/>
A simple explanation of how Apple responds to Adobe's "We Love Apple" 
advertising. (Zeldman doesn't work for Apple.)

How secure is Flash? Here's what Adobe won't tell you >> Ed Bott at ZDNet 
<http://www.zdnet.com/blog/bott/how-secure-is-flash-heres-what-adobe-wont-tell-you/2152>
" In talking to Adobe representatives, reading interviews with Adobe 
executives, and reading Adobe's public statements, I've found a steady stream 
of denial where there should be transparency. One of the key issues in this 
discussion is security."

26 reasons Apple fanboys have got it all wrong >> TechRadar UK 
<http://www.techradar.com/news/computing/apple/26-reasons-apple-fanboys-have-got-it-all-wrong-689379>
Linkbait, but possibly amusing for people who aren't mindslaves in Kim 
Il-Jobs's one-party dictatorship...

QuitFacebookDay.com <http://www.quitfacebookday.com/>
Can a handful of geeks make an impact on a site that has half a billion users? 
Will it be followed by a "Quit iPad day"?

Acer to launch Chrome OS devices in two weeks (exclusive) >> VentureBeat 
<http://venturebeat.com/2010/05/13/acer-to-launch-chrome-os-devices-in-two-weeks/>
"We've learned from multiple sources that the Taiwanese computer manufacturer 
Acer will launch Chrome OS devices at the Computex Taipei show, which will be 
held from June 1 to June 5," says VentureBeat

100 Famous Writers You Can Follow on Twitter >> Online University Reviews 
<http://www.universityreviewsonline.com/2005/10/100-famous-writers-you-can-follow-on-twitter.html>
A lot of them are not primarily writers (Arnold Schwarzenegger, Mariah Carey) 
or don't actually use Twitter themselves, but there are still plenty of 
interesting names.

Can Microsoft beat Google in the battle to rule cloud computing? >> CNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/TECH/05/13/microsoft.cloud.computing/>
With the launch of Office web-apps, Microsoft is going head-to-head with 
Google....

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 