
If Japanese animation house Studio Ghibli hadn’t indefinitely shuttered its 
production wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/04/anime-producer-studio-ghibli-makes-its-last-film>
 last year, the recent 30th anniversary might have been a sweeter celebration. 
This week offers at least one happy return, however, in their rapturous 
penultimate feature,The Tale of the Princess Kaguya 
<http://www.studiocanal.co.uk/Film/Details/4ee2e397-808f-4707-a30a-a4600116274e>
 (StudioCanal, U) – a reminder of the signature artistry we might lose if the 
halt proves permanent and their far-from-exhausted capacity for creative 
exploration.

Veteran director Isao Takahata’s farewell film a typically lovely outing from 
Ghibli, but it’s far from typical in other senses: the whispery lyricism of its 
folkloric storytelling, as soft and spry as its pastel-sketch animation style, 
is miles removed from the dense felt-tip fantasy ofPrincess Mononoke or 
Spirited Away <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spirited-away>, though no less 
vivid. Drawn from a 10th-century fairytale about a reluctant princess, born of 
a bamboo shoot, yearning for a return to nature, it’s a lush ode to fleeting 
mortality that perhaps explains something of Takahata’s own chosen resting 
point for a brilliant career. “Lifetimes come and go in turn,” the film sings 
sweetly at its close; may Ghibli’s rebirth come sooner rather than later.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F104770932&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F104770932>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F104770932&media=>
Kaguya’s melancholy segues more neatly than you might imagine into that of Roy 
Andersson’s brilliant, bone-dry absurdist comedy A Pigeon Sat on a Branch 
Reflecting on Existence <http://www.artificial-eye.com/film.php?dvd=ART745DVD> 
(Artificial Eye, 12) – a film that smuggles a perversely hopeful view on how to 
live into its whey-faced meditation on life’s very futility. Completing a 
trilogy that includesSongs from the Second Floor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/feb/16/culture.peterbradshaw> and You, 
the Living <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/28/worldcinema.comedy>, 
Andersson’s latest can hardly surprise with its tone or technique. Acolytes 
will by now expect the dolefully droll skits, the serenely seasick-colour 
palette and the blase expansiveness of form. Told through 37 vignettes, 
immaculately built tableaux run the gamut from 18th-century military marches to 
lonely cafe suppers, linked by the tragicomic travails of two gormless 
novelty-gift salesmen.

Yet this comfortably glum wallow still finds ways to make the heart stop: a 
late, extended scene of rank human barbarity places the preceding jest in a 
disquieting context. Newcomers should know it’s not even his richest film: seek 
out the newRoy Andersson Collection  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Roy-Andersson-Collection-Blu-ray/dp/B00VVIIM1E>
(Artificial Eye, 15), which gathers the trilogy with his 1970 debutA Swedish 
Love Story, to see why.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dii2BzMaUr3M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dii2BzMaUr3M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dii2BzMaUr3M&media=>
The Swede may now have an unlikely rival in the warped arthouse comedy stakes, 
however, in Bruno Dumont – an auteur whose particular brand of Bressonian 
severity has hitherto yielded about as much wry humour as theLittle Red Book. 
That all changes withP’tit Quinquin, a dark-bellied but delightfully 
loose-limbed police caper made as a mini-series for French television – it’s 
receiving a limited cinema release this week, but at 197 minutes arguably plays 
more digestibly in its intended format onCurzon Home Cinema 
<https://www.curzonhomecinema.com/>, even if you lose some of its gusty 
widescreen atmosphere.

Either way, it’s a singular treat: a Twin Peaks-twisted mystery, set in 
starkest rural France yet executed with the knockabout flair of a Keystone Cops 
jape. Dumont’s tortured sensibility is unchanged – the case begins with 
dismembered human remains stuffed into cows, after all – as is his customary 
taste for non-professional actors. But as the bumbling investigation snakes 
circuitously around a community riddled with eccentrics and malcontents, a 
peculiarly warm feeling for human failing settles in; antic farce turns out to 
be as suitable a vessel for Dumont’s spiritual preoccupations as dour allegory, 
and a good deal more fun.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5IaPaB4Pzqk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5IaPaB4Pzqk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5IaPaB4Pzqk&media=>
The weirdness doesn’t end there. Persepolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/apr/27/worldcinema.animation> director 
Marjane Satrapi’s first English-language film,The Voices 
<http://www.arrowfilms.co.uk/the-voices-2/> (Arrow, 15), is a grisly, almost 
heroically unhinged curio, starring Ryan Reynolds as an amiable American psycho 
guided not simply by the voices in his head, but those of his pets. Gamely 
performed and jazzily designed, it swings wildly and not quite on target – but 
it’s not likely to be mistaken for anything else.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4DueSeIWn2E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4DueSeIWn2E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4DueSeIWn2E&media=>
The same can’t be said for the honest, heart-clutching kid-genius drama X+Y 
(Koch Media, 12), though that’s not the film’s fault. While it gives every 
indication of following a sappy triumph-against-adversity path, Morgan 
Matthews’s film – about an autistic teen, beautifully played by Asa 
Butterfield, learning broader life lessons on a maths olympiad – saves the 
toughest questions for the softest opportunities, and is more affecting for it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeYk0slXSY6s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeYk0slXSY6s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeYk0slXSY6s&media=>
If it’s pure formula you want, you could do worse than The Woman in Black 2: 
Angel of Death <http://uk.eonefilms.com/films/the-woman-in-black-angel-of-death>
(Entertainment One, 15), even as the film could do appreciably better: 
recycling the mildewed Victorian horror of its predecessor once more without 
feeling, it offers a few neat jolts, one Jeremy Irvine in appealingly 
distressed mode and absolutely no reflections on existence. Sometimes that’s 
enough.
 