
We’re inundated through the media with biology news about invasive species, 
endemic species, native species, endangered species, reintroduced species, new 
species and extinct species.

Identifying and describing species is difficult for living organisms let alone 
from fossil remains. If you watch a wildlife documentary or visit a natural 
history museum, you may get the impression that our knowledge of life on Earth 
is fairly comprehensive, but for the majority of described species we know 
little detail about their anatomy, biology and behaviour.

Take, for example, Omura’s whale. At around 10m long, they aren’t exactly 
small animals but it was onlylast year that they were observed for any length 
of time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/oct/31/first-glimpse-rare-omuras-whale-madagascar-video>
 as living animals - previously they were only known from a few beached 
individuals and specimens caught by Japanese science vessels. If a whale 
species can go virtually unnoticed imagine how many smaller organisms we’ve 
missed.


Colleagues and visiting researchers at the Oxford University Museum of Natural 
History where I work regularly describe new animal species, or new information 
about species that were previously only partially studied or known from a few 
museum specimens. The differences between species are being examined at ever 
more precise scales. In the nineteenth century, insect specimens would have 
been described and differentiated from each other from gross anatomy: colour, 
shape, size and structure of the major body parts. Today, these details as well 
as the behaviour, development, micro anatomy and genetic information are used 
and the general trend in taxonomy is that many species are more complicated and 
distinct than previously thought. This is why so many entomologistsare now 
genitalia obsessed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/04/its-all-about-the-genitals-the-secrets-of-fossil-insects-and-amber>
, examining specimens under the microscope and assessing whether the 
arrangement of penile bumps and hairs is a distinctive characteristic of a new 
species or not.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fthe-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F991a760cf9dc3002b24182d40e68cfd2cea7728b%2F0_126_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20concept%20of%20species%20is%20flawed.%20So%20why%20is%20it%20so%20important%20to%20us%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fthe-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20concept%20of%20species%20is%20flawed.%20So%20why%20is%20it%20so%20important%20to%20us%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fthe-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F991a760cf9dc3002b24182d40e68cfd2cea7728b%2F0_126_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
 The graptolite Didymograptus murchisoni. Remarkably, even though there’s not 
much to them, these fossil hemichordates, graptolites are identifiable to 
species level and really important fossils in dating fossil sequences. 
Photograph: Kevin Walsh 
Genetic analysis is a relatively new tool in the biologist’s toolkit. However, 
it isn’t as powerful as science fiction might suggest. Sequencing DNA from a 
museum specimen doesn’t quite work like a barcode reader at the supermarket 
checkout. Interpreting genetic information requires referencing against a bank 
of clean genetic sequences, but the majority of described species haven’t been 
sequenced at all. Those that have been may only have a limited data set of 
partial sequences from a handful of different individuals and although it’s 
easy to computationally compare sequences, with rare exception, it’s hard to 
point to differences in DNA and know what that difference means. (This is also 
why several suggested major reorganisations from genetic analysis, including 
thiscomb jelly one <http://www.pnas.org/content/112/50/15402.abstract> have 
later been rejected).

So why is the concept of species so important? At school it’s taught that a 
species is a group of individual animals who can interbreed and produce 
offspring and is the lowest (“varieties” and “subspecies” are even woollier) 
unit we use to group organisms. In theory that’s the difference between common 
blackbirds (Turdus merula) and redwings (Turdus iliacus), gloomy octopuses (
Octopus tetricus) and common octopuses (Octopus vulgaris) and carrion crows (
Corvus corone) and hooded crows (Corvus cornix). At its most basic, this 
traditional species concept, useful for theoretically dividing up life into 
groups is flawed for a number of reasons.


Most obviously, it’s impossible to experimentally test whether every organism 
can or cannot interbreed with each other, raising ethical as well as cost 
issues. Furthermore, there are organisms which were thought to be distinct 
which have been bred in captivity or found in the wild. Wholphins, European 
edible frogs, ligers, andpizzly bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/pizzly-grolar-bear-grizzly-polar-hybrid-climate-change>
 are some of the better known hybrids with parents from different species. 
Plants can regularly be manipulated to breed across traditional species groups 
and a variety of organisms can share genetic material without breeding at all.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fthe-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff525d48a5e7f31e15e55e0fe7dec1801836ca5c7%2F0_48_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20concept%20of%20species%20is%20flawed.%20So%20why%20is%20it%20so%20important%20to%20us%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fthe-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20concept%20of%20species%20is%20flawed.%20So%20why%20is%20it%20so%20important%20to%20us%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fthe-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff525d48a5e7f31e15e55e0fe7dec1801836ca5c7%2F0_48_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Kekaimalu at Sea Life Park Hawaii, captive bred second generation wholphin, 
hybrid between a male bottlenose dolphin and female wholphin (offspring of a 
false killer whale and bottlenose dolphin). Photograph: Mark Interrante 
Hybridisation and a host of other issues that undermine the species concept 
are broadly referredto as the species problem 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Species_problem>. Surprisingly, for a 
descriptive scientific term used so widely in policy, teaching, conservation 
and industry, the term species isn’t a nice precise descriptive term. It’s a 
generalisation. A list of caveats and assumptions. It’s because of the species 
problem that in reality “species” doesn’t really mean anything in itself. In 
most of biology it’s used to define a pragmatically useful group. We want to 
know how the different kinds of things in an ecosystem are affecting each other 
without having to laboriously refer to individual organisms.

It’s for this reason that we find fossil species described in the geological 
record and how for some groups, a knob, sulcus or fold in a fragment of 
skeleton or shell can be indicator enough for experts to determine this is a 
different “kind of thing” and that difference is important enough. Cherry 
picked examples of new species and their defining characteristic from 
palaeontological journals include: a new species of canid with united cusps on 
the fourth premolar (Weredelin et al. 2015), a new species of archosauromorph 
with knobs on the osteoderms (Heckert 2012) and a new species of ichthyosaur 
with a comparatively short humerus and femur (Lomax and Massare 2015). These 
species-defining unique differences seem trivial and certainly not strong 
indicators for biologically separate entities from other species of canid and 
icthyosaurs. However, these anatomical clues (and interpretations of them) are 
enough of a difference to indicate a different kind of fossil organism.

So how is a ring of stalagmites made by Neanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/neanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago>
 challenging our identity as a discrete species ofHomo? There is some debate 
over the relationships between the two groups. Traditionally, Neanderthals were 
classified as a different species:Homo neanderthalensis to our Homo sapiens, 
one of the key differences being cultural and societal development. Growing 
evidence suggests that the two species interbred, leading some to suggest that 
we’re closely related enough to be two subspecies of the same species-Homo 
sapiens- Homo sapiens sapiens and Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. Although it’s 
no knobbly osteoderms or slightly different tooth, the stalagmite structure is 
significant as it is yet more behavioural evidence alongside tools and 
Neanderthal burial sites that suggest, culturally at least, we may not be a so 
different species.

References:

Heckert, A.B, Lucas, S. G, Spielmann, J. A. 2012. A new species of the 
enigmatic archosauromorphDoswellia from the Upper Triassic Bluewater Creek 
Formation, New Mexico, USA.Palaeontology, 55, 6, 1333–1348.

Lomax, D, Massare, J.A. 2015. A new species of Ichthyosaurus from the Lower 
Jurassic of West Dorset, England, U.K. Journal of Vertebrate Palaeontology, 35, 
2,

Weredelin, L, Lewis, M.E, Haile-Selassie, Y. 2015. A critical review of 
African species of Eucyon (Mammalia; Carnivora; Canidae), with a new species 
from the Pliocene of the Woranso-Mille Area, Afar Region, Ethiopia.Papers in 
Palaeontology, 1, 1, 33–40.
 