
Overview

By Stijn Buyst, editor of Use-it.be 
<http://www.touristinfoforyoungpeople.be/#useit|0>, Maps for Young Travellers 
in Belgium

Twenty years ago, if you were walking around with a camera in Ghent, you were 
probably an art student. Today, the chances are you’re a tourist. Travellers 
have started to discover the pearl between Brussels and Bruges, and it’s now 
selfie time at the medievalGravensteen Castle <http://gravensteen.stad.gent/en> 
and inSt Bavo’s Cathedral <http://www.sintbaafskathedraal.be/>, with the famous 
altarpiece by Jan van Eyck.
Ghent locator map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/07/travel_ghent-zip/giv-300802W62J3lCASu3>
One of the great things about this city (the third most populous in Belgium, 
with 250,000 inhabitants) is that it’s managing to reinvent itself at the 
edges. Parts of the city centre are now awash with rib joints and places 
offering thewaterzooi chicken soup – the famous local speciality that nobody 
actually makes at home – but young people are starting up new bars and clubs in 
outer neighbourhoods such as Sint-Amandsberg, Gentbrugge and Muide.

The municipality is supportive of the move outwards. What was once part of the 
harbour next to the decrepit Dampoort railway station will be redeveloped into 
an imaginative housing project in the next few years. But before people move 
in, the city has allowed the experimental artistic collectiveDOK 
<http://dokgent.be/> to use the site for concerts, an improvised beach, and for 
drive-in cinema evenings during which a stunt car jumps through a caravan and a 
piano is thrown off a factory roof by way of an intermission.

But hip developments aside, Ghent has retained its strong character, and a lot 
of the new spots are the same old places but with new, young owners.Café Fatima 
<https://www.facebook.com/fatima.gent?_rdr=p>, next to the local art school, 
made a point of not removing any of the wallpaper when it took over from the 
couple serving daily dishes to its older regulars (the arcade racing game from 
the 1980s is still there as well). And when a new restaurant opens, it is often 
run by young chefs who prefer not to go after a Michelin star because of all 
the fuss that involves. They prefer to put their energy into no-nonsense menus 
with local ingredients (think pig) instead of investing in the right cutlery or 
pulling the chair out for customers when they arrive. But make no mistake, the 
quality at these Flemish foodie joints is high, and tables are sometimes fully 
booked for months on end at hot addresses likeVrijmoed <http://vrijmoed.be/> or 
Oak <http://www.oakgent.be/?l=GB&id=&title=>.


Where to go for art and design 


By graphic designer Dries Deriemaeker <http://www.driesderiemaeker.be/>, 
co-owner of print shopTopo Copy <http://www.topocopy.org/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099897430%2Fb24e84d9-7582-4295-a546-f6ea5027be2c-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099897430%2Fb24e84d9-7582-4295-a546-f6ea5027be2c-2060x1375.jpeg>
 An artwork by artistic collective DOK at the old harbour. Photograph: Linda 
Nylind 
Instagram snapshots: Ghent through the eyes of locals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/03/instagram-snapshots-ghent-through-the-eyes-of-locals>
DOK <http://dokgent.be/> is a temporary cultural project in a large area where 
the old harbour and the border of the city flow into each other – empty 
warehouses, some slightly out-of-place apartment blocks and the odd second-hand 
car dealer. The scheme let us set up our first print shop there four years ago. 
Together with DOK residents, it promotes arts, culture and sports initiatives … 
It even had a row-in cinema, where everyone was watching Jaws on small boats in 
front of a big screen on the water.Democrazy <http://democrazy.be/english> 
takes care of the live music shows, and you can also findSECONDRoom Ghent 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/SECONDroom-gent/134001396644360?_rdr=p> there, 
a gallery concept where cutting edge contemporary artists show their work.

Ghent has a vibrant street art scene, featuring the likes of Bué The Warrior 
<https://www.facebook.com/buethewarrior.art?_rdr=p&fref=ts> and his joyous, 
colourful creatures, and the enigmaticRoa 
<https://www.facebook.com/ROAStreetArt?_rdr=p> with his dark, black-and-white 
animals. Their work can be seen on walls all over town, often in collaboration 
with other less well-known painters. There’s one wall, at the junction of 
Sleepstraat, Grauwpoort and Rodelijvekensstraat, where almost all the Ghent 
street kings have made a big tableau together: Bué, my friendTopo 
<http://hellotopo.com/> ... all their styles blending in nicely. It’s a good 
spot to start your tour of Ghent street art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438100369843%2F05e5ff33-4f24-424a-9397-0b7b7f0563a0-2060x937.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438100369843%2F05e5ff33-4f24-424a-9397-0b7b7f0563a0-2060x937.jpeg>
 Street art by the ‘enigmatic’ Roa on Tempelhof. Photograph: Linda Nylind 
Another place not to miss is Blanco Gallery 
<http://www.nucleo.be/nieuws/detail/en/206>, a space inside the Nucleo studio 
complex. The gallery mounts excellent exhibitions, such as the recentThe House 
Of Ruth Presents Janet <https://www.facebook.com/events/1579651845631506/>, by 
my friend Ruud Rudy van Moorleghem. AndRiot <http://riot-ghent.org/> is a great 
shop, selling mostly artbooks, carefully selected by the owners Jurgen Maelfeyt 
and Caroline De Malsche.Subbacultcha <http://www.subbacultcha.be/>, which 
organises concerts all over town, has its offices there as well.

These days, art spaces are popping up outside the city centre. In the old 
harbour, for example,019 <http://019-ghent.org/> (Dok-Noord 5L) is a really 
young and fresh place – an artist-run exhibition, work and concert space in an 
old welding factory. In summer, the old Grindbakken (grit containers) next to 
the water, will serve as the perfect background forWastelands festival 
<https://www.facebook.com/wastelandsfestival?_rdr=p>.

Music/clubs scene


By Joanna Iselé, an indie-folk composer/performer who performs as Imaginary 
Family <http://www.imaginaryfamily.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438162671846%2F5fcbb86e-561b-4643-943a-b68a68ce31b9-2060x1131.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438162671846%2F5fcbb86e-561b-4643-943a-b68a68ce31b9-2060x1131.jpeg>
 Raketkanon performing live. Photograph: Tom Roelofs/The Hell Gate/Corbis 
A recent article in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/25/belgian-noise-rock-raketkanon-steve-albini>
 highlighted the Belgian underground noise rock scene and Ghent bandRaketkanon 
<http://www.raketkanon.com/> in particular. They are a great band, but there’s 
much more. The scene around local sludgemeistersAmen Ra 
<http://amenra-official.tumblr.com/> is big as well, with lots of bands and 
projects centred around the Consouling Sounds label (see below). The scene in 
Ghent revolves around so many genres: the psychedelic hiphop beats byDynnoo 
<https://soundcloud.com/acf_imx>; local rock royalty-turned superstar DJs 
Soulwax/2 Many Deejays <http://www.2manydjs.com/?page=radiosoulwax>; my 
labelmatesI Will I Swear <https://soundcloud.com/iwilliswear>; experimental 
drones byMathieu Serruys 
<http://baadm.org/releases/mathieu-serruys-on-germaine-dulac/> and Hellvete 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Hellvete/235382139820043>, both operating 
closely to the long-runningKraak label <http://www.kraak.net/>. The latest 
sensation isStuff <https://stuffmusic.bandcamp.com/>, who have entered the 
Belgian mainstream with their crazy mix of jazz, hiphop, funk and electronics.
Unday Records <http://www.undayrecords.be/>’ Spotify picks 
One reason why so much good music emerges from Ghent is that artists have 
plenty of opportunities to get out of their basements to perform. There are 
always free concerts happening around town – I used to go to concerts every 
night of the week. I only started playing guitar when I was 23, but I got my 
first show six months later. That’s probably the advantage of living in such a 
small town with so many stages. Just a couple of years later, I was playing my 
first record atVooruit <http://vooruit.be/en/overvooruit/>, which has always 
been a really important venue in Ghent. It’s a former socialist arts centre and 
meeting place, once combining a theatre with a supermarket and a big hall. In 
the 1980s a group of artists revived the building and it’s been the cultural 
heart of the city ever since. The last few years I’ve seen inspiring 
performances by Grouper, Bon Iver, Mulatu Astatke, Wilco, Caribou and Celestial 
Shore there. I even saw Joanna Newsom play a show there, and it only cost me €2.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099669444%2F8f8b31c0-8d8a-47c2-b946-d2a1d68c1406-2060x1387.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099669444%2F8f8b31c0-8d8a-47c2-b946-d2a1d68c1406-2060x1387.jpeg>
 The Vooruit arts centre. Photograph: Linda Nylind 
Deeper down in the underground, new (temporary) places like 019 
<http://019-ghent.org/>, Gouvernement <http://gouvernement.gent/>, In De Ruimte 
<http://www.inderuimte.be/> and Kerk Gent <http://www.kerkgent.be/> are popping 
up all the time, providing a stage for acts that are – if not as enigmatic – 
just as exciting. Nowadays, the scene is very much about crossovers between 
visual arts and music. Concerts come with exhibitions and vice-versa. It works 
both ways: the cover of my EP was drawn by a friend,Korneel Detailleur 
<http://www.korneeldetailleur.com/>, and my clips were made by friends as well –
Dries Bastiaensen <https://vimeo.com/driesbastiaensen> and Ben Verschooris 
<http://www.benvers.com/>. That’s probably again due to the size of Ghent: 
staying in your own scene just doesn’t happen here, I guess.

Where to eat/drink


By Nele Buys, a food fanatic who, with husband Mike Keirsbilck, runs the 
record labelConsouling Sounds <http://consouling.be/> and the record shop and 
coffee barConsouling Store <http://consouling.be/store/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438162990865%2Fe126549c-5981-4653-9111-4dfbab04eef0-2060x1379.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438162990865%2Fe126549c-5981-4653-9111-4dfbab04eef0-2060x1379.jpeg>
 A cafe by the market at Sint-Jacobs. Photograph: Linda Nylind 
If you’re talking coffee in Ghent, Mokabon <http://www.mokabon.be/> 
(Donkersteeg 37) is a classic. This small, popular coffee bar and roastery was 
founded in 1937. Coffee companyDe Draak <http://www.dedraak.be/nl> goes back 
even further: it has been roasting handpicked beans since 1864. Coffee to De 
Draak is a serious matter, that’s why we use its products at Consouling – we 
like our coffee strong and straightforward.

The best of Ghent, Belgium: readers' travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/03/best-of-ghent-belgium-readers-travel-tips>
If you want that extra barista touch, visit Gustaf 
<http://www.espressobargustaf.be/> (Sint-Jacobsnieuwstraat 45), where owner 
Xavier will happily discuss what you’ll be drinking with you. Drinking coffee 
becomes a personalised experience. If he thinks you’d like a slow coffee, he’ll 
make it in a vacuum coffee maker, and tell you all about the process while he 
works his magic.

Ghent has the reputation of being Europe’s vegetarian capital. I’m not a 
vegetarian, but if we eat veggie,Komkommertijd <http://www.komkommertijd.be/> 
(Reep 14) is our place of choice. It serves a variety of food in an 
all-you-can-eat buffet concept and has a cantina-style atmosphere. It’s very 
relaxed. As well as vegetarianism, ecological city farming is another thing 
that Ghent is pioneering in Belgium, and atLe Petit Botanique 
<http://lepetitbotanique.be/> (Kammerstraat 19), every ingredient is sourced 
from one of the Ghent city farms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438102912009%2F42b13130-6c45-481a-bbee-4bb845464b22-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438102912009%2F42b13130-6c45-481a-bbee-4bb845464b22-2060x1375.jpeg>
 Beef with cassis at the Publiek restaurant. Photograph: Linda Nylind 
I’m an avid supporter of the weekly local markets. There are several organic 
farmers here, and they need our support. Every Friday, you’ll find a stall from
De Volle Maan <http://www.devollemaan.be/geitenboerderij/nl> – a goat farm – on 
theVrijdagmarkt 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Vrijdagmarkt,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0572665,3.7259419,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c371478ce61bfd:0x976504d8e7fb89b7>
 market square. The farm’s yoghurt and the goat’s cheese with red onion are 
absolutely delicious. There are more organic food markets on theGroentenmarkt 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Groentenmarkt,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0559896,3.7223134,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c371473a452d45:0x89b2e56300e3ec4b>
 square (Friday, 7.30am-1pm) and atSint-Pieters 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Station+Gent-Sint-Pieters/@51.0361744,3.7108469,14z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c373df9337351f:0x4ceda1a1bb234aed>
 railway station (Sunday, 8am-1pm).

There are new places popping up all the time. There’s a good buzz about 
L’Amuzette <http://www.lamuzette.be/> (Krommewal 2 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Krommewal+2,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0586555,3.7284995,16z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c371384711f77b:0x59c1fa9c4666d44e>
) andMa en ik <http://ma-en-ik.be/> (Aannemersstraat 1A 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Aannemersstraat+1,+9040+Gent,+Belgium/@51.049695,3.7451651,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c376b1651a1841:0x2d9daca93446c027>
). But there are also a few classics that I just have to return to now and then.
Het Lepelblad <http://lepelblad.be/en> (Onderbergen 40 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Onderbergen+40,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0520819,3.7196542,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c37143e41aab0b:0x57be4de09ea50653>
) is my favourite for lunch, with a hearty kitchen and a homely feel.


For dinner, Aperto Chiuso 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Aperto-Chiuso/124637173839> (Sleepstraat 82 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Sleepstraat+82,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0626634,3.7221609,15.21z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c37139952bce75:0xd2fc669666e4e49c>
) is an Italian restaurant in a street full of Turkish pizzerias. I’ve been 
going there for 15 years, for freshly made pasta. I also adoreDe Superette 
<http://www.indewulf.be/desuperette/?lang=en> (Guldenspoorstraat 29 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Guldenspoorstraat+29,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0444587,3.7285177,14.17z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c37151b406a4a3:0x17e94c3e25f8b4ea>
), where you can eat pizza with cauliflower and homemade bread.Publiek 
<http://www.publiekgent.be/> (Ham 39 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Ham+39,+9000+Gent,+Belgium/@51.0595582,3.734609,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x47c371361a443969:0x8b25499fce7da03e>
) is the new concept of chef Olly Ceulenaere, formerly the chef at highly rated
Volta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/feb/10/top-10-food-shops-restaurants-ghent>
. It’s top of my bucket list.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438103064608%2Fa63cca10-cea1-40cb-a5d6-7df30204c1b5-2060x1166.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438103064608%2Fa63cca10-cea1-40cb-a5d6-7df30204c1b5-2060x1166.jpeg>
 Kitsch figurines at cafe and concept store L’Amuzette on Krommewal. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind 
For a drink, I recommend the shop Drankhandel Geers 
<http://www.drankengeers.be/site/en> (Ledergemstraat 7 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Ledergemstraat+7,+9041+Gent,+Belgium/@51.1005219,3.7611316,17z/data=!4m7!1m4!3m3!1s0x47c37747abbe2733:0x61cc1ab1c6baa875!2sLedergemstraat+7,+9041+Gent,+Belgium!3b1!3m1!1s0x47c37747abbe2733:0x61cc1ab1c6baa875>
), in Oostakker (just outside of Ghent). If they don’t have what you are after, 
it probably doesn’t exist. Visitors staying in the city centre should drop by 
the city breweryGruut <http://www.gruut.be/en> (Grote Huidevettershoek 10 
<http://www.gruut.be/en/Contact>), which produces excellent brews.

Sustainable and organic Ghent


By Nils Luyten, a human sciences researcher and upcycling enthusiast
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438164401897%2Fb2c04056-28ac-4699-9a14-b764c390a3ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Ghent%2C%20Belgium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fghent-gent-belgium-guide-food-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438164401897%2Fb2c04056-28ac-4699-9a14-b764c390a3ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ghent has a strong sense of the need for sustainability – cycling is the 
preferred mode of transport. Photograph: Linda Nylind 
Ghent is among Europe’s leading cities when it comes to locally driven green 
projects and sustainability.

Bed and breaking news: Ghent’s newspaper hostel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/27/bed-breaking-news-ghent-belgium-newspaper-hostel>
Community gardens are popping up everywhere. De Site 
<http://www.rabotsite.be/nl/actueel/62/de-site-als-best-practise-in-gent-> in 
the Rabot district is a really big one, built on a piece of land that in a few 
years will become a housing scheme. Another project isDe Stadstuin 
<http://de-stadstuin.be/> (the city garden), near the Handelsdok canal 
<http://de-stadstuin.be/bereikbaarheid/>. The plan here is to have local people 
farm their own chickens, grow potatoes, the lot. But of course we’re in Ghent, 
and we combine it with a bar. It’s just another example of how people in Ghent 
try to build communities around ecological projects.
 Free-range sheep grazing the steep banks of the river. Photograph: 
isadarko/Instagram <> 
One of my favourite community building projects is Leefstraten 
<http://www.leefstraat.be/> (living streets), in which a bunch of streets are 
being made traffic-free, all summer long. People create façade gardens andjeu 
de boules courts, and learn to live outside with their neighbours again.

Roof Food <https://www.rooffood.be/nl> is a new project that offers vegetarian 
meals like celeriac soup with roasted almonds, using biological vegetables, 
that are grown in small gardens on rooftops. Of course, the produce is being 
delivered by a bike messenger and the compost used is green waste from locals.


Readers’ tips and Instagram

There’s no better guide to a city than word-of-mouth recommendations – from 
people who live there and people who have visited. We asked our readers to 
share their favourite experiences andInstagram pictures of Ghent 
<http://gu.com/p/4b5f9/stw>. These are just a few tips – see more here 
<http://gu.com/p/4b675/stw>.

Grab an arty cocktail
Jigger’s The Noble Drugstore <http://jiggers.be/> is a cocktail bar in Ghent 
run by Olivier Jacobs, one of Belgium’s most talented mixologists. Jigger’s is 
all about taking the art and craft of cocktail making to perfection, and it is 
done in a lovely, cosy speakeasy-style bar. Olivier has a passion for foraging 
herbs and flowers, and he creates the most amazing infusions with them. Every 
week he has at least three new creations on the menu. His cocktails are not 
only works of art but are unique. A place not to be missed.
Bart D’Hooge
 Sphinx cinema and cafe. Photograph: maced1966/Guardian Witness 
Sphinx cinema and cafe <http://www.sphinx-cinema.be/>
Vibrant arthouse cinema with lots of festivals, events, premieres and an 
attractive cafe, with a terrace next door. It also has “happenings”, serves 
food and a large selection of cocktails, wines, coffees and Fairtrade drinks. 
All that in the middle of the historic centre of Ghent.
Captainofnoella

Party till the break of dawn in Club 69
Club 69  <http://www.club-69.be/>is a small but fun and nicely-decorated place 
to spend your evening. In general it is associated with the cool and hipster 
people of the town. The music they play is varied: from hip-hop to minimal. My 
personal favourite is Mister Moustache – he just plays the funkiest tunes.
Glenn Jones

Walking by de Leie … and to Korenlei, Graslei, Kraanlei
On a sunny day, I find nothing more relaxing than taking a walk next to de 
Leie river which runs alongside the city’s ancient buildings. You can then walk 
towards Korenlei, Graslei, Kraanlei, and end up near Baudelokaai and Portus 
Ganda. Another idea is to rent a boat (fromMinerva 
<http://www.minervaboten.be/en> near Coupure) and cruise along the Leie with 
some friends.
Esther de Wildema

Ghent Belfort, the city’s ancient belfry
Go and see the 700-year-old Belfort, as one of the three towers symbolising 
Ghent. It is next toSint Baafskathedraal <http://www.sintbaafskathedraal.be/> 
Cathedral andSint-Niklaaskerk 
<http://www.visitgent.be/en/st-nicholas-church?context=tourist>. It has been 
well renovated and houses the carillon that is still being played every week! 
Next to it you also have the city hall.
Esther de Wildema

 * For a streetmap of organic and green restaurants, shops and suppliers, and 
details of car-sharing, go toecoplan.be 
<http://www.ecoplan.be/themas/ecoplan-gent>

 * For an irreverent city guide with tips from local young people go to USE-IT 
map for young travellers <http://ghent.use-it.travel/> 
• This article was amended on 2 October 2015 to correct the address for Le 
Petit Botanique
 