



When the Soyuz rocket carrying Britain’s Tim Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/tim-peake> blasted off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/15/first-uk-astronaut-tim-peake-boards-international-space-station-beautiful-launch>
 from Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan this month, he tookmuch of the nation 
with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/live/2015/dec/15/tim-peake-launches-into-space-live>
. He isnot the first British astronaut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/29/helen-sharman-tim-peake-space-flight>
 andnot even the first from Sussex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2002/oct/11/spaceexploration.uknews>, but 
he is the only one ever admitted to theEuropean astronaut corps 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Human_Spaceflight/Astronauts/Timothy_Peake>. 
That makes a difference. As a career astronaut for the European Space Agency, 
Peake is uniquely placed toinspire British children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2008/mar/22/spaceexploration.spacetechnology1>
 for many years to come. The launch was a historic moment, but far from the 
only highlight of 2015.


Pluto photographs thrill Nasa scientists after nine-year mission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/14/nasas-new-horizons-probe-makes-pluto-flyby-nine-years-after-leaving-earth>
It was already an exceptional year in space. The face of Pluto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/pluto> emerged from the gloom to reveal a 
dazzling landscape of ridges, ice mountains and plains of solid nitrogen 
hundreds of miles wide. Robots on the ground and in the sky above Mars found 
ancient water marks and then evidence that water flows there today, leaving 
dark streaks on the walls of craters and gullies. Another probe plunged through 
frigid geysers that spray from Enceladus, one of Saturn’s moons : the vapour 
propelled by hydrothermal energy in a global ocean under the surface.


For one group of British scientists 2015 began with a bittersweet discovery. 
Images from Nasa’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter revealed the fate of the Beagle 
2 spacecraft.Not seen since Christmas 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/dec/27/spaceexploration.research1> 
when it parted from the European orbiter, Mars Express, the pictures showed the 
unmistakableMickey Mouse-shaped remains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/16/lost-beagle-2-spacecraft-found-mars>
 of the little lander. Partially opened, its outer cover apparently nearby, the 
images showed how close the budget mission had come to success. “I had given up 
on ever knowing what happened to Beagle. After so many years you think you’ll 
never know,” saidMark Sims 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/departments/physics/people/marksims>, the project’s 
mission manager at Leicester University. “It had obviously gone through its 
whole landing sequence and had started to deploy itself. When I first saw the 
images, I thought ‘My God, it might actually have made it’.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F261a98bb96cabbb98f38df8dff71933e1b57aefd%2F0_81_1700_1021%2F1700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F261a98bb96cabbb98f38df8dff71933e1b57aefd%2F0_81_1700_1021%2F1700.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of Beagle 2.
 Photograph: European Space Agency/PA 
It was not the last we heard from Mars. In March, Nasa drew on the world’s 
most powerful telescopes to show that the red planet once hosted avast, ancient 
ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/05/nasa-finds-evidence-of-a-vast-ancient-ocean-on-mars>
 that covered nearly half of the northern hemisphere. That Mars had once been 
warm and damp was nothing new, but the amount of water was a revelation. The 
scientists envision the north of Mars under around 20 million cubic kilometres 
of water, more than is found in the Arctic ocean. The huge body of water stood 
for millions of years but as the atmosphere thinned the ocean was lost to 
space. What remains, a mere 13% of the water, is locked up in the planet’s 
polar ice caps.


More breathtaking, though, was the finding in September that there is liquid 
water on Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/28/nasa-scientists-find-evidence-flowing-water-mars>
 today. The Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, the same probe that found Beagle 2, 
had swung around the planet taking pictures of strange dark streaks that 
appeared on crater walls and canyons during the planet’s summer months. 
Infrared analyses of the images found the hallmarks of hydrated salts on the 
surface, but only when the streaks were present. It looked a sure sign that 
liquid water was either condensing on the surface, or rising up from the briny 
reservoirs in the ground.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76540059ec26441d6e823d8ee9a49a918f7a9628%2F265_0_1646_988%2F1646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76540059ec26441d6e823d8ee9a49a918f7a9628%2F265_0_1646_988%2F1646.jpg>
 Hale crater on Mars, showing Nasa’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter signs of 
liquid water. Photograph: NASA/Getty Images 
Water is regarded as a prerequisite for life, or at least for life on Earth. 
The discovery that water flows on Mars means the planet may, in some parts, 
harbour niches where microbes evolved and exist even now. That would be in line 
with the discovery ofmethane plumes on Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/dec/17/methane-mars-curiosity-rover-life>
 last year, though chemical reactions on rocks can release the same gas.


The prospect is tantalising but the practicalities are frustrating. To find 
life elsewhere would answer one of the greatest questions of human existence. 
But there is a glitch. Planetary protection guidelines say that robotic landers 
must not spread Earthly microbes to sites where life might exist on other 
planets.Nasa’s Curiosity rover was not sterilised before launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/29/nasa-crossroads-mars-water-without-contamination-curiosity-rover>
 and so is not clean enough to venture on to Mars’s damp patches. Nor is its 
twin, a rover planned for launch in 2020. It is a quandary that scientists may 
work around though. Trundle about on Mars for long enough and the radiation may 
kill off any microbes that hitched a ride. Expect more in 2016.


“It looks more and more like Mars was a very habitable world three to four 
billion years ago,” saidMonica Grady <http://www.open.ac.uk/people/mmg67>, 
professor of planetary science at the Open University. “What we don’t really 
know is: did life develop there? If you asked me 20 years ago I’d have bet 
heavily against the possibility of life. But nowadays we know Mars was a pretty 
habitable place. The question is: did it start and did it go anywhere?”


Between Mars and Jupiter, a spacecraft named Dawn became the first to visit a 
dwarf planet. At 300 miles wide, Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid 
belt. As Dawn approached, twomysterious shiny spots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/01/dawn-ceres-nasa-probe-enter-dwarf-planet-orbit>
 became clear on the surface. The nature of the bright patches sparked a debate 
among astronomers, with the latest spectral images from the spacecraft 
suggesting they are not ice, as some suspected, butsalts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/09/nasas-dawn-throws-light-giant-bright-spots-ceres-dwarf-planet>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F920d712d232f2a3895dcca5c19fc84024ed2c6e4%2F180_453_2895_1737%2F2895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F920d712d232f2a3895dcca5c19fc84024ed2c6e4%2F180_453_2895_1737%2F2895.jpg>
 The surface of the 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko comet as seen from the Philae 
lander, which stirred back to life this year after extra sun fell on its solar 
panels. Photograph: Handout/ESA via Getty Images 
The European Space Agency’s Rosetta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/rosetta-space-probe> spacecraft, the first 
to drop a lander on a comet, continued to orbit the body,sniffing oxygen in its 
gas cloud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/28/rosetta-finds-oxygen-on-comet-67p-in-most-surprising-discovery-to-date>
 and flying close enough to film its own shadow on the comet’s surface. The 
Philae lander which landed not once, but thrice, fell silent three days after 
touchdown. But as the comet neared the sun and more light fell on its solar 
panels,Philae stirred to life again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/14/rosetta-mission-hibernating-philae-lander-spacecraft-wakes-up>
, long enough to call Rosetta. The moment was the highlight of the year for 
Grady, who works on the Ptolemy instrument onboard. “It powered up and it could 
still happen again,” she said. For now, the comet is too active for Rosetta to 
fly close enough to make contact.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9608cee56f289f0f007b509b273ffb9095ece76a%2F0_376_2200_1321%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9608cee56f289f0f007b509b273ffb9095ece76a%2F0_376_2200_1321%2F2200.jpg>
 Cassini spacecraft image of Saturn’s moons Dione and Rhea. The distance 
between Dione and Rhea was roughly 330,000km (205,000 miles). Photograph: 
HO/Reuters 
Meanwhile, on the sixth moon of Saturn, Nasa’s veteran Cassini probe went 
looking forsigns of life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/30/nasa-cassini-images-enceladus-saturn-moon>
. The spacecraftdived down to Enceladus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/22/spacewatch-clark-saturn-moon-enceladus-water-plumes-cassini-flyby>
 and passed through geysers that erupt from asaline ocean under the surface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2015/oct/30/saturn-moons-underground-ocean-captured-by-nasas-cassini-spacecraft-video>
. Scientists are still analysing the chemicals detected in the plume. If they 
turn out to include hydrogen gas, researchers would have good evidence for hot 
vents at the bottom of the moon’s ocean and good reason to consider Enceladus 
the most promising place to find life beyond Earth.


Orbiters and rovers have peered and poked at Mars for a long time. But other 
corners of the solar system had gone unexplored until this year. AsJohn Bridges 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/departments/physics/people/johnbridges>, a planetary 
scientist at Leicester University, puts it: “2015 was the year of the outer 
solar system.” It was an important year for images too. For 85 years, the best 
pictures we had ofPluto <https://www.theguardian.com/science/pluto> showed no 
more than a blurred blob. In July, the US space agency’s New Horizons probe
changed all that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/14/nasas-new-horizons-probe-makes-pluto-flyby-nine-years-after-leaving-earth>
. Barrelling past the dwarf planet on the edge of the solar system, the 
spacecraft captured Pluto in all itsstaggering beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/05/pluto-new-horizons-sharpest-ever-images-space>
.

“It’s opening up our view of the outer solar system,” Bridges said. “We have 
this idea of the outer solar system being this cold, inert place of dust and 
ice. But the key thing now, when we get a close-up view, is that there’s 
geological activity going on out there.” Inactive planets and moons are pocked 
with ancient impacts but active ones look different: the ground is turned over 
and refreshed. The Pluto images showed clear signs of activity in the form of 
giant regions of smooth, young terrain. “These are halcyon days for planetary 
science,” said Bridges. “There’s no question about that.”

The year produced, a fine demonstration of the fates of space hardware. In 
April Nasa crashed itsMessenger probe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/30/nasa-messenger-spacecraft-mercury-crash>
 intoMercury <https://www.theguardian.com/science/mercury> once it was done 
mapping the planet. A month later, the Russian cargo ship,Progress 59 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/may/07/progress-59-spacecraft-what-are-your-chances-of-being-hit-by-falling-debris>
, fell back to Earth after going wrong en route to the International Space 
Station. In the race to develop a reusable rocket,Elon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>’s SpaceX failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2015/jan/17/spacex-rocket-crashes-attempts-land-barge-docking-video>
 to land its Falcon 9 rocket on a barge at sea and thensucceeded on land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/22/welcome-back-baby-elon-musk-celebrates-spacex-rocket-launch-and-landing>
, whileJeff Bezos <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jeff-bezos>’s Blue 
Origin company landed itsNew Shepard rocket 
<https://www.blueorigin.com/technology> at a West Texas launch site. He made 
sure the world knew, too. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/24/jeff-bezos-1-0-elon-musk-blue-origin-new-shepard-lands-successfully>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9a3f46ab6c196148f1f6c0968ccbc682b3fbe6%2F0_0_2717_1933%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20the%20outer%20solar%20system%3A%20how%20space%20exploration%20reached%20new%20heights%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2F2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9a3f46ab6c196148f1f6c0968ccbc682b3fbe6%2F0_0_2717_1933%2F2717.jpg>
 Elon Musk’s SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket lights up the sky. Photograph: Craig 
Rubadoux/AP 
With ever more powerful telescopes on the ground and in space, astronomers 
added to the haul of thousands of planets spotted beyond our own solar system. 
One is Kepler 438b, claimed by Kepler mission scientists to be themost 
Earth-like planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/06/earth-like-planet-alien-life-kepler-438b>
 found to date. But the alien world, which lies 470 light years away, is not 
the most habitable. Intense blasts of radiation from the planet’s host star are 
thought to havestripped the atmosphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/18/radiation-superflares-kepler-438b-earth-like-planet-uninhabitable>
, leaving the planet Earth-sized but less than Earth-like.


The search for life beyond Earth took an extraordinary turn in October when an 
astronomer from Penn State University suggested that strange signals around a 
distant star might be the signature of aswarm of alien “megastructures” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/oct/16/alien-megastructure-could-explain-mysterious-new-kepler-results>
 in orbit around the planet. In December the possibility, which was seriously 
speculative from the start, was dealt a blow. Scientists dedicated to the 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence (Seti) used an observatory in Panama 
to look for signs of life around the star andfound none 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/dec/09/alien-megastructure-star-kic-8462852-shows-no-sign-of-life>
.

Those impatient for contact with alien life should not lose heart though. The 
world’s most comprehensive search for ET 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/20/breakthrough-listen-massive-radio-wave-project-scan-far-regions-for-alien-life>
 begins in earnest in January with backing from Yuri Milner, the Russian 
internet billionaire. Backing the launch earlier this year, Stephen Hawking 
said: “Mankind has a deep need to explore, to learn, to know. We also happen to 
be sociable creatures. It is important for us to know if we are alone in the 
dark.”
 