
In November 2012, an internal report into the shortcomings of the United 
Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/14/report-damns-un-sri-lanka> in 
the final stages of the war in Sri Lanka urged: never again.The secretary 
general embraced it 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=43496#.V8WspNfd5Rm>, speaking 
frankly about the UN’s failure to meet its responsibilities and the need to 
learn lessons. Ban Ki-moon went on to note that the conflict in Syria was the 
latest reminder of how crucial the organisation’s work was.

Almost four years on, however, the Syrian crisis shows the dilemmas still 
faced by UN humanitarian missions, and persistent deficiencies in its response. 
The $4bn (£3bn) aid effort is its most expensive and challenging to date. The 
dedication of its staff is to be commended. It is also all the more reason to 
be dismayed by the Guardian’s revelations thatcontracts worth tens of millions 
of dollars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/un-pays-tens-of-millions-to-assad-regime-syria-aid-programme-contracts>
 have gone to people close to Bashar al-Assad. They include payments to 
businessmen whose companies are under US and EU sanctions and to charities set 
up by the president’s wife, Asma al-Assad, and his friend and cousin Rami 
Makhlouf, linked to pro-regime militia groups.

The problem is clear: operating in the country forces humanitarians to make 
difficult choices, as a UN spokesman has said. One could be blunter: it forces 
them to make bad choices, since those are the only kind available. Faced with 
choosing between dealing with unsavoury partners or turning its back on needy 
civilians, it has opted for the former course. Yet the decisions it has made in
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> are of deep concern to many 
within the organisation as well as outside it. These unhappy compromises have 
left millions of desperate civilians without aid, and enabled a flow of aid to 
government-controlled areas which bolsters Mr Assad.

Concerns that the regime might kick the UN out of Syria entirely, should it 
become too outspoken, are real. With Moscow on his side, the president feels he 
has little to fear. Yet it is worth considering the precedents again. The 2012 
Sri Lanka review found that the UN had failed to adequately confront the 
government over its obstructions to humanitarian assistance. Thousands died 
from inadequate medical care and lack of food. In at least one instance, the 
report noted, the expectation that the UN would not confront the government may 
have influenced the latter’s actions.

The international community has failed to halt the war. A robust and fair 
humanitarian response is the very least required. The UN’s scope for leverage 
may be extremely limited, but it is not nonexistent. In one of the most 
disturbing cases in Syria, the World Health Organisation has spent more than 
$5m to support the national blood bank – controlled by the defence department. 
Insiders questioned the legality of dealing with defence rather than health 
officials, and acknowledged concerns that supplies could be directed to the 
military first. Blood bags and testing kits are not included on UN convoys from 
Damascus to areas outside government control. Yet when the agreement was 
drafted, the Syrian government could not obtain the supplies that it needed. 
This was, surely, a prime opportunity to push back.

The UN now faces calls for an independent inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/un-under-pressure-to-set-up-inquiry-into-syria-aid-programme>
 into its actions. Such a review would be valuable. But the record shows that 
asking the right questions and drawing the appropriate conclusions are one 
thing; putting them into action is the much harder but more important task.

• This article was amended on 31 August 2016. An earlier version referred to 
“latter course” where “former course” was meant.
 