
Quietness may be one of the most underrated values in pop music. Look up “the 
loudest band in the world” and you will be confronted by a history of lusty 
rock behemoths proudly devoted to blowing eardrums, fromManowar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/06/old-music-manowar-blood-enemies> 
(who achieved a sound pressure level of 139dB during a sound check in 2008) to 
the Who, Motörhead and, erm, Hanson.

Substitute “quiet” for “loud”, however, and the pickings are slim. There’s Dust
 <https://www.facebook.com/quietestdust>, the self-proclaimed “quietest big 
band in the world”, Norwegian jazz musician Tord Gustavsen’s Trio, once 
described as “the quietest band in the world 
<http://jazztimes.com/articles/15611-tord-gustavsen-quiet-is-the-new-loud>”, 
and an interview with Leonard Cohen’s musical directorRoscoe Beck 
<http://cohencentric.com/2015/06/15/roscoe-beck-on-leonard-cohen-the-worlds-quietest-band-jenny-sings-lenny-more/>
, in which he claims that Cohen’s group refers to itself as “the world’s 
quietest band”. Then the trail itself goes quiet.

In a way, this focus on loudness makes sense: increasing the volume of a song 
makes it stand out (something the music industry has exploited since the 
jukebox era) and increases the physical response. There is,according to Music 
Radar 
<http://www.musicradar.com/tuition/tech/why-do-we-like-our-music-loud-212790>, 
an organ in the inner ear called the sacculus that reacts to low-frequency 
vibrations over 90dB and is linked to a region of the brain associated with 
pleasure, so cranking up the volume makes biological sense.

What’s more, quietness doesn’t always work well with the way we now listen to 
music. Quiet music demands audio quality and close attention, rather than 
crappy earbuds and computer speakers that struggle to be heard over the 
incessant background hum.

Yet to focus on loudness ignores the infinitely more subtle appeal of being 
quiet. Air, the enduring French band whoseTwentyears compilation 
<http://www.superdeluxeedition.com/news/air-twentyears-new-5-disc-anthology/> 
is released on 10 June, are masters of the art. As any teacher knows, quietness 
can be more effective than shouting to make people pay attention and Air 
employed this gentle persuasion onMoon Safari 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=99myH1orbs4>, an album that draws the listener 
in with the peaceful sound of rain and muted percussion. (Belle and Sebastian 
pull a similar trick on their first four albums). Even when Air do up the 
volume a touch – as on Sexy Boy – Jean-Benoît Dunckel’s voice remains one of 
the gentlest noises in pop, a sibilant half whisper quite out of step with the 
rock’n’roll tradition.

How we made Air's Moon Safari
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/31/how-we-made-moon-safari-air-jean-benoit-dunckel-nicolas-godin-interview>
Moon Safari is full of intimate, lean-in music, where the listener has to pay 
attention or risk missing out. Given its warmth and peacefulness, it is no 
coincidence that the albumwas a favourite among clubbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/31/how-we-made-moon-safari-air-jean-benoit-dunckel-nicolas-godin-interview>
 after a night out, a time when the desire for amity, companionship and warmth 
replaces the steely urge to dance.

Quietness can work well at live gigs too. Kamasi Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/13/me-and-the-muse-kamasi-washington-jazz-kendrick-lamar>
’s recent Primavera Sound appearance saw the saxophonist’s band take the volume 
levels way down to the barely audible at one point, shushing the lively 
auditorium in what proved an emotional climax to the set. In doing so, 
Washington’s band also demonstrated another important – if often forgotten – 
principle of quietness: it is far harder to play quietly than loudly. Being 
loud, after all, is easy with the right equipment. While there are undoubtedly 
many acts doing brilliantly experimental things with volume (My Bloody 
Valentine for one), they are outweighed by a legion of bands who turn the 
volume up to 11 with no particular purpose.

Quietness, on the other hand, can inspire new ways of listening to and making 
music. Ambient, another genre that benefited from the post-clubbing explosion, 
was at least partly inspired by the influence of low volume. Brian Eno’s 
Discreet Music, one of the most important albums in the development of the 
genre, was inspired by Eno’s experience in hospital, when, left bedridden by a 
car accident, he put on an album of 18th-century harp music at too low a volume 
and was unable to turn it up.

“This presented what was for me a new way of hearing music – as part of the 
ambience of the environment, just as the colour of the light and the sound of 
the rain were parts of that ambience,”Eno later wrote 
<https://books.google.es/books?id=O0VMAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA179&lpg=PA179&dq=%22This+presented+what+was+for+me+a+new+way+of+hearing+music%E2%80%94as+part+of+the+ambience+of+the+environment+just+as+the+color+of+the+light+and+the+sound+of+the+rain+were+parts+of+that+ambience.%22&source=bl&ots=LC8o_vdiYQ&sig=eSNq1C4kWbecgdGcaqxA_-wXQGU&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CCcQ6AEwAWoVChMIht_osu_LxwIVBFwaCh0Lvgga#v=onepage&q=%22This%20presented%20what%20was%20for%20me%20a%20new%20way%20of%20hearing%20music%E2%80%94as%20part%20of%20the%20ambience%20of%20the%20environment%20just%20as%20the%20color%20of%20the%20light%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20the%20rain%20were%20parts%20of%20that%20ambience.%22&f=false>
.

So forget the “loudness war <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loudness_war>”. 
Manowar may be happy with their 139dB, but they are comprehensively bested by
fireworks, which reach 145 to 150dB 
<http://listverse.com/2007/11/30/top-10-loudest-noises/> when they explode, and 
the call of the blue whale, which goes all the way up to 188dB. Now that’s 
something to shout about.


 