
“Of course there’s manipulation. Manipulating audiences to some degree is what 
all shows and art do. I wouldn’t be doing my job if there wasn’t manipulation 
involved.”Seth Honnor <http://www.sethhonnor.com/portfolio/the-money/> is 
talking about his showThe Money 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/35467/see_whats_on/whats_on/shows/the_money>, 
which arrives at Battersea Arts Centre in south London this week as part ofA 
Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/23/battersea-arts-centre-guardian-a-nations-theatre>
. “My job as the artist is to hide the mechanics, and the craft is in taking 
people on a journey that they didn’t think possible, one that they may still be 
mulling over weeks or even months later. At the beginning of the show, everyone 
tends to be lulled into a false sense of security because it is often so low 
key, even quite boring. By the end, people are going: ‘how on earth did we get 
to this place?’ It can be thrilling, but a bit scary, too.”

How the nation's theatre reinvented itself | Lyn Gardner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/09/nations-theatre-reinvented-bac>
It is. You will have never have seen a show quite like The Money, a fiendishly 
slippery piece of game theatre conceived by Honnor and produced by the 
Exeter-basedKaleider <http://kaleider.com/>. There are no actors and there is 
no script, but there is likely to be high drama as the playing audience must 
decide on how to spend a pot of money on the centre table. If, at the end of 
the two hours, everyone around the table is not prepared to sign an agreement 
stating how the money will be distributed or spent, the pot rolls over to the 
next show. Participants have given the money to charities and individuals, 
including themselves. Just as in any scripted theatre show, The Money has its 
highs and lows, lulls and moments of exquisite high tension, and all sorts of 
characters – villains, saints, winners and losers – emerge. When I saw the 
first performance, at theGuildhall in Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/22/the-money-exeter-guildhall-review>
 in 2013, it even had the arc of a well-made play, reaching a climax that was 
part tragedy and part farce as everyone suddenly realised that time was running 
out.

Honnor came up with the idea for the piece after watching Dragons’ Den 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/09/dragons-den-review-sam-wollaston>
 on TV and being involved inOpen Space Technology 
<http://www.openspaceworld.org/>, a method of holding meetings and encouraging 
equality, discussion and decision-making that is familiar to many in the 
theatre world because of its pioneering application with theDevoted and 
Disgruntled <http://www.devotedanddisgruntled.com/> events. He wondered how the 
two might be melded and used in a theatrical setting.

“I liked Dragons’ Den, but I didn’t like the fact that it was just a few 
people who decided how money is distributed and invested. After all, one of the 
biggest narratives and challenges in our world today is how we decide how we 
should share out the resources we have.”

In many ways, the least interesting thing about The Money is the money itself 
and how it is spent. The pot in the middle of the table becomes a metaphor, and 
the drama that develops around it is entirely in the human interactions – how 
power is held, where alliances are made and broken, how difference is 
negotiated and how decisions are reached. It’s a microcosm of our real, 
imperfect world and the psychology at play when big decisions are made, 
bargained and negotiated. Could you do better, or does self-interest always 
kick in?

After coming up with the idea, Honnor took 18 friends to a caravan, locked 
them in and got them to take part in an early prototype of The Money. The fact 
that they were kettled in a particular space added to the drama, and since 
then, it has been performed mostly in civic spaces. At BAC, it will be 
performed in theold town hall’s debating chamber 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/31452/about_us/our_history/our_history> and 
during its time in London it will also play one performance in theHouses of 
Parliament <http://kaleider.com/projects/themoneyparliament/>, where, every 
day, decisions are made that affect us all and where those making the decisions 
often behave very badly.

The Money – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/22/the-money-exeter-guildhall-review>
On that first caravan tryout there was a framework but no rules. “They tied 
themselves up in knots,” recalls Honnor. It made him realise that if the show 
were going to have a future it needed some rules, as with a game. “Establishing 
rules around what is a very simple concept gives people a clear sense of the 
task and challenge, but then the presence of the money makes them behave 
bizarrely.”

The audience all pay the same price for admission. But those who want to 
actively take part in the discussion and decision-making must offer a donation, 
too: a minimum of £10. They take their place around the table, while the rest 
of the audience act as silent witnesses. They can watch, but cannot speak. The 
cunning twist is that, at any point during the performance, any of the silent 
witnesses can buy their way into the decision-making by making a donation. 
Choosing the right moment can be a power play as calculated as anything carried 
out byShakespeare’s Richard III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/the-many-versions-of-richard-iii-from-shakespeare-to-game-of-thrones>
.

At the performance I saw – the very first – the person who did this suddenly 
had a huge amount of power. After watching every performance and seeing how the 
piece has changed as audiences become more knowledgable about its nature (some 
have returned again and again), Honnor says that while those who buy in later 
have initial traction, particularly if they have a great idea, it’s hard to 
maintain it in the face of the group. “When people come in with an idea it gets 
problematised immediately.”

I’m not against art being difficult and challenging, but it does also have to 
be ethical
Seth Honnor 
Every performance finishes with a glass of wine and a chance to discuss what 
has happened. It’s what Honnor calls “the drop-off”, and he see it as integral 
to the performance. It’s a matter of ethics: “People know what the deal is, 
it’s made very clear, and they are treated as adults capable of taking 
responsibility. But, of course, some people do come out and wake up and go 
‘What have I done, how could I have behaved like that?’ They need a chance to 
process it and talk it through. I’m not against art being difficult and 
challenging, but it does also have to be ethical,” says Honnor. So far he has 
been wary of the considerable interest from TV companies in the idea. “I don’t 
want to hand it over. I don’t want to be responsible for a monster.”

But while The Money can bring out the worst in people, it can bring out the 
best, too. At the performance I saw, cringeworthy moments were balanced by acts 
of altruism, self-sacrifice, self-effacement, and quiet kindness.

“There was one really beautiful show when about halfway through somebody just 
asked: ‘What do we actually want to do?’” recalls Honnor. “There was a long 
period of silence as people realised they were being asked something much 
bigger than what they wanted to do with the money. The challenge of The Money 
is the challenge we all face: what do we want to do with our lives and how can 
we do it together?”

 * From 15 April until 1 May. Box office: 020-7223 2223. Venue: Battersea Arts 
Centre 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/35467/see_whats_on/whats_on/shows/the_money>, 
London.
 