
Elvis & Nixon review: Michael Shannon resurrects the King
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/18/elvis-nixon-review-michael-shannon-1970-meeting>
Richard M Nixon is like Macbeth or Iago: there are as many possible versions 
of him as there are interesting actors to play him. I’m not quite ready to add 
Kevin Spacey’s portrayal to the roster of Top Tricky Dickies just yet – Elvis & 
Nixon is perhaps too slight a movie – but that’s because the gallery of great 
Nixons already teems with big thespians making big noises in the Oval Office at 
3am, a large scotch near at hand as the end draws inexorably nigh.

Nixon is the crucial absence in the definitive Nixon movie, All The 
President’s Men, the great white whale for Woodward and Bernstein’s Ahab to 
harpoon with headlines. But in the decades since his fall in 1974, that yawning 
emptiness – the word is apposite to the man, too – was filled by a succession 
of great actors who, simply by watching the news all their lives, had come to 
their own diverse conceptions of the man, and how to tackle him: sweaty, 
neuroticAnthony Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> in 
Oliver Stone’s Nixon; drunken, vengeful Philip Baker Hall in Robert Altman’s 
Secret Honor; and smooth manipulator Frank Langella in Frost/Nixon.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZnEwNincj8w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZnEwNincj8w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZnEwNincj8w&media=>
Anthony Hopkins: five best moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/03/anthony-hopkins-five-best-moments-film>
Some of my favourite Nixons, however, are fictional, and oddly, many of them 
are found presiding over prisons, much as Nixon presided over the madhouse of 
60s and 70s America. For The Longest Yard (1974), director Robert Aldrich told 
Eddie Albert to adorn his prison warden with unmistakable Nixonisms. Bob 
Gunton’s Warden Norton in The Shawshank Redemption draws deeply on Gunton’s own 
long-touring Nixon one-man show (he also played Nixon in contemporary 
reenactments of the Watergate tapes for ABC News), and while watching Renny 
Harlin’s disposable 1988 horror movie Prison, I immediately thought its 
governor, Lane Smith, would be a perfect Nixon. Imagine my delight when I 
discovered him slaying the role in the 1989 TV adaptation of The Final Days, 
effortlessly capturing the unshaven, vindictive Trickster as he faced his
götterdämmerung.

But might I pipe up in favour of a particular favourite? Dan Hedaya’s Nixon in 
Dick, a sure-footed Watergate parody highlighting the comedic potential of the 
scandal, is a comic masterpiece, all growls (“Shuddap, Checkers, goddammit!”), 
hooded eyes and bulging neck veins, mixing rage and drunken self-pity with 
surprising sweetness. To see him in the final shot, ruefully acknowledging from 
his departing helicopter the two idiot teenage girls who, in this version of 
the scandal, have accidentally toppled him is to wonder what might have been 
had Richard M Nixon just been a little nicer to everyone.
 