
What’s the story?

On 24 April, Armenians in Yerevan and around the world will mark the centenary 
of the genocide of 1915. That is the date when Ottoman authorities began 
arresting the leaders of the 2 million-strong minority Christian community. It 
is widely accepted that 1 million to 1.5 million Armenians died in the ensuing 
years until 1922, though there are no indisputable figures.

The Turkish government has never accepted the term genocide. It recognises 
killings that occurred in wartime but denies Armenians were systematically 
targeted and emphasises their links with enemy Russia as well as Armenian 
attacks on Muslims. Modern historical research has demolished the Turkish case, 
establishing intent, organisation and responsibility.

Turkey eclipses centenary of Armenian massacre by moving Gallipoli memorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/16/turkey-armenia-1915-centenary-gallipoli-massacre-genocide>
Turkey’s position has softened in recent times. In 2014 Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, 
now president, described the killings as “inhumane” and sent condolences to the 
descendants of the victims. But tempers flared whenTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> announced it would mark the 
centenary of the Allied landings at Gallipoli on 24 April. Critics say the 
intention was to deflect attention from and limit attendance by foreign VIPs at 
the memorial ceremony in Yerevan.

Armenians and others argue that impunity for the Turks, despite international 
outrage at the time, was one of the factors that allowed Hitler to exterminate 
the Jews ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> a quarter of 
a century later.

How did this happen?

Armenians, an ancient people who converted to Christianity in the 3rd century 
AD, were persecuted in Ottoman Turkey in the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries. There was anger about the way Europe and Russia had intervened on 
the Armenians’ behalf as the empire lost territory. Anti-Armenian violence 
occurred in the 1890s and in 1909.

The wartime mass deportations and killings were orchestrated by the Teşkilât-ı 
Mahsusa (meaning “special organisation”), which sent coded orders to local 
governors. Armenians (in eastern, Russian-controlled Armenia) did fight with 
the tsarist forces and some Armenian nationalists helped precipitate the brutal 
Ottoman response. But most victims were civilians.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429177401152%2Fa3d59613-1942-4112-9905-19ef21cdf719-718x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Armenian%20genocide%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Guardian%20briefing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Armenian%20genocide%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Guardian%20briefing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429177401152%2Fa3d59613-1942-4112-9905-19ef21cdf719-718x1020.jpeg>
 A 10-year-old Armenian orphan named Mushegh displays the wounds caused by 
attempts to crucify him in Diza in spring 1915. His three brothers were all 
killed. Photograph: Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute. 
Much of the killing was carried out by Kurdish tribesmen. Many Armenians died 
from starvation and thirst on death marches in the Syrian desert. Rape, torture 
and other atrocities were common. Children, especially girls, were abducted and 
forcibly converted to Islam. Property was expropriated and churches destroyed.

The US was neutral at the time and its diplomats, as well as American and 
other Christian missionaries, witnessed and documented the killings. Washington 
condemned “crimes against humanity” – the first time that now common expression 
was used.

The Armenian republic that emerged at the end of the first world war 
represented only a small part of historic Armenia. It was briefly independent 
before becoming part of the Soviet Union until 1991, when it regained its 
independence. Turkish (western)Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> disappeared from the maps.

Awareness of the genocide grew because of the focus on the Nazi Holocaust in 
the US and Israel in the 1960s and 1970s. Access to Ottoman archives has 
allowed scholars, Turkish and other, to deepen understanding of what happened. 
Experts argue that, if there is hope for change, it will come from shifting 
attitudes inside Turkey, not from Armenian or international pressure on Ankara.

What are the issues?

Recognition and denial

Armenians demand Turkish recognition of the genocide, though the UN genocide 
convention of 1948 is not applicable retroactively. Of the 22 countries that 
have formally recognised it, the most important are Russia and France. The US 
employed the term under President Ronald Reagan but has retreated since in the 
face of anger from Turkey, a Nato ally. Barack Obama uses the termMeds Yeghern 
– Armenian for “great calamity” – akin to the Hebrew wordshoah for holocaust. 
But he will not use the G-word.

Britain adopts a similar position, condemning the massacres but arguing that 
the Armenian case has not been legally tested. Still, along with statements by 
the pope and the UN, national legislation criminalising genocide denial, and 
recognition by nearly all US states and many parliaments – including the 
European parliament – a quarter of the world in effect recognises the genocide. 
Outright denial is rare except in Turkey and Azerbaijan.

Armenian-Turkish relationship


The genocide issue hangs heavily over bilateral relations. Armenians say 
recognition is about their security, not only history and justice.

Turkey closed the border with Armenia in 1993 because of unresolved conflict 
in Nagorno-Karabakh, a region of Azerbaijan with an ethnic Armenian majority, 
in which Ankara and Yerevan are on opposing sides.

Armenia has tried pragmatically to improve relations and achieve 
reconciliation without setting preconditions, even on genocide. A draft 
Swiss-brokered agreement in 2009 was never ratified because of Turkish demands 
for movement on Nagorno-Karabkh. Thus two difficult issues have become 
intertwined. The result is deadlock.


Change in Turkey


Attitudes to the Armenian question have changed in Turkey in recent years, 
with liberal intellectuals questioning official narratives and recognising the 
genocide. Many books have appeared on the subject, which is researched and 
taught in universities. Reconciliation ceremonies have been held in formerly 
Armenian areas with Kurds whose ancestors slaughtered their Christian 
neighbours. Some Armenian churches have been restored.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429177259394%2Fc21d28ab-cfca-44cb-8ea8-fb623a2cc950-1020x651.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Armenian%20genocide%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Guardian%20briefing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Armenian%20genocide%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Guardian%20briefing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429177259394%2Fc21d28ab-cfca-44cb-8ea8-fb623a2cc950-1020x651.jpeg>
 A picture released by the Armenian Genocide museum dated 1920 shows a 
panoramic view of Shushi, in Karabakh, after it was purportedly destroyed by 
Ottoman troops. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
There is also growing recognition of the existence of many thousands of 
“Islamised” Armenians, descendants of the survivors. Prosecutions for 
“denigrating Turkishness” have diminished. Despite conciliatory messages such 
as Erdoğan’s last year, Ankara refuses to apologise or, crucially, to budge on 
the genocide question. Still, the Turkish thaw, argues expert Thomas De Waal 
“is the only good news in this bleak historical tale”.

Armenian diaspora


Up to 10 million Armenians live outside Armenia, concentrated in Russia, the 
US and France.

Many are direct descendants of genocide victims. Diaspora organisations tend 
to be more militant than the republic itself on this question and are 
suspicious of moves towards normalisation with Turkey. The two main 
organisations in the US have made recognition their raison d’etre. This helps 
them preserve a collective identity and resist assimilation.


A recent pan-Armenian declaration focusing on the genocide was criticised by 
Levon Ter-Petrossian, the country’s former president, reflecting the view that 
Armenia needs to focus on its current problems and not be obsessed by a painful 
past.

Where can I find out more?

Peter Balakian’s The Burning Tigris <http://www.peterbalakian.com/> is a 
readable account emphasising US testimony. For forensic research by a Turkish 
historian, try Taner Akcam’sA Shameful Act 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/shameful-act.html>. In An Inconvenient Genocide
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/inconvenient-genocide.html>, the British 
lawyer Geoffrey Robertson makes the human rights case. The wider background of 
the first world war has been recently retold inThe Fall of the Ottomans 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/fall-of-the-ottomans.html> by Eugene Rogan. 
Other accounts include Thomas de Waal’sGreat Catastrophe: Armenians and Turks 
in the Shadow of Genocide <http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780199350698.do> 
and Vicken Cheterian’sOpen Wounds: Armenians, Turks, and a Century of Genocide 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/276341/>. Professor 
Bernard Lewis’s statement onDistinguishing the Armenian Case from the Holocaust 
<http://www.ataa.org/reference/lewis.pdf>. The website of the Gomidas Institute 
<http://www.gomidas.org/> focuses on historical documentation about the 
genocide and current campaigns.
 