
Pro-EU newspaper the New European is to continue publishing beyond its 
four-week trial period afterbeating its sales targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/brexit-paper-new-european-new-day-profit>
, its publisher has announced.

Billed as the newspaper for the 48% of the UK that voted to remain in the EU 
in the 23 June referendum, the New European’s first edition is thought to have 
sold more than 40,000 copies.

Subsequent issues have also sold well, leading publisher Archant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant> to decide to continue producing it 
on a rolling basis, though the company has made it clear it will pull the plug 
if interest wanes. By contrast, daily sales of The New Day newspaper, which 
launched last February, quickly sunk to an estimated 30,000 before it was 
closed in May. Its publisher, Trinity Mirror, had been targeting a circulation 
of about 200,000 copies.

Anti-Brexit paper the New European outsells the New Day and makes profit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/brexit-paper-new-european-new-day-profit>
Contributors so far have included novelist Howard Jacobson, the Guardian’s 
Jonathan Freedland, venture capitalist Saul Klein andformer Labour spin doctor 
Alastair Campbell, who called for the UK to hold a second referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jul/15/the-new-european-lands-alastair-campbell-brexit-scoop>
.

“We’re thrilled at the reaction and support we’ve seen for this most 
unorthodox newspaper launch,” said Archant chief content officer Matt Kelly. 
“We will continue to publish into the zeitgeist until that moment passes.”
((( Matt Kelly ))) (@mk1969) 
BREAKING: Archant confirms UK pro-48% The New European newspaper to continue 
publishing beyond initial four week run... more later.#media 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/media?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/mk1969/status/758242033299578880> July 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mk1969/status/758242033299578880> 
Archant is primarily a regional publisher, but has shown a willingness to 
experiment with focused projects such as the “pop-up” New European. The company 
claims that the newspaper went from concept to hitting shelves in just nine 
days.

Archant chief marketing officer Will Hattam said: “We have the scale to 
produce a quality print product for a national audience, but also the agility 
to turn things around fast and cost effectively enough to profitably service a 
community that has popped into existence overnight. We’ll only produce the 
paper for as long as our readers still want it.”
 