
If the history of music is now a giant Spotify-ed ocean that you can dive into 
at any moment, new music can feel like a vast infinity pool, constantly topped 
up by endless recent releases. There’s so much uncharted territory, it’s often 
overwhelming – so anything that helps with navigation can be a godsend.

A day inside Adult Swim: the craziest TV network in America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/18/adult-swim-television-channel-too-many-cooks>
Adult Swim Singles <http://www.adultswim.com/music/singles-2015/> sounds like 
an online dating app catering to some splash-happy specialist interests. It’s 
actually a showcase for new music that’s been going since 2010, and this summer 
it has been offering up a downloadable new song for free every week for 19 
weeks from a succession of quality artists. Despite being an exercise in brand 
extension – Adult Swim is the US TV home of defiantly oddball shows such as 
Robot Chicken and The Venture Bros – the high quality of the music and an 
admirably minimalist design aesthetic help combat the whiff of corporate 
synergy. It also helps that the selection of tracks includes exclusive material 
from Peaches, Swervedriver, Sia, Shabazz Palaces and Run The Jewels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIVbe3joh1Ss&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIVbe3joh1Ss>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIVbe3joh1Ss&media=>
You could view Adult Swim Singles as a descendant of the vinyl singles clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/aug/28/theriseofthesinglesclub>
 that peaked in the 1990s and early 2000s, where a subscription payment to a 
discerning independent label would result in a series of mysterious seven-inch 
records plopping through your letterbox. It was curated content before that 
phrase existed, a way to become exposed to new music, support labels you 
respected and feel like you were part of an outlaw indie gang sticking it to 
the man. It does feel like some of that gunslinging vibe lives on online.

Annie Mac: ‘I’m more than just the dance girl’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/13/radio-1-dj-annie-mac> 
Every week, Annie Mac’s Free Music Monday 
<https://soundcloud.com/annie-mac-presents> spotlights under-the-radar acts and 
noteworthy remixes to a massive audience on SoundCloud, with the embedded 
comments reflecting an engaged community experiencing and exploring the highs 
and drops together. For ravers whose tastes skew a little heavier,Nest 
<http://nesthq.com/releases>, the independent “free release label” affiliated 
with dubstep don Skrillex, has been putting out a new EP or single each month, 
featuring rising talents such as bass-wrangling Pittsburgh producer Buku and 
percussive Aussie duo Command Q.

Now, musicians are harnessing the power of the singles club, too. In 2014, 
London duo Oh Wonder started releasing anew song every month 
<https://soundcloud.com/ohwondermusic>, hoping – correctly, as it turned out – 
that the cumulative drip-drip of their seductive folktronica would distinguish 
them from the constant churn of buzz acts. Oh Wonder’s reliable monthly updates 
have functioned like booster rockets, building toward the release of their 
eponymous debut album. That slow-and-steady march has also stoked anticipation 
for their transition from the online world to the real one, with their London 
gigs already sold out. Having done the singles, Oh Wonder are now ready to 
mingle.

Oh Wonder is out on Friday 4 September

 