
Briohny Doyle

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a6ee6f024637b39d00ec3c65feb8865ac1d1a79%2F0_0_1478_2417%2F1478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a6ee6f024637b39d00ec3c65feb8865ac1d1a79%2F0_0_1478_2417%2F1478.jpg>
Police Force as a Corrupt Breeze 
<http://dostoyevskywannabe.com/original/police-force-as-a-corrupt-breeze> by 
Shane Jesse Christmass;False Nostalgia 
<http://giramondopublishing.com/product/false-nostalgia/> by Aden Rolfe

Shane Jesse Christmass’ novel, Police Force as a Corrupt Breeze, projects 
itself in neon across a slippery temporality. It’s a world where there are 
“portals to the afterlife opening in the Middle East”. The streets are littered 
with “Holograms of Lindsay Lohan’s autopsy. Pipettes of poisonous bacteria and 
Dilaterol” and there is “a beheading in times square, during the intermission 
of the Lion King”. It is wild, flickering prose, cutting easily between news 
feeds, gifs, 1970s sci-fi and cop movies.

Aden Rolfe’s False Nostalgia defies expectations about what a book 
(particularly a first book) will be – it is a collection of poems – sometimes 
lyrical and sometimes straddling criticism and drama – complemented by essays, 
exploring memory and our very human ability to falsify it, alone or together, 
yearning for a past that never was.

Neither Rolfe nor Christmass could have known how well-suited their texts – in 
which nothing can be certain, although everything is vivid and compelling and 
might (though equally might not) mean something – would correspond to 2016. 
This year the world has been a rapid fire of unbelievable image- and 
sound-bites, and false nostalgia has ruled supreme. Rolfe’s exploration of his 
title concept reads presciently in retrospect: “Practicing a memory can 
strengthen your belief in it”, he writes. “That’s how the fiction creeps in.”

• Briohny Doyle is the author of The Island Will Sink 
<http://theliftedbrow.myshopify.com/collections/books/products/the-island-will-sink-by-briohny-doyle>

Andy Griffiths


Talking to My Country <http://www.harpercollins.com.au/9781460751978/> by Stan 
Grant;Everywhere I Look 
<https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/everywhere-i-look> by Helen Garner; 
The Curious Story of Malcolm Turnbull: The Incredible Shrinking Man in the Top 
Hat 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/general-books/current-affairs-politics/The-Curious-Story-of-Malcolm-Turnbull-the-Incredible-Shrinking-Man-in-the-Top-Hat-Andrew-P-Street-9781760294885>
 by Andrew P Street

Another great year for Australian books! An early highlight was Stan Grant’s 
extraordinary Talking to My Country, which, for anyone who cares about creating 
an Australia that includes the original inhabitants of the land is, like the 
cover declares, “the book that every Australian should read”. Taking as its 
starting point the shameful treatment of Adam Goodes, it is truly a book that 
will open your eyes to a history of Australia that has been whitewashed to the 
ongoing detriment of all us.

Helen Garner’s Everywhere I Look is like having a backstage pass into the 
mind, notebooks and creative process of one of Australia’s very best writers.


Hats off to Andrew P Street who manages to wring the humour from the tragic 
lack of true leadership that has plagued Australia in recent years in The 
Curious Story of Malcolm Turnbull: The Incredible Shrinking Man in the Top Hat 
(a fantastic follow up to last year’s equally funny tragi-comedy, The Short and 
Excruciatingly Embarrassing Reign of Captain Abbott).

• Andy Griffiths is the author of The 78-Storey Treehouse 
<http://www.panmacmillan.com.au/9781743535004>, with Terry Denton

Jane Harper

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1974ca58567264ad5829a430c6a083c1d0644a5f%2F0_0_1807_2764%2F1807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1974ca58567264ad5829a430c6a083c1d0644a5f%2F0_0_1807_2764%2F1807.jpg>
Fine 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/fiction/literary-fiction/Fine-Michelle-Wright-9781760292454>
 by Michelle Wright;The Natural Way of Things 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/fiction/literary-fiction/The-Natural-Way-of-Things-Charlotte-Wood-9781760111236>
 by Charlotte Wood

There are very few books that capture so many sides of Australian life as 
Michelle Wright’s book, Fine. Her short stories based around a central theme 
offer something different every time. Fine is a beautiful collection of 
snatched glimpses that leaves me wishing for more.

Charlotte Wood’s The Natural Way of Things still lingers with me months after 
reading. As disturbing as it is intriguing, it demands to be discussed and 
dissected in a bid to find answers for the questions it raises.

Hannah Kent

The Museum of Modern Love 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/fiction/literary-fiction/The-Museum-of-Modern-Love-Heather-Rose-9781760291860>
 by Heather Rose;Skylarking <https://www.blackincbooks.com.au/books/skylarking> 
by Kate Mildenhall;Dark Fires Shall Burn 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/dark-fires-shall-burn> 
by Anna Westbrook;Fight Like a Girl 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/general-books/current-affairs-politics/Fight-Like-A-Girl-Clementine-Ford-9781760292362>
 by Clementine Ford
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0fb0954890bbe4dd859775069e6243179dbbe5%2F0_0_1803_2765%2F1803.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0fb0954890bbe4dd859775069e6243179dbbe5%2F0_0_1803_2765%2F1803.jpg>
One of my stand-out Australian reads from 2016 was undoubtedly The Museum of 
Modern Love by Tasmanian-based author Heather Rose. Rose has taken Serbian 
artist Marina Abramovic’s well-known 2010 performance of The Artist is Present 
at MOMA and placed it at the heart of a novel about the strengths and frailties 
of human connection and love.


Set over the 736 hours Abramovic spent sitting silently behind a table in the 
New York museum’s atrium, Rose explores the lives of the (fictional) characters 
who choose to sit opposite her, or who otherwise witness her performance, 
particularly that of Arky Levin, a composer whose wife is dying. Amidst these 
beautifully-drawn characters is Rose’s fictionalised representation of 
Abramovic herself, contemplating art and its role and significance in her life. 
It is a glorious novel, meditative and special in a way that defies easy 
articulation.

This year was also very good for debut novels of Australian historical 
fiction. I particularly enjoyed Kate Mildenhall’s Skylarking and Anna 
Westbrook’s Dark Fires Shall Burn, both of which are based on true events.

Mildenhall’s Skylarking is set in a small 1880s lighthouse community, 
following the intense friendship of two girls who live there, while Westbrook’s 
takes place amidst the madams and criminals of 1940s Sydney, and yet both are 
remarkable for the way in which these settings are rendered, each in 
extraordinarily vivid detail. I hope that both Mildenhall and Westbrook 
continue to write: each clearly has an abundance of talent.

It is also worth mentioning that my current read is Clementine Ford’s Fight 
Like a Girl. While I’m normally reluctant to comment on anything I haven’t yet 
finished, I feel very confident in singing this title’s praises. Ford’s 
exploration of her experience “as a girl in this world” is wonderfully 
accessible, funny and personal. It is exactly the type of book I wish someone 
had put into my hands when I was fifteen and working out how to be: how to be a 
girl, how to be a woman, how to be a feminist, how to be heard.

• Hannah Kent is the author of The Good People 
<http://www.panmacmillan.com.au/9781743534908> 

Melina Marchetta
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7898e500b1e3b84c0fe4c0ca1e597e184942b02%2F0_0_1807_2764%2F1807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7898e500b1e3b84c0fe4c0ca1e597e184942b02%2F0_0_1807_2764%2F1807.jpg>
Reckoning <https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/reckoning> by Magda 
Szubanski

Magda Szubanski’s memoir, Reckoning, appealed to the genre-loving reader in 
me. It felt as if I was watching hundreds of movies; wartime espionage, the 
migrant’s journey, the coming-of-age school saga, the uni student’s journey at 
the height of 1970’s feminism, and more. It was epic, but so uniquely 
Australian and despite our different upbringings, it felt personal. As if it 
was written specifically for that younger me who took forever to feel 
comfortable in her own skin, so she could take on the world.

• Melina Marchetta is the author of Tell the Truth, Shame the Devil 
<https://penguin.com.au/books/tell-the-truth-shame-the-devil-9780670079100> 

Martin McKenzie-Murray

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd33d00f5cbf5f372665990bfa2de763ac2fa7424%2F0_0_1807_2764%2F1807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd33d00f5cbf5f372665990bfa2de763ac2fa7424%2F0_0_1807_2764%2F1807.jpg>
Everywhere I Look <https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/everywhere-i-look> 
by Helen Garner

For years, Garner has offered me a model for journalism: a careful observer, 
she also tells us how those observations change her as well as the subjects of 
her gaze. Garner reveals her nervous system – but also the dubious games and 
improvisations of journalism.

Everywhere I Look is a collection of Garner’s essays and diary entries from 
the past 15 years. She writes on friendship, ageing, film and literature. In 
The Journey of the Stamp Animals, she writes of rediscovering a children’s book 
that – many years earlier – had seemed so stuffed with illicit magic. Now an 
adult, this long dreamt-of book in her hands again, she finds the pleasure of 
having her memory – so often fickle and corruptible – vindicated. The book is 
as she remembered. It’s a measure of Garner’s talent that this small, obscure 
triumph carries the feeling of profundity.

• Martin McKenzie-Murray is the author of A Murder Without Motive: The Killing 
of Rebecca Ryle 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/a-murder-without-motive>

Di Morrissey
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff18d8ae3dd60eadfb7575308d6941559860ac147%2F0_0_800_1244%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff18d8ae3dd60eadfb7575308d6941559860ac147%2F0_0_800_1244%2F800.jpg>
Position Doubtful 
<https://www.scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/position-doubtful> 
by Kim Mahood

Kim Mahood writes like the artist she is: with perception, not only of 
memories, as she explores the years since her wonderful Craft for a Dry Lake, 
but she also paints the remote desert country of her childhood to a truthful 
reality.

For half of the year, she is based in familiar Tanami desert country, not far 
from the station where she grew up. She leaves her creative work and teaching 
in Canberra, to work in Mulan, a small Indigenous community in Western 
Australia, where she coordinates a large mapping project that records and 
unravels Aboriginal knowledge, together with the parallel work of visiting 
white academics, scientists, researchers and artists; a blending of knowledge, 
customs and cultures.


Mahood’s observations of country are insightful. Her friendships, her heart 
and fine pen, are illuminating. Part memoir, part a need to remember women 
friends who have died, her clear-eyed understanding of the landscape and its 
people, is written with a raw honesty that marries the poet and the painter, 
and places us there, with her, to follow, learn and understand. A beautiful and 
valuable book.

• Di Morrissey is the author of A Distant Journey 
<http://www.panmacmillan.com.au/9781743535684>

Niki Savva
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2d54df009b5145246701b059558baf768a3c2a0%2F0_0_800_1208%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2d54df009b5145246701b059558baf768a3c2a0%2F0_0_800_1208%2F800.jpg>
Paul Keating: The Big-Picture Leader 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/paul-keating> by Troy 
Bramston

Although I haven’t finished reading it yet (it is 700 pages and only just 
released) Bramston’s book is a comprehensive portrait of a compelling and 
complex personality.Paul Keating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/paul-keating2> was many things. We 
loved him or hated him, or we loved him and hated him all at the same time. One 
thing he was not was boring.


Keating says the qualities successful politicians most need are courage and 
imagination. It’s a timely reminder just what that combination can achieve. He 
also says – and it comes through vividly in Bramston’s book – that he has the 
crazy gene. Those characteristics helped make him impossible to ignore or 
forget, and Bramston deserves credit for bringing him to life again.

• Niki Savva is the author of The Road to Ruin: H 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/the-road-to-ruin>ow Tony 
Abbott and Peta Credlin Destroyed Their Own Government 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/the-road-to-ruin>

Graeme Simsion
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48474d067805fe78a5dcfe38b1f2c1aab2ff3992%2F0_0_1808_2759%2F1808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48474d067805fe78a5dcfe38b1f2c1aab2ff3992%2F0_0_1808_2759%2F1808.jpg>
Music and Freedom 
<https://penguin.com.au/books/music-and-freedom-9781925324204> by Zoë Morrison; 
The Waiting Room <https://penguin.com.au/books/the-waiting-room-9780857986221> 
andWe’re All Going to Die 
<http://www.harpercollins.com.au/9781460749999/#sm.0017zxtlp13dhebvsf91wdqay4jql>
 by Leah Kaminsky; Our Tiny Useless Hearts 
<https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/our-tiny-useless-hearts> by Toni 
Jordan;Dead in the Water 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/dead-in-the-water> by 
Tania Chandler;Dangerous to Know 
<https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/dangerous-to-know> by Anne Buist; True 
Girt: The Unauthorised History of Australia 
<https://penguin.com.au/books/true-girt-the-unauthorised-history-of-australia-9781863958844>
 by David Hunt

Try Zoë Morrison’s elegantly written and sometimes harrowing debut, Music and 
Freedom, and Leah Kaminsky’s The Waiting Room – a “one day in the life” of a 
doctor during a terror alert in Israel, with echoes of the Holocaust.

For the light relief you’ll need after those two, Toni Jordan is in that small 
group of novelists who can write smart, character- and situation-driven humour, 
which is to say laugh-out-loud comedy: take Our Tiny Useless Hearts to the 
beach.

Fellow RMIT graduate Tania Chandler followed last year’s crime debut with Dead 
in the Water, and my partner Anne Buist backed up hers with Dangerous to Know – 
both sequels and both more assured than their well-received debuts.

Non-fiction: laughs and a surprising amount of painless education from David 
Hunt’s True Girt. And Leah Kaminsky again: the wise, illuminating and possibly 
life-changing We’re All Going to Die. We are, so get reading while you can.

• Graeme Simsion is the author of The Best of Adam Sharp 
<https://www.textpublishing.com.au/books/the-best-of-adam-sharp>


Maxine Beneba-Clarke
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F669e63b479fa64a354a03bce0ab3a1c7766a0613%2F0_0_1512_2338%2F1512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20Australian%20books%20of%202016%3A%20writers%20choose%20their%20favourites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fthe-best-australian-books-of-2016-writers-choose-their-favourites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F669e63b479fa64a354a03bce0ab3a1c7766a0613%2F0_0_1512_2338%2F1512.jpg>
Portable Curiosities 
<http://www.uqp.uq.edu.au/book.aspx/1388/Portable%20Curiosities> by Julie Koh; 
Music and Freedom <https://penguin.com.au/books/music-and-freedom-9781925324204>
 by Zoë Morrison;Of Ashes and Rivers that Run to the Sea 
<https://penguin.com.au/books/of-ashes-and-rivers-that-run-to-the-sea-9780857987273>
 by Marie Munkara

Julie Koh’s satirical short fiction collection Portable Curiosities is 
cutting-edge writing in many ways. Zoë Morrison’s prize-winning Music and 
Freedom is hauntingly dark, but exquisitely written; there are scenes from it 
that still won’t leave me.

In Australian memoir, Marie Munkara’s Of Ashes and Rivers that Run to the Sea 
is that funny-sad hybrid that makes your heart sing and hurt at the same time.

• Maxine Beneba-Clarke is the author of The Hate Race 
<https://www.hachette.com.au/maxine-beneba-clarke/the-hate-race> 

• This article was edited on 2 January 2017 to correct a link
 