
Recent research on adult skill levels in 24 rich nations sparked a rush of 
headlines on the inadequacy of our education system. England came 15th in 
literacy and 17th in numeracy in the global league table, based ona study by 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
<http://skills.oecd.org/skillsoutlook.html>. The report also revealed that 
people aged 16 to 24 were less literate and numerate than those aged 55 to 65.

Predictably, the Conservatives pointed out that the younger cohort is a 
product of Labour policies, while the opposition was able to observe that those 
aged 25 to 34 were scarcely any better.

Since few people will read a densely-researched 500 page survey, early reports 
have, understandably, been selective in highlighting the most dramatic, 
high-impact findings from a rich, complex and sometimes contradictory mass of 
research.

Were a positive spin to be taken, for example, without any distortion it would 
be possible to celebrate the highly effective economic use made of England and 
Northern Ireland's highly-skilled talent pool.

What is clear though is that some countries, such as Finland, Japan and South 
Korea, may have lessons for the UK.

In South Korea, for example, there is a clear relationship between age and 
performance, with younger Koreans outperforming their parents and grandparents. 
What this suggests is that education reforms in South Korea have been 
consistently effective over a period of decades.

Adults in Japan display the highest levels of proficiency in literacy and 
numeracy and it is one of the countries where social background has the least 
impact on skill levels. An impressive feature of the country is how it's 
achieved high levels of literacy among people who have lower qualifications. It 
suggests that the wider differences in people education levels in the UK are 
not inevitable.

Japan is not without its own problems, however, the OECD says one in 10 
Japanese workers are in jobs that they are too highly qualified for in terms of 
literacy.

With the culture and economic history of these Asian countries in the post-war 
period potentially accounting for their distinctive skills profiles, 
commentators might expect Finland to offer more transferable insights. But 
interestingly, the OECD does not touch on what many believe to be one of the 
secrets of Finnish success â€“ the quality of its teachers.

The first important lesson to be learned in the UK is the need to improve the 
quality of secondary education, which consistently fails too many children. 
Part of this is likely to involve breaking the national fixation on progression 
to higher education as the only measurement of school success. To do this 
politicians need to better promote the value of vocational education.

A second lesson is to consider how best to ensure skills are used at work or 
in preparation for work. Surely this must mean weaning employers off the 
expectation that the state should pay for training people in employment. We 
need to equip adults with the literacy and numeracy skills to function as 
citizens for moral and economic reasons. There is a role for the state to 
facilitate young people's transition into work. But beyond this, we need to 
debate whether public funds are best routed through employers, colleges and 
other providers.

The overall message from the OECD is that, in an increasingly competitive 
world, the UK cannot afford to waste the potential of so many of its citizens. 
We need to support lifelong learning, not simply as a second chance to those 
failed by schools, but also to help individuals to retrain and up their skills, 
especially if they're employed by places unwilling to invest in their 
development.

Alastair Thomson is principal advocacy officer at the National Institute of 
Adult Continuing Education. <http://www.niace.org.uk/>
 