
Tate oil tanks

The cavernous old underground oil tanks beneath Tate Modern, the former 
Bankside power station, are due to reopen as performance and installation 
spaces in time for the Olympics. Connected to three new galleries, the tanks 
are the first phase of a £215m extension by Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron.
July.tate.org.uk <http://www.tate.org.uk/modern/transformingtm/>

Shard London Bridge

Designed by Renzo Piano for property developer Irvine Sellar, the Shard, 
towering over the capital at 310 metres, is now the tallest building in western 
Europe. Rising from London Bridge station, this steel and glass-clad spire 
houses offices, restaurants, hotel, flats and four floors of public viewing 
galleries: on a clear day you will be able to see for 40 miles.May. 
the-shard.com <http://www.the-shard.com>

ArcelorMittal Orbit


Britain's tallest and biggest sculpture, the bright red Orbit – designed by 
Anish Kapoor and Cecil Balmond, with engineers Arup and architect Katherine 
Findlay – is made of complex, calligraphic loops and whirls writ in steel. As a 
public viewing gallery overlooking the 2012 Olympics site, this is London's 
21st-century answer to the Eiffel Tower.May. london.gov.uk 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/art-culture/culture-2012/arcelormittal-orbit>

Caro goes to Chatsworth

In a move that will no doubt provoke widely differing reactions, 15 steel 
sculptures by Anthony Caro will be set against the restored south front of 
Chatsworth House in Derbyshire, as well as gathered beside its sensational 
Emperor Fountain, designed by the great Joseph Paxton (creator ofthe Crystal 
Palace <http://www.victorianstation.com/palace.html>). Caro has often been 
inspired by powerful architecture, and there's no denying William Talman's 
baroque Chatsworth is a supremely confident building.28 March to 1 July. 
chatsworth.org <http://www.chatsworth.org/whats-on/events/caro-at-chatsworth>

Room for London


Imagine spending the night in an intriguing and isolated temporary 
house, designed by artist Fiona Banner and architect David Kohn, sitting atop 
the brutalist Queen Elizabeth Hall on London's South Bank. The tugboat-like 
building's first six months are already taken; bookings for July to December 
will be available in January for this project by Artangel and Alain de Botton's 
Living Architecture.January 2012. Details: living-architecture.co.uk 
<http://www.living-architecture.co.uk/the-houses/aroomforlondon/overview/>

National 9/11 Museum, New York

A lofty, glazed atrium, sheltering two of the trident columns that once 
supported one of the twin towers, marks the entrance to the museum at the site 
of Manhattan's ground zero. Designed by Oslo-basedSnohetta 
<http://www.snoarc.no/> with local firm Davis Brody Bond 
<http://www.davisbrody.com/contact.html>, much of this long-awaited museum is 
underground. September. 911memorial.org/museum 
<http://www.911memorial.org/museum> 
 