
Amber Rudd announced yesterday that there would be no inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
 into the “Battle of Orgreave”. The reaction from my constituency, the site of 
the former Orgreave coking works, was initially one of shock and anger. But as 
the news sank in, it shifted to a palpable sense of the inevitable. This is 
what the people of South Yorkshire have come to expect from the Tories. Once 
again, we have been treated with contempt by our government. Upon entering 
Downing Street, Theresa May spoke ofleading a government for everybody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/theresa-may-becomes-britains-prime-minister>
. The message yesterday was quite different. Rudd said an inquiry into Orgreave 
was not in the public interest. Well, the taxpaying people of South Yorkshire 
disagree.

Orgreave was part of the class war that ended with 96 dead at Hillsborough | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
The events of 18 June 1984 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/22/orgreave-truth-police-miners-strike>
 have cast a dark shadow. For many in coalfield communities, there remains a 
deep and abiding mistrust of the police. The allegations against South 
Yorkshire police are of the utmost severity. They include assault, brutality, 
wrongful arrest and fabrication of evidence. Yet the home secretary has 
determined they do not warrant any form of inquiry by the government. Her 
stated reasons are, essentially, that as there were no convictions, there was 
no miscarriage of justice. As there were no deaths, allegations of brutality 
are inconsequential. As many years have passed and policing in Britain has 
changed, no lessons can be learned and no analysis is needed. These arguments, 
frankly, are nonsense.

South Yorkshire police have faced a torrent of criticism in recent years, from 
the revelations of theHillsborough inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
 and inquests to the abjectfailures to protect children from sexual exploitation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/24/child-sex-abuse-in-rotherham-i-was-treated-as-a-criminal-never-as-a-victim>
 in Rotherham. The force is in the midst of a challenging process of 
rebuilding. Public trust, which has been badly shaken, must be restored. This 
is simply not possible while the shadow of suspicion continues to linger over 
its actions at Orgreave. The passage of time has done little to alleviate this 
suspicion; the home secretary’s decision has compounded this.

Time has not healed the wounds of those who were present at Orgreave, or of 
their families. I have seen proud, strong men in tears as they described to me 
what happened that day. They have lived with the smears and aspersions that 
were cast upon them for every day of those 32 years. Many have died without 
ever seeing the truth exposed. Those that remain are approaching old age. We 
owe them justice.

'Burning injustice' of Orgreave is left smouldering | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/burning-injustice-of-orgreave-is-left-smouldering>
The home secretary effectively rejected the connections to Hillsborough during 
her remarks in parliament. No one has argued that Orgreave and Hillsborough 
were identical. They were not. Yet theconnections and similarities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
 between the two cases are alarming: the same allegations of falsified evidence 
and manipulated statements; the same smears; the same culture; in some cases, 
the same commanders. We now know the truth about Hillsborough. We deserve the 
truth about Orgreave.

The government seems to be hoping that calls for an inquiry will now simply 
disappear. They are sadly mistaken. I know that theOrgreave Truth and Justice 
Campaign <http://otjc.org.uk/> will continue with the same determination and 
dignity in the face of adversity that they have shown thus far. This chapter of 
this shameful episode in British history may be over, but the book is not 
closed. I, and many others, will not let it be.
 