
Conservatives hosts are struggling to get past the anger and denial stages of 
the grief imposed on them by the Tucson shootings, as they continue to be 
shocked by the hypocrisy of the "hate-filled" left.

Sean Hannity
 Sean Hannity 
Sean Hannity was granted the much sought-after Sarah Palin exclusive (view 
clip) <http://mediamatters.org/mmtv/201101170013> and his gentle questioning 
invoked a performance from her that, no doubt, delighted her fans and drove her 
detractors to distraction.

To summarise the interview briefly: God was invoked aplenty, condolences were 
offered to the bereaved and several references were made to the "deaths of 
innocents". Mrs Palin was dismissive of the uproar over her target map and said 
it was "futile to start censoring everyone's speeches and everyone's icons". 
She thought it irrelevant whether or not she knew what a "blood libel" was 
because it's used all the time and, anyway, what was done to herwas a blood 
libel. She's not yet ready to cash in her chips and announce a presidential 
run, and she has no plans to shut up or fade into the background anytime soon.

So, there were no great surprises in the interview, but it did provoke a more 
heated than usual panel discussion, with Hannity staunchly defending the former 
governor against the token liberal guest, Democratic strategist Chris Hahn, who 
had the temerity to imply that Palin was insinuating herself into the story 
once more.

She can't win if she comes out early; she can't win if she comes out late. 
When Robert F Kennedy Jr wrote that I was a "merchant of hate" in response to 
this, when Robert said I was creating the same atmosphere that killed his uncle 
– meanwhile, it was an avowed Marxist that killed his uncle, he ought to read 
history – I responded!

The liberal guest, whom Hannity accused of "dripping with hate", caused 
further upset when he implied that manyRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> are probably relieved that 
Palin's presidential hopes are now dashed because she would have been an easy 
candidate for Obama to defeat. After shouting the guest down on this point 
(with assistance from other conservative panellists), Hannity goes back to 
defending Palin's right to defend herself.

If you accuse me of murder or accessory to murder, or Democrats can put up 
their bulls'-eyes but I can't put up mine, I'm going to fight back!

Amid more shouting, the liberal tried to defend his own position, but Hannity 
shut him down.

There has been no person in modern society that has been vilified more than 
her. She's a woman and you ought to have condemned it.

Thankfully, for all concerned, that was all they had time for.

Bill O'Reilly
 Bill O'Reilly 
Bill O'Reilly was also upset (view clip) 
<http://www.foxnews.com/on-air/oreilly/index.html#/v/4500254/president-obamas-message-not-getting-through/?playlist_id=86923>
 that the left appeared to be ignoring President Obama's calls for civility and 
devoted his talking points memo and two other segments of his programme on 
Monday to the "hatred on the left".

His researchers had located two examples of this "hatred" to illustrate his 
argument. The first was a video clip of Washington Post columnist Richard 
Cohen, who calledSarah Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin> 
"stupid". The second clip was of HBO's Bill Maher, whom O'Reilly described as a 
"leftwing entertainer". Maher took a shot at the Tea Partiers for their alleged 
fondness of the founding fathers by pointing out that, in reality, the founding 
fathers were everything the Tea Party would have despised because they "studied 
science, read Plato, hung out in Paris and thought the bible was mostly 
bullshit".

Delightful. Now, I don't hold Mr Maher to the same standard as the Washington 
Post, as he's a comedian, a man who makes a living expressing a point of view. 
Apparently, the president's point of view, more civility, is not being embraced 
by Mr Maher.

O'Reilly went on to say that he has received a lot of mail asking him why he 
doesn't come down on rightwing radio hosts (as he is coming down on the left), 
and he explains his position as follows.

Talk radio <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/talk-radio> is 
entertainment. People on there make a living expressing opinions. It's not a 
news form. Therefore, the standards aren't the same. But when a newspaper like 
the Washington Post continues to feature columnists who flat out hate 
conservatives, you have to wonder why.

It's fortunate for O'Reilly that his civility rules don't apply to rightwing 
talk radio hosts, because if they did, he might have a hard time explaining 
away certain comments they have been known to make, such as Rush Limbaugh 
calling the president a "halfrican American", or telling a female African 
American caller to "take that bone out of your nose". Still, it was perhaps a 
bit ungentlemanly of the Washington Post columnist to call Mrs Palin stupid 
when she has taken such care in the pastnot to single out any newspapers she 
may or may not have read <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xRkWebP2Q0Y>.

O'Reilly explains later to Fox News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news> political analyst Brit Hume that 
what really bothers him is that the left gets away with their incivility in a 
way that the right never can.

If you had gone on the air three days after President Obama had expressed a 
desire for civility and called Vice President Biden 'stupid' – say you did 
that, I think you would have got some blowback from the corporation here, from 
News Corp.

In fairness to O'Reilly, his boss Roger Ailes did recently order his guys to 
"shut up" and "tone it down" 
<http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/11/ailes-to-fox-anchors-tone-it-down/>
, so his frustration is understandable.

Glenn Beck
 Glenn Beck 
Glenn Beck has had it up to here with the mainstream (synonymous, I believe, 
in Beckworld with "leftwing") media and their constant "perversions of the 
truth" (view clip <http://mediamatters.org/mmtv/201101170006>).

"Reality doesn't seem to match the script that's coming out of our television 
sets. The Arizona shooter – it didn't matter to anyone, the script was 
prewritten."

Beck's concern is that the media these days have no interest in factual 
reporting; they just mould the facts to suit their storyline.

The proof is in the Arizona coverage. The kid wasn't of any clear ideology. 
Did you see him? He looks nuts! Hello. And if you had to pick – after you'd 
learned everything about him – if you had to pick an ideology, his friends said 
he was from the left. OK?

With those facts set straight, Beck looks to history to back up his assertions.

This isn't the first time in history that reality hasn't matched the script 
coming out of the mainstream media.

He highlights some newspaper accounts from the 1960s, which show several 
incidents wherehis hero and mentor, Martin Luther King Jr 
<http://www.glennbeck.com/2011/01/17/tribute-to-martin-luther-king-jr/>, was 
falsely accused of inciting violence and hatred.

So, here they are, blaming Martin Luther King. They're blaming him for the 
violence. That's the opposite of what he was. But this is the establishment. 
This is the elitist view. It's what they wanted to print at the time. That was 
the script.

As Beck sees it, this is no different from what is being done today to himself 
and his conservative colleagues.

Just like today, Sarah Palin, Rush Limbaugh, me, Fox, grouped together for 
things we're not doing. In fact, things we despise. We don't want to ruled or 
told how to live – and neither do you.

One can only hope that they manage to work through their righteous anger soon, 
so they can focus once more on their signature issue – repealing the 
"job-killing" healthcare bill.

• Read more from Sadhbh Walshe's The Right Word 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/series/the-right-word> series
 