
George Osborne was just one of the latest people to warn about the growing 
threat of antibiotic resistant superbugs, telling theInternational Monetary 
Fund (IMF) in Washington last month 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/14/george-osborne-resistance-to-antibiotics-will-become-an-even-gre/>
 that without urgent action the bugs would soon kill more people every year 
than cancer.

The chancellor’s warning echoed the sentiments of many within the medical 
community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/20/colour-changing-dressing-to-fight-antibiotic-resistance>
. Infections such as MRSA which have developed resistance to drugs have become 
a notorious threat in hospitals, where the bacteria can survive on surfaces for 
up to seven months.

But a new discovery by scientists in Ireland 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep24770> could soon be working to combat them.

A research team led by Prof Suresh Pillai has developed a coating for everyday 
objects that prevents the spread of MRSA and E coli bacteria. The coating, 
which can be used on items such as smartphones, door handles and remote 
controls as well as surgical surfaces, has a 99.99% success rate in killing the 
bugs.



John Browne, the chief executive of Dublin-based company Kastus 
<http://www.kastus.com/about-us/>, which is working to commercialise the 
solution, says: “It is very hard to get rid of these things once they are 
there. Some studies have shown that with a deep clean on an [intensive care 
unit] ward where there is a critical care bed in one room … the entire room is 
cleaned with bleach over a 24-hour period and the bacteria are back on the 
surface within 24 hours.”

 In a 2014 study 
<http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/healthtopics/antimicrobial_resistance/database/Pages/table_reports.aspx>
, the resistance of MRSA tometicillin 
<http://www.medicinenet.com/mrsa_infection/page2.htm>, one of the first 
antibiotics used to treat the bacteria, was at almost 12% in UK hospitals. 
Another study showed that almost 93% of writing tools taken from a group of42 
doctors were contaminated 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(05)63642-2/abstract>
.


The Kastus anti-microbial solution is made up of titanium oxide, with fluoride 
and copper. The solution is first baked on to a surface such as glass. When 
light is shined on it, a series of reactions on the surface of the material 
make it resistant to MRSA and E coli as well as trichophyton rubrum, the main 
cause of athlete’s foot.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fthe-innovators-irish-coating-superbug-mrsa-e-coli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F345b11bd6ede608709de2651ade28171c63c25a8%2F0_49_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20innovators%3A%20Irish%20lab%20develops%20coating%20to%20ward%20off%20superbug&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fthe-innovators-irish-coating-superbug-mrsa-e-coli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20innovators%3A%20Irish%20lab%20develops%20coating%20to%20ward%20off%20superbug&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fthe-innovators-irish-coating-superbug-mrsa-e-coli%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F345b11bd6ede608709de2651ade28171c63c25a8%2F0_49_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Prof Pillai in the nanotechnology laboratory at IT Sligo with the new 
anti-superbug solution. Photograph: Handout 
“You prepare the material in a water-based solution and spray it on the 
surface. It will form a thin coating on the surface and then you bake it in the 
oven or furnace and that will make a transparent thin film. You will not even 
see that there is a coating there,” says Pillai, who is from the nanotechnology 
research group at the Institute of Technology, Sligo.


Any MRSA or E coli landing on the surface of the tile will die over the 
subsequent 24 hours, so the solution stops it forming a colony and spreading – 
in effect creating a reliably sterile surface, he says.

Even when doctors adhere to proper hygiene practices, everyday objects and 
areas such as door handles and other surfaces can foster the bacteria.

“In the [US], if you go into a hospital with a broken leg and get a case of 
MRSA and don’t survive it, your estate has to sue that hospital because the 
health insurance won’t pay because the hospital is being treated as liable. I 
think a lot of us know people who have gone into hospital for minor surgeries 
as patients and have contracted bugs,” says Browne.

“I think we have all been in hospitals and we have seen dirt in floors and 
corners that have just not been cleaned. They are ceramic tiles. If there is a 
dirty corner then it is likely that the entire surface has been affected and it 
is likely that you are walking it through the building.”

Browne aims to have the solution applied to smartphone and tablet screens, 
said to be fertile grounds for bacteria because they typically do not go 
through rigorous cleansing. In 2012,a man contracted Ebola after stealing a 
mobile phone 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/27/ebola-phone-theft-steals-infected-patient_n_1832927.html>
 from an isolation ward in Uganda.

“The product is scaleable so the idea is that it gets out there and becomes a 
standard on smartphones and on ATMs. It is there and it is not adding any 
significant cost for the manufacturer of the end product,” he says.

“You are using an eco product, it is safe and it is helping to stop the spread 
of harmful bacteria.”

The innovators: slow fashion that cuts waste and lasts longer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/08/the-innovators-slow-fashion-zero-waste-movement-designer-dan-vo>
There is little hard data to show how wide a problem the spread of bacteria 
via mobile devices is, but they certainly harbour bacteria and some of the 
keenest interest in the new product has so far come from electronics companies.

“Mobile phones contain 10 times more bacteria than the toilet seat because 
toilet seats are cleaned regularly and mobile phones are never cleaned,” says 
Pillai.

There are plans to develop towels which will stop the spread of superbugs by 
the solution adhering to the fabric. “You need special types of spray or 
cottons which will withstand several washes,” he says.

Pharmaceutical firms that use “clean rooms” for research will also be 
targeted, says Browne. “If a fungus enters a clean room, it could close a 
building down. A lot of these clean rooms are separated into different 
buildings to stop this happening. The cost to do that is enormous and if a 
fungus gets in, it is serious.”

The company also plans to investigate possible uses for the technology in food 
packaging, for instance as the coating on a glass bottle. “There has been a 
test on milk bottles showing that an anti-bacterial coating can extend the life 
of milk by 15 days,” adds Browne.

 