
Anne Tyler shares with Jane Austen, (No 7 in this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/04/100-best-novels-jane-austen-emma>
) both a fascination with the domestic complexity of married life and an 
instinct, as a writer, to protect her privacy and keep her art to herself 
(Tyler rarely gives interviews). To her fans, she is the pitch-perfect author of
Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/05/families-in-literature-tulls-dinner-homesick-restaurant-anne-tyler>
 andThe Accidental Tourist 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/accidental-tourist.html>, but it’s Breathing 
Lessons, her novel set on a single summer’s day in the midlife of 50-ish Maggie 
Moran, that I’ve chosen to represent her deeply American and deeply classical 
qualities. As an American girl, she grew up in a Quaker community, and was 
raised on books such asLittle Women (No 20 in this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/03/100-best-novels-little-women-louisa-may-alcott>
), fiction based in the precise observation of family life that spoke to a 
passionate audience of women readers. As a mature writer, she also citesEudora 
Welty <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jul/24/guardianobituaries.books> 
as a lasting influence.

Breathing Lessons, for which Anne Tyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-tyler> won a Pulitzer in 1989, displays 
her extraordinary gifts in supreme harmony: exquisite narrative clarity, 
faultless comic timing, and the Tyler trademark of happy-sad characters 
inspiring a mid-American domestic drama that somehow slips the surly bonds of 
the quotidian to become timeless and universal.

Anne Tyler: ‘I am not a spiritual person’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/15/anne-tyler-interview-i-am-not-a-spiritual-person-spool-of-blue-thread>
Maggie Moran and her husband, Ira, are driving from Baltimore to Deer Lick, 
Pennsylvania, for the funeral of Max, the late husband of Maggie’s best friend, 
Serena. On the road, with many detours, her marriage is slowly laid bare. We 
unravel the story from, first, Maggie’s, then Ira’s and finally Maggie’s point 
of view. By close of play, through a sequence of brilliantly executed 
digressions, we know all about the Moran household, its secrets, lies, 
frustrations and, ultimately, its resilience. Tyler, who diffuses a melancholy 
optimism through her fiction, seems to say that an enduring marriage can become 
as natural as breathing.

As well as the poignant and unanticipated crises of the funeral and its 
aftermath, which is not the focus of Tyler’s attention, there is also high 
comedy. On the return journey, the middle chapters describing the Morans’ 
encounter with Mr Otis and his loose wheel, are a tour de force of comic prose 
in which the spirit of Jane Austen (often invoked by Tyler’s fans) is never far 
absent. Tyler is also sometimes compared to John Updike (No 88 in this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/25/100-best-novels-rabbit-redux-john-updike-review>
), and evenJohn Cheever <https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-cheever>, but I 
think her longing for a vanished and vanishing America, combined with her 
faultless ear for American speech, puts her in a class of her own.

A note on the text 

Compared with most contemporary American novelists, we know very little about 
Anne Tyler, which is the way she likes it. In arecent Observer interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/15/anne-tyler-interview-i-am-not-a-spiritual-person-spool-of-blue-thread>
, her readers got a glimpse of her modus operandi, but almost no clues about 
her work. “She writes in longhand,” Tim Teeman reported, “then types her words 
out, then records her words, listens to them, and then adds to and edits the 
words on a computer.” Since she has never given aParis Review “Writers at Work” 
interview, this is all we know about her methods, and there is virtually no 
further information on the record about the genesis ofBreathing Lessons.

There is, however, a snapshot of Tyler’s reaction to its success. According to 
theObserver, the morning after Breathing Lessons won the Pulitzer prize for 
fiction in 1989, “she politely dismissed an inquisitive reporter with the 
explanation that she was too busy writing to talk; they had interrupted her in 
the middle of a sentence. ‘Allergic’ to interviews, Tyler is a writer not a 
celebrity. Outside the New York loop of young, edgy literati and excluded from 
the Gentlemen’s Club of elder literary statesmen, Tyler, now in her 60s, lives 
in quiet, productive seclusion in Baltimore, where nearly all her novels are 
set.”

What else do we know? She prefers to write her first drafts in longhand, 
sitting on a sofa. Her favourite novel used to beDinner at the Homesick 
Restaurant, now it’s her latest, A Spool of Blue Thread. She told the Observer 
that “I start every book thinking ‘This one will be different’ and it’s not. I 
have my limitations. I am fascinated by how families work, endurance, how do we 
get through life.”

The same could be said of Breathing Lessons, which is fundamentally a portrait 
of a marriage. In theNew York Times, the writer Edward Hoagland celebrated the 
novel as follows: “Anne Tyler, who is blessedly prolific and graced with an 
effortless-seeming talent at describing whole rafts of intricately 
individualised people, might be described as a domestic novelist, one of that 
great line descending fromJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>. She is interested not in 
divorce or infidelity, but in marriage – not very much in isolation, 
estrangement, alienation and other fashionable concerns, but in courtship, 
child-raising and filial responsibility. It’s… a mark of her competence that in 
this fractionated era she can write so well about blood links and family 
funerals, old friendships or the dogged pull of thwarted love, of blunted love 
affairs or marital mismatches that neither mend nor end. Her eye is kindly, 
wise and versatile (an eye that you would want on your jury if you ever had to 
stand trial), and after going at each new set of characters with authorial 
eagerness and an exuberant tumble of details, she tends to arrive at a set of 
conclusions about them that is a sort of golden mean.”

As well as winning the Pulitzer prize for fiction in 1989, Breathing Lessons 
was alsoTime magazine’s book of the year.

Three more from Anne Tyler 

Earthly Possessions (1977); Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant (1982); The 
Accidental Tourist (1985).

Breathing Lessons is available in Vintage (£8.99). Click here to order it for 
£7.19 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/breathing-lessons.html> 
 