
Like its titular galaxy, Under the Milky Way is a song that feels as though it 
has always existed. Only the mullet hairdos in its brooding video clip betray 
its true age.


The single dropped in 1988, eight years into the life of Sydney new-wave band 
the Church <http://thechurchband.net/>. INXS and George Michael were going 
galactic as Under the Milky Way slid on to the airwaves with a meteor shower of 
jangly guitars, moody A-minor chords, ebow instrumental interludes and 
otherworldly lyrics about “something shimmering and white” that “leads you 
here, despite your destination”.

With its anthemic chorus, “Wish I knew what you were looking for, might have 
known what you would find,” Under the Milky Way catapulted the Church on to the 
world stage (the song peaked at No 22 on the US charts) and earned the band 
single of the year at the 1989 Aria awards.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg6jhpaX7fNQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg6jhpaX7fNQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg6jhpaX7fNQ&media=>
Since then, Under the Milky Way has never drifted far from the airwaves – or 
the campfire. It has soundtrackedcar advertisements 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7E1xcGgRzU> and movies (the surreal house 
party sequence in Donnie Darko <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-6UJigii8U> 
introduced the Church to a whole new generation of indie kids), wasonce voted 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/magazines-20-best-songs-poll-results/story-e6frg6n6-1111117520298>
 the best Aussie song of the past 20 years, and has been covered bybuskers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xPDNiM5te1k>, flashmobbers 
<http://www.abc.net.au/local/videos/2010/07/10/2950252.htm> and children’s 
choirs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pC6wlETno3Y>. The Killers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KvDmov5HmJM>, Grant-Lee Phillips 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZfeSQPo5Rhs>, Sia 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7E1xcGgRzU>, Josh Pyke 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mIhanjU7SZ8> and the late, revered Indigenous 
singerJimmy Little <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eHVdpdK1-qc&feature=kp> 
have all made it their own.

Brides continue to walk down the aisle to it. The dying request it at their 
funerals. The band’s loquacious lead singer and bassist, Steve Kilbey, has lost 
count of the number of people who’ve told him they lost their virginity to it.

If Under the Milky Way is the most successful and universally loved song of 
the Church’s 34-year (and counting) career, it is also the most despised. 
Ironically, its biggest critic has been its own co-creator, Kilbey. What began 
as self-inflicted tall poppy-chopping (Kilbey refused to collect the song’s 
Aria) soon morphed into resentment as Under the Milky Way threatened to eclipse 
everything the Church released in its wake.

Frustrated at how crowds would dissipate at gigs right after Under the Milky 
Way had been played, for a few years around the turn of the millennium, the 
Church refused to play it — or their other 80s hits,Unguarded Moment 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Osz-GQbX37o&feature=kp> and Almost With You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UeDRhKaB6z4&feature=kp> — live, lest they be 
seen as“a bunch of old hacks regurgitating our golden years” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/music/the-fire-and-the-fury-20130220-2erdv.html#ixzz33O4sPsam>
.

So how did the song that Kilbey once branded 
<https://rhythms.com.au/news/great-australian-songs-milky-way/> “flat, lifeless 
and sterile” andsaid 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/music/the-church-milk-their-own-song/story-e6frfn09-1226222283027>
 he "accidentally wrote and accidentally became a single and accidentally 
became a hit" ever come to see the light of day?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpC6wlETno3Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpC6wlETno3Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpC6wlETno3Y&media=>
Kilbey wrote Under the Milky Way with his then girlfriend, Swedish musician 
Karin Jansson. The couple, who went on to have talentedtwin daughters 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/music/say-lou-lou-twin-daughters-of-the-churchs-steve-kilbey-make-bbcs-sound-of-2014-shortlist/story-e6frfn09-1226775151997>
, were visiting Kilbey’s mother on the New South Wales central coast. After 
dinner, Kilbey snuck outside to dodge his washing-up duties and smoke a 
“special musicians’ jazz cigarette”.

“Perhaps I looked up at the wonderful glittering heavens and was inspired – I 
don’t know,” herecounted <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZIYEVxKH4s> years 
later. Kilbey drifted back indoors and began tinkering on the piano. Jansson 
sidled up and, before long, a melody had formed. “We agreed on the lyrics 
within three minutes,” he said.

As for what the song’s about, Kilbey tells Guardian Australia: “It’s not about 
anything. Like all my songs, it’s a portal into your own mind where I give you 
a guided meditation. It’s a blank, abstract canvas for people to lose 
themselves in.”

When Kilbey played Under the Milky Way to his bandmates — drummer Richard 
Ploog and guitarists Marty Willson-Piper and Peter Koppes — they were far from 
bowled over. It was the Church’s manager who insisted it make the cut on their 
fifth album, the Los Angeles-recorded Starfish. And then Arista Records founder 
Clive Davis, who recognised a cash cow when he heard one, made it the album’s 
first single.

The 90s saw the Church saddled with far greater problems than an 
attention-seeking hit single as “girls, drugs and geography” threatened to tear 
the band apart. Certainly economics played a part, but at some point in the 
mid-noughties, Kilbey made a sort of peace with his famous song.

In 2004, the Church released an LP, El Momento Descuidado, which included an 
ethereal acoustic version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ne2_bi4FVE> of 
Under the Milky Way. Two years later the bandperformed it with the Melbourne 
Symphony Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NDFW9yB9dKg> at the 
Commonwealth Games opening ceremony, complete with aerial ballerinas tumbling 
through the night sky. And in 2010 the Church performed the song on national 
television as they were inducted into the Aria hall of fame (the band actually 
bothered to turn up this time).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLSNGejPlTAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLSNGejPlTAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLSNGejPlTAo&media=>
These days, Kilbey is kinder about his breakthrough hit. While he says “I’d be 
happy to never play it again,” he admits it has “been a nice earner”, although 
laments “somehow I got the mixture exactly right with that song and never was 
able to again”.

While it was never his intention, he’s chuffed at how “Australians have 
adopted it as their own song”.

“I keep joking I’m going to sell it to the bloody Liberal party or something 
as the next Australian anthem,”said Kilbey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZIYEVxKH4s> a couple of years back. “Because 
it’s becoming so Australian, it’s unbelievable.”
 