
While We're Young: Ben Stiller has a hipster replacement in brilliant comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/while-were-young-ben-stiller-review-noah-baumbach-adam-driver>
Deciding not to have kids will change your life. You’ll save money, you’ll 
save time. You’ll be constantly reminded of your decision by friends with kids 
(who’ll have run out of both).

Noah Baumbach’s spot-on comedy is partly about parenthood, but it’s really 
concerned with the things we substitute in when kids aren’t around: be it a 
job, your art or a protégé.


Ben Stiller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benstiller> plays Josh, a 
documentary film-maker struggling to get a grasp on what exactly the follow-up 
to his incendiary debut is about (“America?”). Having tried for kids, he and 
his wife, Cornelia (Naomi Watts) are childless, but have come to terms with it. 
Then along come friendly, hip, young couple Jamie (Adam Driver) and Darby 
(Amanda Seyfried). They make films, they make ice cream, they prefer vinyl to 
MP3s, video tapes to Netflix. They are – unlike Josh and Cornelia’s 
contemporaries – allowed in the spur of the moment to do whatever they want.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-ben-stiller-trailer&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425301599922%2Fcrop_KP_109426_640x480.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=While%20We're%20Young%20trailer%3A%20Ben%20Stiller%20hits%20mid-life%20crisis%20in%20Noah%20Baumbach%20comedy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-ben-stiller-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=While%20We%27re%20Young%20trailer%3A%20Ben%20Stiller%20hits%20mid-life%20crisis%20in%20Noah%20Baumbach%20comedy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-ben-stiller-trailer&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425301599922%2Fcrop_KP_109426_640x480.jpeg>
 Watch the trailer 
Josh and Cornelia are energised. Released from the crushing responsibility of 
acting their age. Josh buys a hat like Jamie’s. Cornelia joins Darby at a 
hip-hop dancercise class. They ride bikes, walk the subway lines at night and 
join their young friends at a Ayahuasca ceremony, where they use psychotropics 
to purge their demons (and a fair bit of vom too). Their middle-aged mates – 
Marina (Maria Dizzia) and Fletcher (Adam Horowitz) – are bemused and a little 
appalled. This is not what growing up is supposed to look like.


Baumbach, who was apparently inspired by hanging out with his younger partner 
Greta Gerwig’s friends, confidently maps out a new route through well-chartered 
territory. The creative struggles of a middle-aged film-maker shouldn’t be this 
entertaining. Nor the spectre of a 40-somethings scampering after a chance to 
re-live (or repair) their youth. But a lack of self-awareness is always funny, 
especially when played by Stiller, who does quiet desperation better than 
anyone. The jokes about parenting hit the bullseye, particularly the hellish 
vision of a soft play class lead by a Wiggles-style kids’ band. Cornelia, 
dragged to the session by Marina, lasts a few minutes before fleeing the crowd 
of screaming babies and their love-zombie moms.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427990767715%2Fcrop_KP_156531_640x360.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=While%20We're%20Young%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=While%20We%27re%20Young%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427990767715%2Fcrop_KP_156531_640x360.png>
 Watch a video review of the film 
Baumbach is also kind to Jamie and Darby. They are hipsters with depth. Kids 
who are as interested in the world as their place in it. The world’s changed 
since Josh was cool. Jamie makes films that play with around with the facts, 
tart up the truth and ignore inconsistencies. His loves retro tech, but not the 
old fashioned ideals of ethics and fact-checking. This incenses Josh, who 
hasn’t made a film in years, but hasn’t made a film in years with his 
self-righteousness intact. Baumbach argues that both characters can be right, 
but only one is successful. Josh’s ethical sense is noble. Jamie’s go-get-em 
attitude is essential. Today’s world favours one over the other.


The best films of 2015 in the UK: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/best-films-of-2015-uk>
For Josh and Cornelia middle-age is a void. With no kids and no creative 
satisfaction, they’re left adrift. They know that they have to fill their time 
with something, but what? The chance to steward a younger couple (and leach off 
their vitality) seems too good to miss. But there’s an arrogance in their 
attitude born of denial. Often life is just one day after the other. There is 
no clear roadmap. And dissatisfaction is hard to cure. As funny as While We’re 
Young is, it’s a film about grief as much as it is a comedy. Work or kids or a 
new flavour of ice cream won’t fix you. It sounds like something Jamie would 
say, but true happiness comes from within.
 