
I had such a mistaken idea about Anita Brookner’s novels, until I picked up 
The Latecomersin a secondhand shop about 10 years ago, and read the first 
wonderfully concrete sentence. “Hartmann, a voluptuary, lowered a spoonful of 
brown sugar crystals into his coffee cup, then placed a square of bitter 
chocolate on his tongue, and, while it was dissolving, lit his first 
cigarette.” Somehow – I think because of the title of her Booker winnerHotel du 
Lac – I’d expected something ladylike, lavender-scented, prissy and precious; I 
knew as soon as I opened my eyes to her words that this writing was everything 
opposite to that.

Julian Barnes remembers his friend Anita Brookner: ‘There was no one remotely 
like her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/18/julian-barnes-remembers-anita-brookner>
I love the stories, the plots – variations on a few themes, their scope 
narrowing as time went on. The sensitive and intelligent and weak are preyed 
upon by the unintelligent and strong; profoundly private women elect, for their 
own purposes, to build their lives around the absent men who hardly know them. 
The themes have an exotic flavour these days, they smell of an irretrievable 
past. But the stories only come into their being through Brookner’s distinctive 
sentences, ripely substantial, stamped unapologetically with the writer’s 
personality, commenting and discriminating, digressing and summarising – and 
darkly funny. Hartmann “considered his life’s work to lie in the perfecting of 
simple pleasures, mainly of a physical or domestic nature … The idea of God, 
for example, he rejected as derogating from his own serene existence.”

Latecomers (1988)

My first Brookner-love. The novels of the first decades have stronger stories 
and more characters, more happens. InLatecomers two Jewish boys, Thomas 
Hartmann and Thomas Fibich, are sent to London as refugees in the war and 
become lifelong friends. We follow them into their youth, marriages, 
fatherhood. In his middle age, Fibich suddenly needs to make the journey back 
to the railway station in Berlin where he parted from his mother for the last 
time. This is one of the warmest of her novels, rich with family affection, 
shadowed by history.

A Start in Life (1981)

This was Brookner’s first published novel – she seems to spring into being as 
a novelist fully-formed. The rot in Ruth Weiss’s life began when she was small, 
and her nurse told her that Cinderella shall go to the ball – but the ball 
never materialised. Instead she’s working on the second volume of her academic 
study, “Women in Balzac’s Novels”, and taking care of her helpless, selfish, 
childish parents – who only want to have fun, not to grow old and die. It’s 
blackly, bleakly, wonderfully funny.

Lewis Percy (1989)

Everyone in Brookner’s novels seems to want to get away to France. France! 
It’s more elegant, the coffee’s better, they do things differently there. Her 
characters only ever escape to France temporarily, but it persists in their 
imagination like a high watermark of civilisation and sophistication, a dream 
possibility. Lewis Percy, a young English scholar, brings camembert and 
cherries to a soiree in Paris – but then has to return to his ill mother in 
London, and marriage to the enigmatically dull Tissy. His mother-in-law is a 
“Messalina of the suburbs”, smelling of “cigarettes mixed with slightly stale 
Vol de Nuit”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fthe-five-best-anita-brookner-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F508345e50e1466a865e534a97d8570859be44b42%2F0_0_663_1024%2F663.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20best%20Anita%20Brookner%20novels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fthe-five-best-anita-brookner-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20best%20Anita%20Brookner%20novels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fthe-five-best-anita-brookner-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F508345e50e1466a865e534a97d8570859be44b42%2F0_0_663_1024%2F663.jpg>
Brief Lives (1990)

A bracing novel of lifelong female friendship, or enmity. The narrator doesn’t 
really like Julia – “She was not a very nice woman, but then neither am I” – 
yet when she reads Julia’s obituary it prompts the novel’s pouring out of 
reminiscence, fascination. The women are brought close by the connection 
between their husbands – but the men feel almost instrumental, it’s what’s 
between the women that’s truthful and terrible, raw. Brookner notates the 
ritual of domestic habit like an anthropologist: her friend remembers Julia 
“placing her underclothes on a chair in her bedroom and covering them with a 
square of silk reserved for this purpose”.

A Misalliance (1986)

All my favourites seem to come from the first decade of Brookner’s writing 
life. The later novels can seem to turn round in ever-tighter circles of story, 
becoming more suffocatingly sad – though the distinctive intelligence and music 
of her prose never falters.A Misalliance is prophetic of some of the late 
themes – Blanche Vernon’s husband has left her “for a young woman in computer 
sciences” and she’s trying to make a life out of what remains, which is next to 
nothing. There’s shopping, and cooking for one, and the glass of wine carefully 
held off until the evening – and there are her visits to the Wallace 
Collection, the National Gallery and the British Museum. It’s a tiny life, and 
it’s as huge as everything.
 