
A lot of cracking guests have graced The Adam Buxton Podcast 
<http://adam-buxton.co.uk/ad/category/adam-buxton-podcast/> over the last few 
months, includingKathy Burke <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kathy-burke>, 
Michael Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-palin> and Richard 
Ayoade <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-ayoade>. His latest 
offering is a real treat, withLouis Theroux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-theroux>, “infantilism, 
questionable social habits and the never-ending challenges of parenting” on the 
menu.

There’s a home-made tone to Buxton’s “ramble chats” and silly jingles, but 
don’t be fooled: his podcasts are more revealing than most straightforward 
interviews. Friendship and time leaves room for tangents and a real insight 
into what makes Theroux tick.

Talking about his excellent documentary Drinking to Oblivion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/24/drinking-to-oblivion-louis-theroux>
, Theroux touches on his own alcohol consumption. “White wine, Champagne, 
prosecco, tequila, certain drinks like that make me feel silly,” he says. “I 
get energy and I just get a feeling of tremendous well-being. I feel a bit 
weird saying that. If you get it right, you can hit that peak point of 
pleasure. After that it gets sloppy.”

“People were thrilled to see you being less callous and robotic than you 
normally would be,” Buxton says of Theroux’s last documentary. “You have a 
quality of aloofness, of detachment sometimes, which you need to have being 
semi-objective, making the films you make.”

Theroux is not fazed. “What? Like a ‘Why is there water coming from your 
eyes?’ sort of thing?” he says. “There’s a part of me that doesn’t want to be 
phoney. It’s a cheap trick in TV in general … we see so much of what appears to 
be fake emotion – or cynically used emotion – in things likeBritain’s Got Talent
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> and X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor>. Oh, lives have been 
transformed, soaring music, hugs. It’s cheap, isn’t it?”

Much can be learned about Theroux from the podcast. He leaves without warning 
when he’s ready to go home from a party, abandoning his wife. He regards 
10.30pm as the “watershed” for the time to phone people. And he deliberately 
uses “Meaning?” and “Go on …” to keep his interviewees talking.

But the biggest revelation is his impressive falsetto of Yes Sir, I Can Boogie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KGuFn0RPgaE>, which comes out after Buxton 
cracks open the energy drinks. (That’s not even a euphemism.) “It’s a very 
clean sound,” he claims, continuing until he has Dr Buckles in hysterics.

Hannah Verdier

If you like this, try… WTF with Marc Maron <http://www.wtfpod.com/>, The Tim 
Ferriss Show 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/the-tim-ferriss-show/id863897795?mt=2>
 