
Curiosity is one of the human animal’s essential qualities, and two questions 
– where did we come from, and how did we get here? – continue to express the 
insatiable curiosity that animates human consciousness. Today, when we consider 
our place in the universe, the cosmos remains the supreme frontier of mankind’s 
propensity to wonder at its origins.

Last month, an event in a remote corner of our universe, another contemporary 
reminder of this timeless curiosity, hit the international headlines with the 
dramatic verification of a concept first predicted by Einstein in 1915: 
gravitational waves.

In the words of the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/14/opinion/sunday/finding-beauty-in-the-darkness.html?_r=0>
, “a minuscule jiggle, discovered in an exotic physics experiment” saw two 
teams of American scientists, in collaboration with British and German 
partners, overcome almost insurmountable odds “to open a vast new window on the 
cosmos”. This, in simple language, was the wider significance of the moment – 
an astronomical “first” – when the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave 
Observatory (Ligo) announced thata signal from gravitational waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/09/gravitational-waves-everything-you-need-to-know>
 had been discovered emanating from the collision and merger of two massive 
black holes (collapsed stars) more than a billion light years away.

The mind-dizzying scale of this data only begins to come into focus when you 
remember that just one light year is approximately 5.88 trillion miles. Welcome 
toStephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/jan/01/stephen-hawking-at-70> and his 
universe.

He devoted the final chapters to 'wormholes', 'spiral galaxies' and, perhaps 
most controversial, 'superstring theory'

It was, rather less distantly, in 1988 that Hawking confirmed his place as the 
most brilliant British scientist of his generation with the publication ofA 
Brief History of Time, a succinct, entertaining and brilliantly lucid account 
of our relationship with the universe. In addition to his review of all the 
great theories of the cosmos, from Galileo and Newton to Einstein, Hawking, who 
was already renowned for his work on black holes, took the opportunity to 
explore and publicise some of the most speculative contemporary ideas about 
space and time. He devoted the final chapters ofA Brief History to “wormholes”, 
“spiral galaxies” and, perhaps most controversial of all, “superstring theory”, 
in a complex narrative that was also a sketch for Hawking’s goal of a 
“complete, consistent and unified” theory of physics.

It was his ambition, he wrote, to facilitate “the discussion of the question 
of why it is that we and the universe exist. If we find the answer to that, it 
would be the ultimate triumph of human reason – for then we would know the mind 
of God.”

What, you might ask, is the use of such hyperbole? What, indeed, is the 
justification for a highly theoretical department of science, such as 
astrophysics, that doesn’t contribute to the improvement of the physical world 
(safer aeroplanes; faster cars; better washing machines)? Here we have to 
acknowledge the immense but intangible cultural significance of scientific 
inquiry, especially its ability to change mankind’s perspective of its place in 
the universe.

Stephen Hawking at 70: still the brightest star in the scientific universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/jan/01/stephen-hawking-at-70> 
Who knows what the Ligo experiment or A Brief History will achieve? If history 
is any guide, however, the impact on our consciousness is potentially profound. 
Already, as myObserver colleague Robin McKie recently reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/14/british-scientists-crucial-role-in-stronomical-breakthrough-gravitational-waves-einstein>
: “It is now clear that astronomers have created a new type of astronomy: 
gravitational wave observation.” The Ligo breakthrough joins an extraordinary 
tradition of scientific endeavour. As one of the scientists behind Ligo put it, 
“This confirms the existence of a range of intermediate black holes, about 
which we had theoretical doubts. Now those have gone. We’re already going 
places.”

Over the centuries, Aristotle, Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, Einstein and many 
others, often at great personal cost, have changed our understanding of the 
universe. Hawking’s own boastful calculations of his book sales suggest thatA 
Brief Historywill have influenced the minds of a generation as few other 
contemporary titles will have done. Translated into 40 languages, as he writes 
in the introduction to the latest paperback edition,A Brief History has sold 
“about one copy for every 750 man, woman and child in the world”. Not bad for a 
book that, Hawking freely admits, he never expected “to do anything like as 
well as it did”.

From its opening page, in which he repeats the apocryphal tale of the little 
old lady who toldBertrand Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2013/nov/18/bertrand-russell-philosopher-religion-ethics-life>
 that “the world is really a flat place supported on the back of a giant 
tortoise”, Hawking’s intention is to instruct and entertain. He recounts, 
tongue in cheek, that when Russell is said to have replied, with a smirk, “What 
is the tortoise standing on?”, the old lady answered, “You’re very clever, 
young man, very clever. But it’s turtles all the way down.” Plainly, Hawking 
can appreciate the ironies implicit in the speculative side of quantum physics.

We are each free to believe what we want and it is my view that the simplest 
explanation is there is no God

In fact, what follows is not fanciful but hard-nosed, an authoritative 
account, addressed to the layman, of Hawking’s understanding of space and time, 
the expanding universe, particle physics and the origins of the universe. 
Nearly 30 years from publication, Hawking has refined some of his ideas. In 
1988, he seems to have been tempted by quasi-spiritual distractions. In 2011, 
he spoke out unequivocally in favour of anaetheistical understanding of man’s 
origins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/may/15/stephen-hawking-interview-there-is-no-heaven>
: “We are each free to believe what we want and it is my view that the simplest 
explanation is there is no God. No one created the universe and no one directs 
our fate. This leads me to a profound realisation. There is probably no heaven, 
and no afterlife either. We have this one life to appreciate the grand design 
of the universe, and for that, I am extremely grateful.”

Hawking’s own life and his heroic struggle with the debilitating effects of 
motor neurone disease have become braided into the world’s response toA Brief 
History and many of his subsequent speculations, as if his suffering has 
somehow sharpened his perception of the cosmos and its mysteries. For the 
media, the oracular nature of his utterances, and the remarkable courage with 
which he has defied all predictions of his imminent mortality, have imbued some 
of his theories with a quasi-mystical status. The most cursory reading ofA 
Brief History of Time will remind his readers that there is nothing fuzzy or 
untested about the intelligence behind this contemporary classic.

A signature line

“Our goal is nothing less than a complete description of the universe we live 
in.”

Three to compare

Isaac Newton <https://www.theguardian.com/science/isaac-newton>: Mathematical 
Principles of Natural Philosophy (1687)
Albert Einstein <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alberteinstein>: “On the 
Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies” (1905)
Aristotle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2014/aug/11/science-weekly-podcast-aristotle-armand-leroi-lagoon>
:On the Heavens (circa 340 BC)

 * A Brief History Of Time by Stephen Hawking (Bantam, £8.99). To order a copy 
for £7.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brief-history-of-time.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article-100-best>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 