



Mercury prize 2015 : 'A shortlist that offers no sense of a prevalent trend in 
British music'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/16/mercury-prize-2015-shortlist-jamie-xx-florence-machine-wolf-alice>
Aphex Twin – Syro

What we said: “Some would grouse that Syro didn’t reinvent music – a rather 
high bar that you have to regard as a compliment of sorts. But if we don’t get 
Aphex the innovator here, we get something just as good: Aphex the virtuoso. 
Much of Syro is rooted in an athletic 80s electro funk, typified by the 
inhumanly fast keytar runs of syro u473t8+e (piezoluminescence mix). But the 
album’s real hallmark is its generosity of melody. From the delicate tonal 
shifts and syrupy vocal ooze of minipops 67 (source field mix) to the wistful, 
cloudy synths that swirl beneath the pneumatic junglist breaks of PAPAT4 
(pineal mix), Syro feels designed to delight and beguile.” (Louis Pattinson) 
Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/09/best-albums-of-2014-no-4-syro-by-aphex-twin>
.

Benjamin Clementine – At Least For Now

What we said: “Channeling influences such as Erik Satie and Antony Hegarty, 
Clementine is reminiscent of Kevin Rowland in that he sounds as if he is 
singing from the gut, and because he has to. If only he had Rowland’s economy: 
mannered vocal flourishes complicate the melodies when what’s needed is 
simplicity. The addition of syrupy strings and pedestrian drumming further 
dilutes the impact of his raw talent. However, when he performs unadorned, 
melodies dripping from his fingertips, and letting fly from the heart, his 
voice is difficult to forget.” (Dave Simpson) Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/26/benjamin-clementine-at-least-for-now-review>
.

C Duncan – Architect

What we said: “He seamlessly merges interweaving vocals with the sounds of 
pastoral English folk and lush, 4AD-esque dreampop. On He Believes in Miracles 
and the title track, both of which have a psychedelic shimmer, you realise that 
Duncan is just as comfortable when creating music to suit sunnier climes, 
making this a magical record for all seasons.” (Tim Jonze) Read the full piece 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/16/c-duncan-architect-review-christopher-duncan>
.

Eska – Eska

What we said: “Her debut album, five years in the making, attests to the 
Londoner’s versatility, drawing on everything from psychedelic soul to folk 
infused with the spirit of Kate Bush. The hypnotic opener, This Is How a Garden 
Grows, moves at its own leisurely pace through history, evoking a half-cut 
Erykah Badu. Unsurprisingly, not every song’s that good – To Be Remembered is 
particularly forgettable – but, at its best, Eska is a mind-bending gem.” (Paul 
Mardles) Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/26/eska-review-session-singer-centre-stage>
. Orsee Phiona Okumu’s Cult Heroes blog about Eska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/apr/28/cult-heroes-it-was-a-long-wait-for-eskas-first-album-but-it-was-worth-it>
.

Florence + the Machine – How Big How Blue How Beautiful

What we said: “It takes about 10 minutes for the listener to realise that 
reports of Welch’s new-found reserve might have been slightly over-egged. It’s 
at that point that the title track appears, bringing with it that legendary 
musical signifier of modest understatement, a 36-piece orchestra: strings saw 
dramatically, brass blares out, little bursts of woodwind scurry about, what 
appears to be a dulcimer and something that sounds like a celeste attempt to 
muscle in on the action. It’s understated only in the sense that she didn’t get 
someone in to let off a cannon like in the 1812 Overture. The sneaking 
suspicion that How Big How Blue How Beautiful perhaps isn’t going to be 
entirely as advertised is hard to avoid.” (Alexis Petridis) Read the full piece 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/florence-and-the-machine-how-big-how-blue-how-beautiful-review>
. Or have a look atSophie Heawood’s interview with Florence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/25/florence-and-the-machine-i-funned-myself-out>
, which is a terrific read.

Gaz Coombes – Matador

What we said: “Matador’s sound textures are pulled together from a wide range 
of sources: a gospel feel on the chorus of 20/20, a touch of Neu! in The 
English Ruse. There’s a trace of John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band, not only in 
Matador’s use of slapback vocal echo, but also in its raw, confessional lyrics. 
Coombes’s voice has always been a powerful pop instrument, thrillingly on the 
edge of hysteria. On Matador, it’s also a howl of pain.” (Jon Dennis). Read the 
full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/gaz-coombes-matador-review>.

Ghostpoet – Shedding Skin

What we said: “Here, he takes a turn that might alienate fans of the icy, 
sparse electronic beats that launched his career. With a backing band composed 
of guitarist Joe Newman, drummer John Blease and bassist John Calvert, Ejimiwe 
dives headfirst into moody alt-rock territory. His languid, spoken word-esque 
bars are still here, dripping over thetitle track’s 
<https://soundcloud.com/ghostpoet/shedding-skin> exploration of homelessness 
and That Ring Down the Drain Feeling’s morose look at an ex-lover’s newfound 
happiness. But he explores more universal themes than on his past work, 
stepping outside the tried-and-tested tales of big-city woes and one too many 
boozy nights.” (Tshepo Mokoena) Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/26/ghostpoet-shedding-skin-review>.

Jamie xx – In Colour

What we said: “In Colour is no mere sepia-tinted nostalgia trip. It might be a 
kaleidoscopic 11-track tribute to raves long past, a paean to the styles Smith 
is too young to remember first-hand, and the incidental chatter of London 
pirate radio circa 1992 that he is too young to have heard – a direction 
presaged in last summer’s pre-album offering,All Under One Roof Raving 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wk28cgCG3Ho>. But it is also about the 
pleasure of being alone, enveloped in bass, in a sea of many; of refracting 
what can often be a superficial experience – London clubbing – into something 
more existential, more nuanced, more unified.” (Kitty Empire) Read the full 
piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/24/jamie-xx-in-colour-review-larging-it-for-introverts>
. If you like, you can also readAlexis Petridis trying to get blood from the 
stone that is Jamie xx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/jamie-xx-smith-solo-debut-album-in-colour>
.

Róisín Murphy – Hairless Toys

What we said: “From the glasslike Gone Fishing to its Italo-disco and house 
mutations and unusual country diversions, it draws from the past but adds a 
crisp, modern polish; and unlike other revivalists, there’s a depth to Murphy’s 
vocals, as if she has experienced the freaks and fantasy of Studio 54 
firsthand. Hairless Toys is pure, evocative elegance, her performance as 
flamboyant and fragile as the subculture she celebrates.” (Harriet Gibsone) 
Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/07/roisin-murphy-hairless-toys-review>
.

Slaves – Are You Satisfied

What we said: “It’s not so much that Slaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/23/slaves-the-hunter-feed-the-mantaray>
 don’t capture the excitement of their live show on record, more that their 
live show isn’t designed for transfer to a major label album. The riffs of 
songs such as Wow!!!7am or Hey or Do Something are strong enough, but the 
formula “riff, primitive bash of drums, bellowed chorus” wears thin pretty 
quickly. Great garage-rock needs to sound, in the words of John Peel, as if the 
instruments are playing themselves, but on record Slaves always sound a bit too 
self-conscious.” (Michael Hann) Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/slaves-are-you-satisfied-review>
. Read what happened whenKevin EG Perry joined them on the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/23/slaves-the-hunter-feed-the-mantaray>
.

Soak – Before We Forgot How To Dream

What we said: “It’s a debut that shows potential, but falls just short of the 
songwriting spark hinted at on her second EP, 2012’sSea Creatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/27/soak-bridie-monds-watson-sea-creatures>
. The Derry singer’s cocooning, husky voice sounds as delicately expressive as 
always, creaking on the singleBlud <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EwmeF9aDy20>
 – about overhearing her parents arguing with an ear pressed to her bedroom 
floorboards – and Hailstones Don’t Hurt.” (Tshepo Mokoena) Read the full piece 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/soak-before-we-forget-how-to-dream-review>
.

Wolf Alice – My Love Is Cool

What we said: “It feels like an album that’s been allowed time to gestate: 
despite being virtually veteran in buzzband terms, they have benefitted from 
beefing up their sound on tour – as evidenced on the heavy romance of Your 
Loves Whore, the dirty degenerate chug ofYou’re a Germ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XflmOIEUVbo>, or the cinematic Turn to Dust. 
The awkward introversion in the lyrics – which deal with relationship strife, 
creepy blokes, friendship, gender and the quest for eternal love – add a sense 
of emotional overload driven by late nights, blood pacts and wide-eyed wonder. 
It’s an invigorating debut with a gaunt, gallant identity of its own.” (Harriet 
Gibsone) Read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/18/wolf-alice-my-love-is-cool-review>
. You can also cast your eyes overRachel Aroesti’s interview with Wolf Alice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/19/wolf-alice-indie-rock>.
 