
It should have been a national story with heavy coverage. The hook, on its 
face, seems tailor-made for breathless coverage: last week in Spokane, 
Washington state, asuspected rightwing terrorist attempts to murder multiple 
parade-goers 
<http://www.spokesman.com/stories/2011/jan/18/bomb-scare-closes-streets/> who 
are out to celebrate the life of an American hero killed by a rightwing 
terrorist 43 years ago. The talking heads would have an endless series of 
important-sounding questions to ask – with "political vitriol" and "hate", no 
doubt, figuring highly. Experts in counterterrorism, hate groups and racial 
politics could be brought on as guests, alongside shocked near-victims of this 
thwarted bombing,which FBI officials have described 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5io6mwyUU9cT9ZyMDY_OOIzdAqb_A?docId=7e621f4980b9477fbf042f55cb234c1e>
 as sophisticated and potentially able to kill numerous people.

Other attempts, which had far less chance of going off, receive heavy 
coverage, so why did the national news media give the attempted bombing at the 
Spokane MLK Day parade such cursory amount of coverage?

The answer lies in looking at which two national news organisations did give 
the story the coverage it deserves,MSNBC 
<http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/41139894/ns/us_news-crime_and_courts/> and the 
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/01/18/bomb-found-on-mlk-day-parade-route_n_810735.html>
. Yep, that's right: the two liberal outlets. Everyone else was afraid or 
unwilling to give the story any oxygen – even though doing so could help catch 
the perpetrators by publicising the reward the FBI is offering.

Will Bunch of the Philadelphia Inquirer 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/blogs/attytood/Has_right-wing_carping_killed_media__coverage_of_major_domestic_terrorism_case_in_Spokane.html>
 has the right instincts, which is to look at the aftermath of the shooting in 
Tucson, Arizona to see how it might have influenced public discourse around 
domestic terrorism. Liberals can – and should – be forgiven for blaming the 
right for the news that a Democratic congresswoman who has been heavily 
targeted by paranoid Tea Party activists in a state that's giving South 
Carolina some competition in the contest for most reactionary state in the 
country.

Interestingly, our instincts are not necessarily off the mark. We do not know 
yet whether the shooter's mental health status will be a matter at issue in his 
trial, but we do know that Jared Lee Loughnerwas heavily invested in fringe 
rightwing conspiracy theories 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/blogs-and-stories/2011-01-13/zeitgeist-the-documentary-that-may-have-shaped-jared-loughners-worldview/2/>
 andis apparently a misogynist 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/blogs/scocca/archive/2011/01/17/maybe-jared-loughner-was-a-bigot-after-all.aspx>
 who echoes many extreme right beliefs about women.

None of this would matter if the mainstream American right was dedicated to 
rationality and civility. But since the mainstream right has embraced 
conspiracy theories and talk of insurrection, they've created an environment 
where the fringe right can flourish.

Despite the facts on the ground, the right was able to quell discussion about 
the role that their paranoia and violent rhetoric likely played in this event, 
particularly with regard to the political figure whom, among others, Loughner 
chose to shoot. Sarah Palin started shouting "blood libel", and it was all so 
unpleasant that many in the mainstream media decided it was better to let 
important questions lie than to provoke her into worse assaults on decency and 
good taste.

Unfortunately, the effect of the successful rightwing freakout has been to 
scare most of the mainstream media from talking about domestic terrorism 
honestly at all. The attempted bombing of an MLK Day parade cannot be excused 
away as mental illness. Nor can someone muddy the waters by implying that the 
would-be bomber is, in fact, some sort of pinko commie. It would be far harder 
to deny that the white supremacist groups and militias that are flourishing in 
the American north west owe their success to the mainstreaming of paranoia in 
the American right.

As David Neiwert has documented in his extensive research 
<http://www.amazon.com/Death-Fourth-July-Killing-America/dp/1403965013> of 
these groups, rightwing extremists justify themselves by telling themselves 
they speak for the community at large, saying those things they believe others 
believe, but are afraid to say. So, the further right the mainstream gets, the 
more emboldened the fringe right becomes.

Which means that if someone like Glenn Beck creates rogues gallery where eight 
of the nine people listed are Jews <http://mediamatters.org/blog/201101140003>, 
overly antisemitic groups will see this as a coded signal of support for them. 
It's the same story with accusing President Obama of being unAmerican or a 
socialist – racist groups pick up on this as further evidence they speak for 
those who are afraid to be overtly racist. It's not hard, from there, to feel 
that now is the time to strike – perhaps by bombing an antiracism event.

The best prevention for all this is to hold the right accountable and shame 
conservatives from using incendiary, paranoid rhetoric. But after the right won 
narrative control after the Tucson shooting, the possibility of holding them 
responsible becomes ever further out of reach.

The evidence demonstrates that many on the right have already figured out that 
they now havegreater licence to sow paranoia and call for violence after the 
Tucson shooting. One of the people still alive on Beck's Jewish-heavy rogues 
gallery, liberal sociologistFrances Piven, has been receiving a crushing number 
of death threats 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/157900/glenn-beck-targets-frances-fox-piven>. 

Lest you're tempted to say that this is just a bunch of nobodies whose 
opinions don't matter, I highly recommend looking atthis post from the 
editorial staff of RedState.com 
<http://www.redstate.com/the_directors/2011/01/22/we-have-drawn-a-line/>, on 
the anniversary of Roe v Wade. Red State is the mainstream right; editor Erick 
Erickson is a regular guest on CNN. In this post, the authors threaten 
insurrection against the government if they don't get their way on abortion 
laws.

"The reason for this is simple: once before, our nation was forced to 
repudiate the supreme court with mass bloodshed. We remain steadfast in our 
belief that this will not be necessary again, but only if those committed to 
justice do not waiver or compromise, and send a clear and unmistakable signal 
to their elected officials of what must be necessary to earn our support.

Aside from the hilarious attempt to imply that the Confederacy started the 
civil war to repudiate slavery (it was, in fact, to defend it), this is a 
chilling passage. Especially in light of the fact that violence to protest 
abortion isone of the most common, ongoing forms of domestic terrorism 
<http://www.prochoice.org/about_abortion/violence/history_extreme.asp>. Instead 
of being ashamed for using inciting language justifying violence in the wake of 
the Tucson shooting, it seems some of the right feel empowered to double down.
 