
You can probably guess by the title of this book that it's going to be grim! 
So no surprise that this is the scariest book I have ever read.

I recommend that you don't read this book in bed, I did, and believe me I did 
not get a wink of sleep! If voodoo dolls and dark family secrets aren't your 
thing, then this book certainly isn't for you!

I have to admit that when I read the blurb and when the book hadn't really got 
that exciting in the first few chapters, I didn't really think that it was for 
me but because of my annoying affliction (basically I have this thing where 
once I've started a book, no matter how boring it may me, even if I hate it, I 
can't quit half way through, I have to finish it), I persevered. Anyway, before 
long I was gripped and even if the book had my hair standing on end at points, 
I couldn't put it down and the story will haunt me forever.

The basic plot is that the main character Daniel has never really left the 
grounds of his house that he lives in with his mum, and he has been ill all for 
all his life, or so he thinks, but then one day a knock at the door changes 
everything. When a Doctor comes in to his room and says that he is fine and his 
mother kills herself, Daniel is thrust into a life of deadly family secrets and 
ancient evil, and must strive to find the answers he needs. I won't say any 
more because I don't want to spoil it for anyone who might want to read it, 
although it certainly isn't everyone's cup of tea! I would recommend it to 
anyone who likes thrillers and ghost stories.

One of the reasons the book is so gripping is the way it is written. Anne Fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-fine> definitely knows how to weave a 
good story. The order she writes things in means that you get a taster of 
what's going to happen next but not quite enough to guess. It leaves you 
frantically turning the pages, and feeling like you are in the story. I swear I 
got a decent amount of exercise just from reading it, my heart was thumping 
like mad! At one point, I remember my friend getting hysterical when she saw my 
face as I was reading it, she said I'd gone bright red and looked like I'd seen 
a ghost. She was probably right, I'd seen one in the story or something and was 
petrified! I think I cried at one point as well, I could relate to the 
characters so well I could practically feel their pain!

So read, if you dareâ€¦..

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 