
When Nasa’s Dawn spacecraft arrived at Ceres last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/06/dawn-starts-to-orbit-ceres-in-mission-to-photograph-dwarf-planet>
 the images it beamed back were puzzling. The nearest dwarf planet to Earth was 
missing the massive craters that astronomers thought would heavily scar the 
surface.

As the Dawn probe swung around the body, the largest in the asteroid belt, its 
cameras recorded pictures of pockmarked terrain. But even though small craters 
dotted the Cerean surface, none were larger than the 175-mile-wide dent that is 
the Kerwan impact crater.


This left scientists scratching their heads. Models of collisions in the main 
asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter held that Ceres should have accumulated 
10 to 15 craters more than 250 miles across in its 4.5 billion year history. 
Instead, it had none. And rather than hosting at least 40 craters more than 60 
miles wide, Dawn had spotted only sixteen.


Mystery of Ceres's bright spots deepens as new data is analysed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/16/mystery-of-ceres-bright-spots-deepens-new-data-analysed-nasa-dawn>
To investigate, Simone Marchi at Southwest Research Institute in Colorado ran 
a series of computer simulations of the impacts Ceres might endure over its 
lifetime. They showed that the dwarf planet was missing craters all the way 
down to pits 100 miles wide. Only the smaller craters were found in the 
expected numbers.


“Ceres is thought to have formed at the dawn of the solar system, some one to 
ten million years or so after the onset of formation,” said Marchi. “Thus, 
Ceres is a witness to the tumultuous early days where collisions were much more 
frequent and violent than today.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da6RXz14nhBg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da6RXz14nhBg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da6RXz14nhBg&media=>
 The missing large impact craters on Ceres. Credit: Simone Marchi 
From other data collected by Dawn, the scientists reasoned that large craters 
on the 620-mile-wide Ceres had been “obliterated beyond recognition” over 
geological time scales. “For the most part, they are totally obscured,” said 
Marchi, whose report appears inNature Communications 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/ncomms12257>.


The disappearance of large impact craters has “huge implications”, Marchi 
adds. The report suggests that the icy interior of Ceres is mobile to some 
extent, allowing the ground to refresh itself over long periods of times. 
Another possibility is that Ceres was geologically active in the past, with 
“cryovolcanoes” blasting out water and ice that gradually erased large craters 
from the surface.


Dawn’s images of Vesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2012/sep/05/nasa-leaving-party-asteroid-vesta>
, another giant asteroid, revealed immense impact craters, including one that 
covered almost an entire side of the 300-mile-wide body. On closer inspection 
of the Ceres images, Marchi and his team believe they may have found the 
remains of huge craters, one being the Vendimia Planitia depression that 
reaches 500 miles across the surface.
 