
It's the middle of a wet, wet winter, unaccountably you haven't shed the 
pounds or learnt the cello as per the optimism of 1 Jan, and to make matters 
even worse, Valentine's Day is just around the corner. No wonder you're feeling 
bilious; thank God, therefore, that there is a literary prize to match your 
mood.

Last night, the Omnivore's Hatchet Job of the Year award 
<http://www.theomnivore.com/hatchetjoboftheyear/>, an annual celebration of 
unkind book reviewing,went to AA Gill for his piece on Morrissey's Autobiography
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/11/hatchet-job-of-the-year-aa-gill-morrissey-autobiography>
; on this scant information alone, if the prize were suddenly in need of a new 
name, we might reasonably suggest the Shooting Fish in a Barrel award. But more 
of AA presently; for now, let us leave him to enjoy his spoils, a year's supply 
of potted shrimp donated by The Fish Society (I think the idea is to draw a 
parallel between the smell of rotten fish and the smell of rotten writing; it 
might also be an allusion to those possibly apocryphal stories of spurned 
lovers sewing prawns into the spurners' curtain rods).

The Hatchet Job of the Year, previously won by critics Adam Mars-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/07/michael-cunningham-review-hatchet-job>
 andCamilla Long 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/12/hatchet-job-of-the-year-rachel-cusk>
, is theduck/rabbit <http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Rabbit-DuckIllusion.html> of 
the literary prize season. Viewed one way, what's to dislike? It takes a 
welcome hatpin to the balloon of literary pomposity; it declares war on the 
bland book review and the log-rolling backslap. The prize locates itself firmly 
in the traditions of seductively louche literary London – its co-sponsor is the 
writers' and artists' local, the Coach and Horses in Soho – in which waspish 
young men (usually) tell it like it is to old farts, without fear nor favour 
and certainly without an eye to their literary prospects or next free drink. To 
underline its devotion to the milieu, it is awarded at one of those properly 
old-school parties held in tiny rooms with lashings of cheap wine and the 
promise of poets to snog on the way to the night bus. Brilliant!

On that reading, the Hatchet Job is the witty icing on the delicious cake, the 
only problem being that there's no effing cake any more. Kicking against the 
pricks becomes rather less impressive when the pricks have melted away. The 
Hatchet Job – as all self-styled rebellions and expressions of naughtiness do – 
relies on the idea of a flourishing literary culture, peopled with literary 
colossi wielding influence with every metaphor they scrutinise, pontificating 
weekly in seemingly endless literary sections, dominating the stage on 
television arts shows, venerated across the land. Oh. Right.

In tacit acknowledgment of this sorry state of affairs, the Omnivore's 
manifesto promises to address precisely these problems; to reverse the decline 
in the quality, quantity and "relevance" of book reviewing. It has mounted, it 
says "a crusade against dullness, deference and lazy thinking" by shining a 
light on "critics who have the courage to overturn received opinion, and who do 
so with style".

The organisers have never really explained why dullness, deference, lazy 
thinking and received opinion might not thrive just as well in a negative book 
review as a positive one; nor why a glowing notice by a good writer should not 
elude these pitfalls. To do so would be to expose the fact that "hatchet jobs" 
are in fact far easier to write than admiring reviews; or that what they are 
really after is a piece of humorous, well-turned spite (and nothing too wrong 
with that, either).

This year's shortlist featured some excellently written and perceptive 
reviews, though you'd struggle to describe many of them as "hatchet jobs".
Rachel Cooke's piece on Ann Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/10/strictly-ann-widdecombe-autobiography-review>
 was not a favourable review, but it was more incisive pen portrait than 
demolition; and is it surprising to find that two high-profile novels, Donna 
Tartt's The Goldfinch (Peter Kemp) and Eleanor Catton's The Luminaries (David 
Sexton), had detractors as well as enthusiasts?

Similarly, it would have been more of a challenge – and thus more of a service 
to the art of book reviewing – to find a pro-Morrissey voice. Certainly, it is 
no great surprise to find thatAA Gill hasn't much time for him 
<http://www.theomnivore.com/a-a-gill-on-autobiography-by-morrissey-the-sunday-times/>
, though one might have hoped that a prize-winning piece of writing would have 
avoided the tedious rehearsal of the Penguin Classics controversy (here's 
something that might have extended the argument; Morrissey's abiding penchant 
for releasing work on odd labels. You Are the Quarrycame out on an old reggae 
label 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/70736/morrissey-bringing-new-music-artists-to-attack>
. Have that one for free, AA). What did I learn besides? That the writer has 
little time for valorising pop culture, and the stunningly original thought 
that Morrissey is camp. Ah, well. Morrissey made The Queen is Dead, and AA Gill 
has made a decent living out of writing moderately amusing broadsides against 
risotto. There you go: I've joined the snarkers. It doesn't feel great, but 
apparently it's going to save literature.
 