
The art of the bad review is a noble and well-established tradition, starting 
in 1662 with Samuel Pepys' hatchet job of Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's 
Dream (“the most insipid ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life”) and 
ending last year with AA Gill'stake-down 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/culture/books/non_fiction/article1330696.ece>
 of Morrissey's memoir (“utterly devoid of insight, warmth, wisdom or 
likeability.”) Kicking around Jordan somewhere is probably a long lost tablet 
engraved with a two-star review of Genesis.


Less well-documented is the lively sub-category of retaliatory action: the 360 
degree review of the reviewer by the reviewed. As a rule, dignified silence is 
thought to be the best way to shut down criticism. But those paid large sums to 
express themselves for a living sometimes can't bite their tongues and we, 
their audience, are the richer for it.


And so to James Franco <https://www.theguardian.com/film/james-franco>, whose 
talents range across many disciplines, the latest of which falls into the 
Baldwin School of Ill-Advised Public Outburst.


Baldwin of course, established the form with variants of “I'm gonna fuck you 
up,” delivered free-style in the street to reporters and photographers. Franco 
favours a more formal approach, taking to Instagram after a poor review of his 
play Of Mice and Men by The New York Times theatre critic Ben Brantley – or as 
the actor described him, very much in the Baldwin style, thatlittle bitch 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/article/James-Franco-Calls-Out-Ben-Brantley-for-New-York-Times-Review-of-OF-MICE-AND-MEN-20140417#.U1EVusdOreY>
. (A posting which, in line with modern tradition, he later deleted).


Thanks to the internet, we live in what is possibly the richest era of 
counter-criticism in history, and the genre is expanding. There is the high 
sarcasm of Gabourey Sidibe'sTwitter response 
<https://twitter.com/GabbySidibe/status/422748363738472448> to critics after 
the Golden Globes: “To people making mean comments about my GG pics, I mos def 
cried about it on that private jet on my way to my dream job last night."


There are Rihanna's swift and linguistically inventive slap-downs, notably of 
MTV after its tweet, “Yikes Rihanna’s marijuana photos from Coachella spark 
controversy.” To which the singerresponded 
<http://www.vh1.com/celebrity/2012-09-10/rihannas-10-best-twitter-slams-and-comebacks-of-all-time/>
, “Yikes...@rhianna ran out of fucks to give.”


And there is Richard Marx, the '80s soft rocker, who responded 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/01/19/richard_marx_hates_my_guts/> to a critical 
blog-post by a local TV reporter last year with the sort of breath-taking 
escalation only the filterless wonderland of social media permits: “Hey 
@TedMcClelland I’m running some errands. Should I stop and pick you up some 
tampons?”


It had all the zaniness and sub-textual misogyny we expect from the new 
art-form, and was, of course, shortly followed by a gratuitous reference to the 
20th Century dictators: “to assume you can crawl inside my head and know what 
my motivation is for writing a song is arrogance reserved for the likes of 
Hitler and Stalin.” Boom!


Marx, and musicians in general, fall some way behind the field leaders, of 
course, which is to say bad-tempered chefs. Gordon Ramsay responded to Frank 
Bruni's two star review of his restaurant at the London a few years ago, with 
theadmirably concise formulation 
<http://www.grubstreet.com/2007/11/gordon_ramsay_gives_at_least_t.html> that he 
didn't give “two fucks”.


Bruni, like Brantley, is a lightening rod for this kind of push-back, and at 
the extravagant end of the scale, Jeffrey Chodorow, in 2007, took out afull 
page ad <http://gawker.com/238396/jeffrey-chodorow-declares-war-on-frank-bruni> 
in the New York Times after Bruni's zero star review of his restaurant, Kobe, 
at a reported cost of $83,000.


For the really expansive put-down, however, it is the novelists we must look 
to, whose fights take place mainly on the letters page of the New York Review 
of Books. (See what can only be described as theJohn Banville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville>, Ian McEwan, John Sutherland 
cluster-fuck of many years back, when Banville wrote a bad review of McEwan's 
Saturday, to which Sutherland responded in McEwan's defense, pointing out 
several errors in the piece, to which Banville counter-counter responded with 
the magisterial opening, “Summoned, one shuffles guiltily into the department 
of trivia.")


He was perhaps inspired by Vladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov>, who set the standard for 
lofty rebuttals with his response to a bad review by his friend Edmund Wilson 
of his translation of Pushkin's Onegin. Wilson, wrote Nabokov, was nothing but 
a “commonsensical, artless, average reader with a natural vocabulary of, say 
six hundred basic words.” (It is the “say” in this sentence that so devastates).


Jonathan Franzen, of course, studying a more casual style, responded to 
Michiko Kakutani's description of his book of essays as a “portrait of the 
artist as a young jackass” with the assessment that she is “the stupidest 
person in New York 
<http://observer.com/2008/04/jonathan-franzen-michiko-kakutani-is-the-stupidest-person-in-new-york-city/>
,” a view seconded by Salman Rushdie, who after receiving his own bad review 
from Kakutani, called her a “weird woman.”


Back to Baldwin, however, who paved the way for Franco's latest contribution 
to the art, by himself attacking Brantley last year after the critic called 
Orphans, Baldwin's Broadway play, a “limp revival.” Baldwintook to the 
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/alec-baldwin/broadway-orphans_b_3229873.html> to 
call Brantley “some odd, shriveled, bitter Dickensian clerk.” Not quite in the 
Tina Fey league of incisive put-down, but one appreciated the effort.


Personally, I think the greatest response to criticism of recent years came 
from Maurice Sendak. A few months before he died, I went up to his house in 
Connecticut tointerview him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/maurice-sendak-interview>, and 
over the course of two hours he expressed outrage about practically every facet 
of modern life, including Salman Rushdie, who had given him a bad review some 
years earlier in the New York Times. “That flaccid fuckhead,” said Sendak. “He 
was detestable. I called up the Ayatollah, nobody knows that.”


Rushdie, of course, responded on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, and was grace itself. “I love 
you too, Maurice,” he wrote. Perhaps we could all learn a lesson from that.
 