
“Money’s nice, but connections and conversations are better,” says Julia 
Negus, co-founder ofShopfront theatre 
<http://www.theatreabsolute.co.uk/shop-front-theatre/>, which is in an old fish 
and chip shop in City Arcade, Coventry. “We all know that theatre can happen 
everywhere, but Shopfront made us realise that often it doesn’t happen where 
people are and need it.”

On 17 October, Shopfront, which is run by Theatre Absolute 
<http://www.theatreabsolute.co.uk/>, hosted one of the conversations 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-conversation-coventry-new-models-of-civic-theatre-18411537404>
 in the ongoing symposiumA Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre> . It was a debate 
about civic theatre – appropriately in the city that built the first civic 
theatre,the Belgrade <http://www.belgrade.co.uk/>, after the second world war; 
a symbol of optimism in a devastated city, born of the belief that the arts 
really can change people’s lives for the better.

But there are significant differences between the civic function of the 
theatres of almost 60 years ago and that of theatres in the 21st century. The 
days when every town thought it should have a theatre as a matter of pride, and 
to demonstrate how cultured it is, are long gone. Often, increasingly 
cash-strapped local authorities see their theatres as a drain on resources 
rather than an asset, and, quite rightly, they don’t see that what people 
really want and need is yet another revival of Private Lives.

So how can those in the arts create new or better relationships with local 
authorities and other local partners, to ensure that the arts stay on the 
agenda and remain part of the conversation about who we are and how we live 
together? It’s an issue that is particularly pressing for buildings and 
institutions that too often, and often unwittingly, create barriers between 
themselves and the people they would like to reach.

Devon knows how to make homegrown theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/13/doorstep-arts-theatre-local-communities-torbay>
At Arts Council England’s No Boundaries conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/05/arts-council-england-no-boundaries-conference>
i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/05/arts-council-england-no-boundaries-conference>
n September,Vasif Kortun <http://curatorsintl.org/events/vasif_kortun> talked 
about this issue in relation to museums, speaking about how, too often, they 
are like monasteries, rich in history but undemocratic in structure and lacking 
in transparency. Instead, what they need to be is town squares. The same can be 
said of all arts institutions, including theatres. The town square is a place 
for art, ideas and dialogue, in the heart of the community, and it’s a place to 
which everyone has access.

Shopfront, for example, is a long-term pop-up in the middle of a shopping mall 
in the middle of Coventry. It has big windows so everyone can see what’s 
happening inside, and it has an open door policy. Everyone is welcome. It 
creates a different way of brokering relationships between artists and 
councils, audiences and artists, and creating cultural and social capital. It 
has participation at its heart, not as an add-on. It is of course just one way 
of doing it (in Coventry, there are other thriving models, including the 
community-basedEgo <http://www.egoperformance.co.uk/about/>) and across the 
country there are examples of councils and communities working together, which 
understand thatparticipatory and grassroots activity 
<http://arestlessart.com/2015/10/13/participation-can-be-more-important-than-art/>
 can have an immediate impact on people’s lives, and that the purpose of such 
activity isn’t only to create the nextWar Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/war-horse>. Doorstep Arts in Torbay, 
<http://www.doorsteparts.co.uk/> for example, has another way of doing things: 
it’s an initiative run by and for locals in the places and spaces that people 
already gather in and call their own.

This is not to say that theatre buildings don’t have a part to play. Justine 
Themen 
<http://www.belgrade.co.uk/news-and-blogs/blogs/justine-themen-on-close-to-home/>
 talked eloquently about the work that the Belgrade does. But the point about 
many theatre buildings is that the focus is on their main stages. The community 
work is too often divorced from what those running theatres see as their main 
mission. Instead of building a community of mutual interest and support, 
theatres become fixated on building an audience so they can sell more tickets. 
In these circumstances, it’s almost inevitable that a focus on self-interest 
and survival becomes dominant, and they continue to operate as monasteries 
rather than as town squares.

Changing the way you think isn’t easy. But spaces such as Cast, in Doncaster 
<http://castindoncaster.com/>, understand that the best asset any community has 
is its people, not its buildings. Companies such as Slung Low realise that it 
is by making work that is immediate, relevant, accessible and essential to 
people’s lives that theatre will playa real part in community 
<https://alanlaneblog.wordpress.com/2014/01/08/blog-post-after-blood-and-chocolate-whats-next/>
. Perhaps more cash-strapped councils will realise, just as far-sighted 
Coventry has done, that the arts bring people together, can reframe the way 
that a community sees itself and reinvent the narrative that it tells about 
itself. And that the arts can do all this very economically, too, given the 
right support. As one member of the audience put it, it’s all about making 
things seem possible.

As Negus admitted at the Nation’s Theatre event, running Shopfront has given 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Absolute a new lease of 
life, because they’ve stopped looking for what might be an opportunity for them 
and instead found a way of making opportunities for others. There is a lot to 
be learned from that for arts organisations of all scales.
 