
On Monday, a raunchy letter from Ernest Hemingway to Marlene Dietrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/10/ernest-hemingway-letter-marlene-dietrich-sold>
 – a surreal fantasy about her, reflecting what he called an "unsynchronised 
passion" that endured for more than 25 years – is part of an online auction of 
Dietrich's possessions. Although their relationship remained platonic, many 
other authors did have movie-star lovers …

F Scott Fitzgerald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fscottfitzgerald> – Lois 
Moran

Fitzgerald's affair in the 1920s with this Zelda lookalike, a silent screen 
actor who was 17 when he first met her, infuriated his wife – she once threw a 
jewellery gift from him out of a train window while raging about Moran – but 
inspired Dick Diver's romance with the actor Rosemary Hoyt in Tender Is the 
Night.

Siegfried Sassoon <https://www.theguardian.com/books/siegfried-sassoon> – Ivor 
Novello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/03/ivor-novello-musicals-simon-callow>

The war poet's relationship with Novello – now remembered mostly as a 
songwriter, but also an actor then fast becoming British cinema's No 1 leading 
man – began badly when Sassoon (who hated Novello's hit song Keep the Home 
Fires Burning) cut him dead; they nevertheless had an affair lasting a few 
months.

Erich Maria Remarque – Paulette Goddard <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0002104/>

The German-born author of All Quiet on the Western Front emigrated to the US 
in 1939. Far from inactive on the west coast boudoir front, he bedded Dietrich 
andGreta Garbo  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/greta-garbo>(separately, 
although the two goddesses may have been long-term lovers) before marrying 
Goddard,Charlie Chaplin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin>'s ex 
and the star of his Modern Times.

Albert Camus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus> – María Casares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1997/oct/15/biography.albertcamus>

Camus relieved the intolerable Sisyphean absurdity of man's condition with 
many affairs, including one with the star (in the dual role of Death and 
a princess) ofJean Cocteau <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeancocteau>'s 
1949 film Orphée, which also featured Cocteau's own lover,Jean Marais 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0544786/>, in the title role.

Roald Dahl <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> – Patricia Neal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/patricia-neal>

A Hollywood star best known for movies such as Hud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/92392/hud> and Breakfast at Tiffany's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78178/breakfast.at.tiffany.s>, Neal was 
married to Dahl from 1953-83, and was herself played by Glenda Jackson (with 
Dirk Bogarde <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/26/biography> oddly 
cast as Dahl) in a biopic centring on her recovery from a stroke.

Arthur Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miller> – Marilyn Monroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marilynmonroe>

The most famous of all romances of this type, their short-lived marriage was 
unusual as a splicing of playwright and global celebrity: other dramatists have 
contented themselves with flings with leading ladies, or married stage or TV 
actors (eg Harold Pinter,Tom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>), not celluloid idols.

Jackie Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackie-collins> – Marlon 
Brando <https://www.theguardian.com/film/marlonbrando>

Before writing Hollywood Wives and other bonkbusters, Collins has said, she 
met Brando when she was only 15 at a party in LA, and they had "a brief but 
fabulous affair – he was at the height of his fame and glamour".

Edna O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edna-o-brien> – Robert Mitchum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/26/1>

Reviews of the Irish novelist's recent autobiography complained that it 
contained "a lot of kissing but not much telling", but it does tell us about a 
one-night-stand with Mitchum, the droopy-lidded lead inNight of the Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77277/night.of.the.hunter>, Ryan's 
Daughter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76491/ryan-s-daughter> and 
Farewell My Lovely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/80799/farewell-my-lovely>.

Gore Vidal <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gore-vidal> – Fred Astaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/27/movetube-savion-glover-fred-astaire>

In Bed with Gore Vidal, Tim Teeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tim-teeman>'s recent book, suggests that 
among those who shared his bed were Rock Hudson,Noël Coward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/noelcoward> and Charles Laughton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/apr/08/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm.derekmalcolm>
, and less predictably Astaire andPaul Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paulnewman>.

Kenneth Tynan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kenneth-tynan> – Louise 
Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/sep/22/clip-joint-louise-brooks-bob>

The critic and creator of Oh! Calcutta! had a bizarre love affair in the 70s – 
later depicted in a screenplay by his wife and biographerKathleen Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/dec/06/londonreviewofbooks> – with the 
then-elderly Brooks, who 50 years before had starred inPandora's Box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/jul/22/2> and started an enduring vogue 
for bobbed hair like her "black helmet".
 