
Ai Weiwei wants you to know he is a political artist. For more than four 
decades, the Chinese dissident has beencreating work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/10/ai-weiwei-interview-in-human-history-theres-never-been-a-moment-like-this>
 that addresses freedom of speech and human rights. Now he is turning his 
attention to refugees.

Earlier this week Ai posed dead on a beach in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/ai-weiwei-poses-as-drowned-syrian-infant-refugee-in-haunting-photo>
, recreating the now-iconic 2015 photograph of drowned Syrian refugee infant
Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/shocking-image-of-drowned-syrian-boy-shows-tragic-plight-of-refugees>
 for the magazine India Today and an accompanying exhibition at the Indian Art 
Fair.

Ai Weiwei poses as drowned Syrian infant refugee in 'haunting' photo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/ai-weiwei-poses-as-drowned-syrian-infant-refugee-in-haunting-photo>
The week before, Ai shut down  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/27/ai-weiwei-shuts-danish-show-in-protest-at-asylum-seeker-law>
Ruptures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/27/ai-weiwei-shuts-danish-show-in-protest-at-asylum-seeker-law>
, his exhibition at Faurschou Foundation in Copenhagen, in protest ata new law 
passed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/danish-parliament-approves-plan-to-seize-assets-from-refugees>
 by the Danish parliament that allows authorities to seize asylum seekers’ 
valuables and to delay family reunions.

In line with his ongoing focus on refugees, these were both powerful 
statements that were reported around the world. But they have unearthed an 
inconsistency: the National Gallery of Victoria (NGV) in Australia is currently 
hosting the blockbuster exhibition Andy Warhol | Ai Weiwei, and this week, the 
Australian high court ruledthe government had the right to detain people 
offshore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/high-court-upholds-australias-right-to-detain-asylum-seekers-offshore>
, leaving the way clear for it to return 267 asylum seekers, including 39 
children and 33 babies, to conditions in Nauru that the UNHCR hasdeemed inhumane
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/26/un-refugee-agency-condemns-australias-offshore-detention-regime>
.

If Ai Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> is a 
political artist, then shouldn’t his politics extend to a nation that may send 
a five-year-old boy back to an island where he was allegedly raped?

Ai’s treatment of the Alan Kurdi image is a telling misstep. A headline in The 
Spectator 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/02/ai-weiweis-aylan-kurdi-image-is-crude-thoughtless-and-egotistical/>
 called it “crude, thoughtless and egotistical”, and in an article forAl Jazeera
 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2016/02/portrait-artist-dead-boy-ai-weiwei-aylan-kurdi-refugees-160204095701479.html>
, Hamid Dabashi went so far as to say that “Ai Weiwei the artist died in – and 
with – that fake death”.
David Beard (@dabeard) 
Powerful: @aiww <https://twitter.com/aiww> recreates scene of dead Syrian 
toddler.https://t.co/2pWf5cKs3G <https://t.co/2pWf5cKs3G> #SyrianRefugees 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SyrianRefugees?src=hash> @IOM_news 
<https://twitter.com/IOM_news> pic.twitter.com/lEAiu5B5wo 
<https://t.co/lEAiu5B5wo>
 <https://twitter.com/dabeard/status/693708916396560385> January 31, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/dabeard/status/693708916396560385> 
Rendered in black and white with an overwrought background of sea, sky and two 
mournfully arched trees, the photograph – which Aisaid 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/01/arts/ai-weiwei-alan-kurdi-syria/index.html> 
was a “spontaneous” idea that arrived between the photographer, the journalist 
and the artist – comes across like a first-year art student’s hokey attempt to 
tell us, not show us, that something is sad.

 If he’s identifying with Kurdi, he shouldn’t – there are no useful 
comparisons to be drawn between a refugee child dead at the age of three and a 
highly successful living artist.

It is, however, an accomplished piece of viral imagery – a very specific kind 
of viral imagery, too: the kind that piggybacks on another viral image with 
slight variation and without adding anything. It is ameme 
<http://junkee.com/on-the-memefication-of-aylan-kurdi-and-the-power-and-ethics-of-sharing-photos/65078>
. And like all memes, it got attention.

 But just because it gets attention doesn’t mean it’s good art, and it 
certainly doesn’t mean it’s good political art. The problem with the refugee 
crisis isn’t a lack of attention; the problem is we are aware of their plight, 
but are not doing enough to help.

Ai Weiwei is posing, both literally and figuratively. “You are taken by some 
kind of emotions that you can only have when you are there,” the artist said of 
the experience inan interview with CNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/01/arts/ai-weiwei-alan-kurdi-syria/>. “So for 
me to be in the same position [as Alan Kurdi], is to suggest our condition can 
be so far from human concerns in today’s politics.”

Ai Weiwei interview: 'In human history, there's never been a moment like this'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/10/ai-weiwei-interview-in-human-history-theres-never-been-a-moment-like-this>
 Ai is correct: most of us are far removed from the almost unimaginable horror 
faced by Kurdi and thousands of others. But this means it’s difficult for most 
of us to understand, let alone represent (and represent respectfully), what 
they face. You can be right, but still tasteless. You can be well-intentioned, 
but still cause harm.

 It’s instructive to consider the other artist whose work is presented 
alongside Ai’s in the National Gallery of Victoria exhibition. Andy Warhol knew 
about the numbing effects of a multiplicity of images decades before the 
internet existed. In his Death and Disasters series, Warhol snatched images of 
catastrophes from newspapers and reproduced them en masse, highlighting how the 
media’s profligate use of images could desensitise us. As he wrote in his 1980 
memoir POPism, “The more you look at the same exact thing, the more the meaning 
goes away, and the better and emptier you feel.”

 No one should be feeling better or emptier now about the status of refugees. 
As an artist, a person who is intimately aware of the power of images, Ai 
should wield that power with caution. The danger here isn’t the creation of bad 
art – although that has arguably been committed – but the very real possibility 
of diluting a worthy cause.

If Ai Weiwei wants to be the face of refugees, as he quite literally does in 
his India Today photograph, and if he wants to use boycotts as a political 
tool, as he did in Copenhagen, then he should be consistent. As a political 
artist with a global profile, just as important as what he says – and the 
potentially harmful way he might say it – is what he doesn’t say.

#LetThemStay: protesters gather around Australia to prevent return of asylum 
seekers to Nauru – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/feb/04/let-them-stay-protesters-gather-around-australia-to-prevent-return-of-asylum-seekers-to-nauru>
Next month sees the opening of the 20th Biennale of Sydney which, in its most 
recent iteration in 2014, wasmarred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/11/sydney-biennale-boycott-victory-shows-that-divestment-works>
 by an outcry over the event’s links with Transfield, the company that holds 
the contract for managing Australia’s detention centres on Nauru and Manus 
Island. Twenty-eight of the artists involved published an open letter saying 
they were reconsidering their participation. Some later withdrew altogether, 
while others made last-minute changes to their work in direct response to 
Australia’s immigration policy.

Whether it was done within their art or outside of it, the artists offered 
considered and personally invested engagements with human rights concerns, 
acknowledging that showing art in Australia today is fraught with political 
implications. As a result of the ensuing public debate, the Biennale returns 
this year havingsevered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/07/sydney-biennale-chairman-quits-transfield-detention>
 all ties with Transfield and Luca Belgiorno-Nettis, its managing director and, 
until March 2014, the chair of the Biennale. Artists’ actions can effect change.

During the opening of Andy Warhol | Ai Weiwei, Ai announced he would be 
donating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/11/ai-weiwei-donates-lego-human-rights-artwork-to-national-gallery-of-victoria>
 his major installation Letgo Room, 2015, to the National Gallery of Victoria. 
Constructed out of more than two million plastic building blocks, the work 
consists of 20 faux-Lego portraits of Australian activists, including Gillian 
Triggs, Michael Kirby and Julian Burnside, who have fought tirelessly for the 
rights of refugees.

As an art critic, it’s not my place to tell artists what to do with their art. 
Ai Weiwei agrees – his caption for the photograph at the IndiaArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Fair reads, “Artists are free to 
make art for art’s sake, and I respect that, I do not criticize them.”

 “I am not born an artist,” it continues. “I am born a human. I care about 
human conditions rather than the opinions. I have no choice.”

If that’s the case, then as a fellow human – not as an art critic – I have a 
suggestion for Ai Weiwei: boycott Australia’s offshore detention policy, tear 
that NGV installation down, and donate the bricks instead to the children in 
detention. It might not be an image that’s shared around the world, but at 
least it will give them something to play with when they’re sent back toNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>.
 