
The American religious right is more determined than ever to discriminate - 
and that may be a good thing. It means that the privileged can no longer 
overlook the impact of prejudice. They no longer have the luxury of overlooking 
it or dismissing it as something that’s none of their concern.

Wheaton College, an evangelical Christian college in Illinois, announced last 
week thatit was dropping health insurance for all its students 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/dc/wheaton-birth-control-obamacare> rather than 
comply with Obamacare’s contraception mandate. Under the compromise offered by 
the Obama administration, religious employers that object to birth control can 
notify their insurer, who then provides it to covered individuals without 
involving the employer, but Wheaton argued that even having to state their 
objection was an intolerable violation of their religious conscience - a claim 
that would undoubtedlylead to chaos if it were widely accepted 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2012/02/some-more-implications-of-religious-liberty/>
.

Along the same lines, since the US supreme court legalized same-sex marriage 
nationwide in Obergefell v Hodges, some county clerks and probate judges in 
conservative states likeKentucky 
<http://www.kentucky.com/2015/06/29/3923157_some-kentucky-county-clerks-refusing.html?rh=1>
 andAlabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/12/alabama-judges-gay-marriage-licenses>
 have have announced that they’ll no longer issue marriage licenses toanyone, 
gay or straight, rather than face a discrimination lawsuit they’d be certain to 
lose for turning away a same-sex couple.

Even before landmark rulings like Obergefell 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/obergefell-v-hodges/>, religious 
groups were engaging in this massive-resistance strategy. Catholic charities 
haveshut down in both the US 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2010/03/the-loving-compassion-of-the-catholic-church/>
and the UK 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2010/08/ending-discrimination-in-adoption/>
, ending services like adoption assistance and foster care, so as not to have 
to give benefits to same-sex partners of employees or consider same-sex couples 
as prospective parents. Catholic schools are alsonotorious for firing 
<http://www.freep.com/story/news/nation/2014/09/03/catholic-schools-firing-of-gay-teachers-sparks-outcry/14998887/>
popular gay teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/26/detroit-catholic-school-morality-clause-gay-teacher-fired>
and principals 
<http://www.care2.com/causes/firing-gay-teachers-its-a-fight-religious-schools-cant-win.html>
 in the face of protests by students - and some are responding bymaking their 
morality clauses even more draconian. 
<http://www.cruxnow.com/church/2015/02/19/san-francisco-catholic-school-morality-clause-dispute/>

These tactics echo the civil rights era, when some municipalities shut down 
their public schools entirely 
<http://www.vahistorical.org/collections-and-resources/virginia-history-explorer/civil-rights-movement-virginia/closing-prince>
, as well as other public accommodations likepools 
<http://www.fold3.com/page/372_responses_to_the_civil_rights_act_of/stories/#1846/>
, rather than desegregate them. In the same way, today’s religious 
conservatives are so determined to continue discriminating against women and 
LGBT people that they’re willing to depriveeveryone of rights and privileges 
rather than grant equal treatment to people who, in their eyes, don’t deserve 
it.

In a strange way, this is a sign of progress. These decisions may well mean 
that more people are being materially deprived than would otherwise be the 
case. But it also means that the costs of that discrimination are being spread 
across all of society, borne by everyone equally, rather than being 
concentrated on politically less-powerful demographics. For a politics that’s 
based on justice and empathy, that’s good news.

It’s human nature to not care about injustices that don’t directly affect you. 
When it’s only same-sex couples, for example, who face rejection at the county 
clerk’s office, it’s easy for straight people to ignore their plight. When it’s 
only women who are denied access to standard and necessary reproductive 
healthcare, it’s easy for men to dismiss it as not their problem. But when 
members of the majority feel the sting of unfair deprivation for themselves, 
they’ll gain a more intimate perspective on how prejudice hurts – and, we can 
hope, they’ll be more willing to support democratic means to abolish it and to 
create a fairer society for everyone. Ideally, of course, people would be 
willing to do the right thing just from hearing about the mistreatment of 
others, even without experiencing it personally, but this comes in a close 
second.

Too often, religion is thought of as a purely benevolent and positive force, 
despite the role it has played in justifying harmful prejudice and the ongoing 
denial of equal rights. But these hardball massive-resistance tactics, this 
stubborn desire to enforce their will despite the collateral costs, brings 
people face to face with the anti-human side of religious morality in a way 
that’s a lot harder to overlook. Atheists have long made this criticism, but 
ironically, it’s the religious conservatives themselves who are lending it 
greater weight and force.
 