
The discovery of gravitational waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
 has been hailed as yet another vindication ofAlbert Einstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alberteinstein>’s theory of general 
relativity, unveiled a century ago. Indeed it is: among the theory’s 
predictions was that violent events in the universe involving immense masses – 
such as the collision and merging of two black holes – could set the fabric of 
spacetime ringing, the ripples spreading across the cosmos and stretching or 
squeezing space as they pass.

Gravitational waves may help us answer the biggest question of all | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/12/gravitational-waves-answer-biggest-question-albert-einstein>
Experiments at the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave 
Observatory facilities in Washington and Louisiana have detected these 
distortions, and it’s a tremendous, exhilarating moment for science. But it’s 
been barely noted what a deeply strange, perhaps unprecedented situation this 
is too. The initial detection event happened last September, in the centenary 
year of the publication of Einstein’s theory. Yetthe theory of general 
relativity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2015/nov/25/video-100-years-of-einsteins-general-relativity>
 itself is a great rarity in science: for this was not an idea motivated by any 
need to explain observations, but the result of Albert Einstein simply sitting 
down and thinking. It isn’t easy to find another example of such a rich, 
fertile theory conjured, as it were, out of nothing.

No one was demanding a new theory of gravity in 1915. We already had one – 
devised byIsaac Newton <https://www.theguardian.com/science/isaac-newton> more 
than two centuries earlier – and it seemed to work fine. Sure, there were a few 
little puzzles, such as theanomalous motion of the planet Mercury 
<http://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/26408/what-did-general-relativity-clarify-about-mercury>
. But these weren’t in any sense the stimulus for the new theory (even though 
it explained them). No, it arose because Einstein saw the world differently.

It began in 1907, when Einstein was 28 and still working as a patent clerk. “I 
was sitting in the patent office in Bern,” he later wrote, “when all of a 
sudden a thought occurred to me: if a person falls freely, he won’t feel his 
own weight. I was startled. This simple thought made a deep impression on me. 
It impelled me toward a theory of gravitation.” This, Einstein attested, was 
“the happiest thought of my life”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20discovering%20gravitational%20waves%20changes%20everything%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20discovering%20gravitational%20waves%20changes%20everything%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video&media=>
Why discovering gravitational waves changes everything – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video>
This is what set Einstein apart: what seems trivially obvious to most people 
struck him as profound. Using a complex form of calculus calledtensor theory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar%E2%80%93tensor_theory>, he spent eight 
years working on a new concept of gravity. The theory of general relativity 
showed that masses warp space and that in a gravitational field time slows 
down. It also predicted neutron stars and black holes, although they weren’t 
accepted for many decades.

Many physicists regard general relativity as a theory of exemplary beauty. But 
it’s difficult too. Its10 equations 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein_field_equations> can be written down 
concisely using tensor notation, but in full they’d take up many pages. The 
difficulty of solving the equations is one reason why, after being first 
vindicated in 1919 by observations of “bent” starlight during a solar eclipse, 
the theory languished for decades.

Almost all science stems from a need to explain what we see: to solve 
empirical puzzles. But not general relativity. Are there any other cases where 
significant new scientific ideas have arisen without any observations demanding 
explanation?String theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2015/may/06/string-theory-and-black-holes>
, which attempts to unite general relativity with quantum theory, is juggling 
with scales and energies well beyond anything experimentally accessible, but 
still there’s a clear motive: to reconcile two mutually incompatible ideas. 
Quantum theory itself is startlingly accurate with its predictions but current 
research into its underlying principles is motivated largely just because it 
appears so bizarre. It works but scientists want to know why.

Explain it to me like I'm a kid: scientists try to make sense of gravitational 
waves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/12/gravitational-waves-explained> 
By contrast, Einstein seemed to invent general relativity simply because he 
wanted to – because he saw questions where others didn’t.

A more pertinent question, perhaps, is whether any young scientist could do 
that today. Einstein’s “miraculous year” of 1905, in which he not only deduced 
special relativity but also kick-started quantum theory and published several 
other ground-breaking papers, was an unrivalled creative burst. Yet any 
scientist’s early career is often their most productive time, as it was with
Stephen Hawking <https://www.theguardian.com/science/hawking>. Today, however, 
it’s instead likely to be the most constrained and fraught.

Young scientists now need more than ever to publish lots and quickly, to get 
grants and tenure, to justify the “impact” of their work, and to carve out a 
niche for themselves, often in a highly specialised area. There is scant 
opportunity to just sit at a desk and ponder big questions.

A century ago, general relativity had no obvious “impact”, even though the GPS 
systems in today’s smartphones rely on it. It didn’t even have a clear goal, 
except intellectually. If Einstein’s project had relied on a grant application 
today, it would surely be rejected; probably no young scientist could afford 
the luxury of contemplating it in the first place. It’s not clear there is a 
space for Einsteins in modern science any longer.
 