
In all the outrage about the unhinged things Donald Trump keeps tweeting and 
saying, there’s been almost zero criticism at the fact that Obama will be 
partly responsible for the extraordinary scope of powers Trump inherits. The
Obama administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> 
has not only done nothing to curtail the slew of extreme national security and 
war powers that Trump is about to acquire since the election – the White House 
is actively expanding them.

If Donald Trump gets his way, his administration will be disastrous | Trevor 
Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-administration-conflicts-of-interest>
One of the most undercovered aspects of Obama’s legacy has been how he has 
waged war,unilaterally expanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/06/war-with-isis-illegal-obama-speech>
 the original 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF) against the 
perpetrators of the September 11 attacks almost beyond recognition. It’s 
currently being used to legally justify the administration’s war on Isis in 
about a half dozen countries (that we know of), despite Isis not being in 
existence at the time AUMF was passed. It’s also being used to authorize action 
against a host of other groups, though who they are isclassified 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/who-are-we-at-war-with-thats-classified>.

Now, the Obama administration has warped the AUMF even further. As the New 
York Times reported on Monday 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/27/us/politics/obama-expands-war-with-al-qaeda-to-include-shabab-in-somalia.html?_r=0>
, the White House is claiming it can use the 2001 law to go after al-Shabaab in 
Somalia, another group that didn’t exist in 2001, which the Timesopenly states 
in its lead paragraph 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/27/us/politics/obama-expands-war-with-al-qaeda-to-include-shabab-in-somalia.html?_r=0>
 “will strengthen President-elect Donald J Trump’s authority” to wage war when 
he enters office.

Council on Foreign Relations senior fellow Micah Zenko didn’t mince words 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/27/us/politics/obama-expands-war-with-al-qaeda-to-include-shabab-in-somalia.html?_r=0>
 in the Times when describing what the Obama administration is doing: “It’s 
crazy,” he said of the administration’s redefining the law out of existence. 
“This administration leaves the Trump administration with tremendously expanded 
capabilities and authorities.”

Make no mistake: Trump will have a free hand to use the law meant for the 
perpetrators of 9/11 to wage war around the world, fashioning it to different 
enemies at his command, and he will be able to point to precedent set by the 
Obama administration as he does it.

Per usual, all the White House’s decisions are being made under the veil of 
official secrecy. The only reason we know about it is not because the 
administration announced it, but because the New York Times reported it after 
unnamed officials leaked it to them.

Also this weekend, in another story that was overlooked while Donald Trump was 
tweeting nonsense that held everyone’s attention, the Washington Postreported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2016/11/25/obama-administration-expands-elite-military-units-powers-to-hunt-foreign-fighters-globally/>
 that Obama dramatically expanded the power of the secretive Joint Special 
Operations Command (JSOC), the secretive military unit that gained notoriety 
during the Osama bin Laden raid, “to track, plan and potentially launch attacks 
on terrorist cells around the globe” – even far away from battlefields. JSOC 
was already operating out of an untold number of countries, but the relaxed 
rules will allow the group to skip portions of the chain of command and 
potentially broaden its reach even further.

The developing Somalia war and more war-making latitude for JSOC comes on the 
heels of the Obama administration already quietly deepening the US military’s 
15-year war in Afghanistan over the summer (you know, the war Obama announced 
had “ended 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/12/28/politics/obama-afghanistan-end-of-combat/>” in 
December 2014) to the point where there were, according to Zenko,more 
airstrikes in that country 
<https://twitter.com/MicahZenko/status/803265701180047360> in October than at 
any point in the past two years. Earlier this year, Obama also quietly exempted 
Libya “from 2013 rules that restrict drone strikes and other counterterrorism 
operations away from battlefield zones” — ruleswhich he announced 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/Default.aspx?pageID=517&nid=47509> to great 
to great fanfare at the time.

Protests won't stop Trump. We need a movement that transforms into a party | 
Micah White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/protests-donald-trump-democracy-party>
At this point, the Obama administration’s supposed drone rules aren’t worth 
the paper they are printed on, even before Trump gets into office.

And if you’re holding out hope that the Obama administration will change 
course at the very last minute, don’t. We already know that almost immediately 
after the election, the Obama administrationmade clear that it wouldn’t attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/obama-administration-drone-strikes-donald-trump>
 to tighten rules around the CIA’s controversial drone strike program or 
provide any more transparency to a program that many believe is illegal and 
unconstitutional.

Trump is now coming into office with ever expanding war powers, and they’re 
being served to him on a silver platter by the same people who told the 
American public two months ago that Trump was so unstable and thin-skinned that 
he couldn’t be trusted with the nuclear codes.
 