
A new season of Invisibilia <http://www.npr.org/podcasts/510307/invisibilia> 
is finally on its way. The show, which intertwines scientific research with 
memorable stories, like a blind man who “sees” by echo-location, released a 
teaser announcing the show’s 17 June return. Hosts Lulu Miller and Alix Spiegel 
will now be joined on their journeys to the frontiers of science by author 
Hanna Rosin. While we wait for the new season, take a deep dive into the 
future-lookingFlash Forward 
<http://www.flashforwardpod.com/2016/05/17/episode-13-expiration-date/> 
podcast, which this week looked at a time when everyone knows their own 
expiration date. It’s a better future than the one envisioned on Imaginary 
Worlds, where they looked at theinevitable robot uprising. 
<http://www.imaginaryworldspodcast.org/> Over at Memory Motel they released a 
fascinating story on Iceland’s obituaries.

The 50 podcasts you need to hear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/14/fifty-best-podcasts-bob-mortimer-john-oliver-jemaine-clement-serial>
If you haven’t listened to The Breakdown <http://breakdown.myajc.com/>, the 
true crime serial podcast from the Atlantic Journal Constitution, they are in 
the midst of a heartbreaking, yet fascinating story on the murder trial of 
Justin Ross Harris who left his toddler in a hot car, causing his death. For 
something lighter,Song Exploder <http://songexploder.net/carly-rae-jepsen> was 
visited by Carly Rae Jepsen for a memorable breakdown of her song, When I 
Needed You off her 2015 album E-mo-tion, andYo, Is This Racist? 
<http://earwolf.com/episode/actors-doing-accents-for-roles/> gets to the bottom 
of whether actors taking on foreign accents for roles is racist.

On Here’s the Thing, <http://www.wnyc.org/story/htt-anthony-weiner/> Alec 
Baldwin talked to former New York congressman Anthony Weiner, who was forced 
out of office amid a sexting scandal. They talked about the new documentary 
calledWeiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/anthony-weiner-review-huma-abedin-documentary>
 and, of course, the trouble with texting.Stacking Benjamins 
<https://soundcloud.com/averagejoemoney/why-you-should-give-junior-a-huge-allowance>
 explains why you should give your kids an enormous allowance. It sounds crazy, 
but could set them up for financial stability as adults.

As for the business of podcasting, Acast is starting a new subscription service
 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/podcasts-experiment-with-paid-subscriptions-1463997601?mod=e2tw>
, which will do away with advertising and instead set up a paid model for 
podcast fans who don’t want to hear about Casper mattresses, Kind Bars, Mail 
Chimp or Stamps.com. The program, called Acast+, will also offer exclusive 
content to subscribers and will hopefully create a viable source of revenue for 
podcasters.

In each episode of WNYC’s There Goes the Neighborhood the producers craft a 
portrait of the real-world effects of gentrification, which are as applicable 
in Portland, Oregon, or San Antonio, Texas, as they are in New York City. “We 
didn’t know what the purpose of the podcast was until we were actually finished 
making it – but the mission was to first come up with a format that was both 
deeply reported and uniquely narrative,” said the show’s producer and Guardian 
columnist, Rebecca Carroll.

“Gentrification is not just about lattes and man buns, it’s about history and 
economics and local policy and politics, and, fundamentally, it’s about 
systemic racism.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fpodcasts-there-goes-the-neighborhood-invisibilia-weiner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F170083540b4f332cc42a0bb2e7edc8ee2feccd34%2F0_103_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%20in%20podcasts%3A%20There%20Goes%20the%20Neighborhood%2C%20Invisibilia%20and%20Weiner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fpodcasts-there-goes-the-neighborhood-invisibilia-weiner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%20in%20podcasts%3A%20There%20Goes%20the%20Neighborhood%2C%20Invisibilia%20and%20Weiner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fpodcasts-there-goes-the-neighborhood-invisibilia-weiner%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F170083540b4f332cc42a0bb2e7edc8ee2feccd34%2F0_103_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 WNYC’s There Goes the Neighborhood explores the effects of gentrification in 
areas such as Fort Greene. Photograph: Milton O Brown Jr 
“We realized that the purpose of There Goes the Neighborhood is to try to 
level the playing field in a way that gentrification itself cannot,” she adds. 
The results are compelling stories that resonate with any listener that has 
seen their neighborhood change around them, their chance at home ownership 
swept away under a wave of development, or been priced out of the neighborhood 
they call their own.

Megan Tan is living the dream. Her podcast, Millennial 
<http://www.millennialpodcast.org/>, just joined the Radiotopia network, as 
their 14th show. “All of this is incredibly surreal,” said Tan. “I feel like 
I’m living in a Cinderella story, if Cinderella lived in a podcast world.”

Millennial started out as a serialized narrative about stumbling into 
adulthood while you navigate through life and love and work in your 20s, with 
Tan as the tour guide. Now as the show becomes her full-time job, it will be 
expanding its scope. “Over time, the show is going to focus more on 
coming-of-age across decades and we’re going to include multiple stories that 
ride alongside my own,” said Tan. “The topics will expand, the people who are 
interviewed will expand, and the universal themes to make Millennial resonate 
with people of all ages will also expand.”

While the focus will expand, Tan expects Millennial to stay true to its roots. 
“The show can maintain its identity and stay true to its tone and content while 
working alongside some of the best shows in the industry and working with a 
team of people who are pushing the boundaries of podcasting. It’s all very 
exciting,” said Tan, who plans to continue recording the show in her closet. 
She will have to spend more time in there, though, as she expects the show will 
double its output, releasing two episodes a month.
 