
What is the true identity of Ajax as a football club in 2016? In the words of 
Edwin van der Sar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/edwin-van-der-sar>, 
their recently appointed marketing director, Ajax are “a club that focus on 
producing young players”. This was not the case a few years ago, but to 
understand the changes that have taken place in recent season we must look to 
the persistence of one man: Johan Cruyff.

In the wake of Cruyff’s passing, focus has been placed on his dumfounding 
ability as a player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/mar/29/david-squires-on-johan-cruyff>
. However, we must remember the strength of his footballing ideology. An 
ideologyglamourised by Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/apr/02/sport-picture-of-the-day-barcelona-pays-homage-to-cruyff>
 butborn at Ajax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/johan-cruyff-father-modern-game-dutch>
.

A fervent battle between the Ajax legend and the club’s board of directors 
came to a head in 2010, with Cruyff going as far to say “this isn’t Ajax 
anymore”. He felt the club was stagnant and settling for mediocrity: that they 
were happy to produce average players who did not form the basis of theAjax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> first team and were subsequently 
used as a source of income for the club. For Cruyff, it wasn’t good enough.

This is PSV: from a team for factory workers to champions of Holland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2015/nov/26/psv-eindhoven-eredivisie-factory-workers-holland>
Cruyff eventually won his fight for change and Ajax’s academy underwent a 
complete overhaul, withhis ideology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/you-play-football-with-your-head-and-your-legs-are-there-to-help-you-johan-cruyff-in-quotes>
 becoming gospel. Their youth system is now shaped in his design. Creativity 
and individuality is rewarded with playing time, no matter how young the player 
is. The change also led to the introduction of Frank de Boer as manager, with 
Dennis Bergkamp his second in command. Van der Sar and Marc Overmars, the 
technical director, also serve on the board, with Jaap Stam and Ronald de Boer 
also coaching.

Ajax fans know their talented young players will be nurtured by men ensconced 
in the club’s history. Cruyff’s principles are now entrenched in Ajax’s 
philosophy. His dream was for Ajax to once again playTotal Football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/mar/24/what-is-a-cruyff-turn>
, inspired by young and exciting homegrown talent, a dream that will endure as 
his lasting legacy.

Follow Copa90 on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/user/Copa90football>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/copa90> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Copa90>
 