
Thousands of people have marched in Brisbane and more were planning to march 
in Darwin on Saturday, following Friday’s40,000-strong rally in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/27/victorians-take-to-the-streets-to-demand-urgent-action-on-climate-change>
. Crowd reports in Brisbane varied from 5,000 to 10,000.

The People’s Climate March – a worldwide event – took place on Saturday, and 
organisers said thousands took part in 35New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> centres – the smallest being on 
Raoul Island, where the island’s entire population of seven turned out.

The Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> march was 
plagued by hot, humid weather, but those rallying to call for urgent action on 
climate change in the lead-up to the Paris climate talks next week seemed 
undeterred.

The ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-11-28/thousands-turn-out-in-brisbane-march-for-climate-change-action/6983252>
 the 5,000-strong crowd gathered at Queen’s Park before marching through the 
CBD and across the river to South Bank. The Pacific Climate group addressed 
demonstrators about the risk of catastrophic sea level rises.

Rallies are planned in Adelaide, Canberra, Sydney, Hobart and Perth on Sunday.

Before the Brisbane march, thousands had also gathered in Wellington, Auckland 
andChristchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christchurch> in New Zealand.

A reported 15,000 marched in Auckland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/auckland> – although some media outlets put 
the figure as low as 4,000 – 8,000 in Christchurch and 7,000 marched on NZ 
parliament in Wellington, according to media reports.

Climate activist and actress Lucy Lawless addressed the Auckland event.

Altogether, 30 marches were scheduled across New Zealand for the weekend.

March organiser Steve Abel told the New Zealand Herald 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/element-magazine/news/article.cfm?c_id=1503340&objectid=11552800>
 that collectively, it was by far the biggest climate change march to be held 
in New Zealand.

“Instead of seizing the opportunities from moving to a low-carbon future, the 
New Zealand government is lagging behind its people and the world by taking a 
weak target to Paris and refusing to take real action on climate change,” 
Auckland march convenor Kristin Gilles told AAP.

New Zealand is taking a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 30% 
below 2005 levels by 2030 to the Paris talks.

“The government should listen to the thousands of New Zealanders who took to 
the streets today and come up with a stronger, more ambitious plan for reducing 
climate pollution,” said co-leader James Shaw.


However, the prime minister, John Key, has said the 30% reduction is credible.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report.

 * This report was amended on 29 November 2015 to clarify that some crowd 
reports put the estimated number of demonstrators in Brisbane at 10,000.  