
Jennifer Saunders: ‘It's still easier for a gang of boys to get a TV show’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/25/jennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own>
The Absolutely Fabulous movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie> might be 
brilliant. Given the general state of the world at the moment, the sight of two 
ungracious old codgers wobbling around anarchically on a screen for an hour and 
a half might be exactly what everyone needs.

Then again, however, it has history working hard against it. Movie adaptations 
of beloved sitcoms are a notorious minefield, full of tics and quirks that tend 
to kill the whole enterprise dead. So here are the three main crimes that 
Absolutely Fabulous will have to avoid if it wants to succeed, even though it 
has already been written and shot and edited and it comes out on Friday. You’re 
welcome, Ab Fab! Hope this helps!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&media=>
Absolutely Fabulous: the Movie: Edina and Patsy in big screen debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/27/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Crime one: go on holiday

Nothing kills a movie adaptation of a TV show like a holiday. Your characters 
have spent years weaving themselves into the fabric of a specific location, so 
sending them all elsewhere at the first sniff of a movie is a ridiculously 
silly move.Are You Being Served? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sM1nF4iIAXg> 
tried it.The Likely Lads <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGFr08_iBx4> tried it.
Mr Bean <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-m--M6NyIeA> tried it. On the Buses 
<https://vimeo.com/34428404> tried it. Kevin and Perry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nENwy9GRyF0> tried it. Sex and the City 
<https://youtu.be/5WWSf3DzstY?t=1m54s> even tried it, for crying out loud, and 
all we got out of that mess was the phrase “Lawrence of my labia”. Every time, 
it has ended in a miserable fish-out-of-water storyline so overused that to 
even hint at it feels like monumental laziness. If the Absolutely Fabulous film 
sends Eddy or Patsy anywhere near an airport, it’s time to panic.

Likelihood: a certainty. The entire last half of the trailer is set in the 
south of France <https://youtu.be/Dj3ZWhlmexw?t=1m58s>. This isn’t a good sign 
at all.

Celebrity cameos: has the joke worn thin?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/30/celebrity-cameos-absolutely-fabulous-has-the-joke-worn-thin>
Crime two: too many cameos

Celebrity cameos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/30/celebrity-cameos-absolutely-fabulous-has-the-joke-worn-thin>
 are what comedy writers use when they’ve run out of jokes. And while they can 
initially be distracting enough to paper over cracks in the script, they 
invariably end up sucking the entire project into a self-indulgent morass from 
which it can never escape. TheEntourage movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/entourage-review-smug-unfunny-la-bromance>
 is a case in point here, as is every low-rent British sitcom movie that 
features an awkward, winking appearance by Richard Branson, usually on one of 
his own planes, heading wherever the characters are going to on holiday.

Likelihood: inevitable. The Ab Fab movie, sadly, is cameo city. The trailer 
alone features Kate Moss, Jon Hamm, Stella McCartney, Emma Bunton, Brienne of 
Tarth, Sophie Raworth and, perhaps most impressively of all, the guy who does 
the TV reviews on GMTV. However, cameos have always been a part of Ab Fab, so 
this might not be as terminal as it looks.

Crime three: over-merchandising

If Sex and the City proved anything, it’s that marketing departments will 
chuck your film’s logo at any old gendered crap if they think it’ll sell stuff. 
You could buy SATC booze and shoes and pants and computers and cars at one 
point, and it all became so suffocating that you ended up being sick of the 
film before you’d even seen it. Fortunately, most British shows aren’t big 
enough to warrant this sort of behaviour, which is why you were never able to 
buy officialBad Education: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/25/the-bad-education-movie-review-jack-whitehall-tv-spin-off>
 underwear.

Likelihood: low. A quick Google search suggests that Ab Fab has managed to 
swerve this one. In fact, the only Ab Fab merchandise available comes in the 
form ofsome pretty gruesome-looking fan art 
<http://www.redbubble.com/shop/ab+fab> that you’d only put up in your house if 
you hated nice things and life. Finally, a success! Maybe the Ab Fab movie will 
be worth watching after all! Now, we just need a firm assurance that Richard 
Branson was banned from set and we’re ready to go.
 