
Two of Aaliyah's best-known collaborators have denied they will play any role 
in the late singer's forthcoming album, helmed by Drake. Timbaland andMissy 
Elliott <https://www.theguardian.com/music/missyelliott> "will not be 
participating" in the posthumous LP, they said on Monday, despite recent claims 
by the project's label, Blackground Records.

"Although Missy and Timbaland always strive to keep the memory of their close 
friend alive, we have not been contacted about the project, nor are there any 
plans at this time to participate," Mona Scott-Young, Elliott's manager, said. 
"We've seen the reports surfacing that they have been confirmed to participate 
but that is not the case. Both Missy andTimbaland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/timbaland> are very sensitive to the loss 
still being felt by the family, so we wanted to clear up any misinformation 
being circulated."

Last week, Drake unveiled a new single, Enough Said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/08/aaliyah-family-posthumous-album>
, incorporating his own raps and an unreleased vocal by Aaliyah, who died in 
2001. The song was produced by his longtime associate, Noah "40" Shebib. 
Blackground, which was founded by Aaliyah's uncle, confirmed an entire album is 
in the works, executive-produced by Drake and Shebib. "The idea [is] to release 
new music for her die-hard fans, and also reintroduce her music to a new 
generation that doesn't really understand how much influence she has [had]," 
Blackground's Jomo Hankerson, Aaliyah's cousin,told Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/#/column/the-juice/blackground-clarifies-rumors-of-aaliyah-1007791952.story>
. Shebib is "heavily involved" with the music, he said, and Drake will appear 
on several more songs.

Immediately, fans were asking about Elliott and Timbaland. The two musicians 
were crucial to Aaliyah's best-known album, 1996's One in a Million, and have 
been outspoken defenders of her legacy. In a radio interview, Timbaland said he 
had not been approached byDrake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> or 
Blackground. But Hankerson insisted both artists were in talks with the label. 
"A lot of [it] is still up in the air, but I can tell you that Timbaland will 
definitely be involved," he said. "Missy will definitely be involved."

Or maybe not. Instead of joining up with Drake and Shebib, Elliott and Timbo 
seem to have allied themselves with Aaliyah's brother, who has opposed the 
record. "There is no official album being released and supported by the 
family," Rashad Haughtonwrote on Facebook  
<http://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10152021546610515&id=26702510514>
. "We have nothing but love and respect for [Aaliyah's] memory and for her 
loved ones left behind still grieving her loss," Elliott and Timbaland said. 
"Tim and I carry Aaliyah with us every day, like so many of the people who love 
her. She will always live in our hearts."

Aaliyah <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> was 22 when she died in a 
plane crash in the Bahamas. After three albums and seven top 20 singles, her 
first posthumous LP, I Care 4 U, reached No 4 in the UK.
 