
Most of Britain’s banks report their annual results this week in probably the 
most frenzied atmosphere since the financial crisis. Bank shares have plunged 
as investors have fretted about their financial strength, prompting Deutsche 
Bank and Credit Suisse to go public with reassuring comments. Britain’s banks 
have kept quiet and analysts will be as interested in what bosses have to say 
about their balance sheets as in the profits – and losses – racked up last year.

HSBC kicks things off on Monday after deigning last week to remain in the UK 
instead of moving back to Hong Kong – though that hasn’t stopped it releasing 
results at the merciless hour of 4am UK time to accommodate Hong Kong. The 
bank’s shares, like those of its rival in Asia, Standard Chartered, which 
reports on Tuesday, have been hit by concerns about emerging-market economies 
and bad debts.

Lloyds, which reports on Thursday, could take yet another big charge for 
mis-selling payment protection insurance, while RBS on Friday is likely to 
serve up its usual combo of bad figures and claims things are getting better. 
Barclays wraps things up the week after. With results unlikely to be great, 
executive pay will be in the spotlight as most banks release annual reports 
with their figures. The thinking seems to be if there’s going to be uproar, 
best to get it over with.

Hornby has a fence to clear


Ladbrokes reports annual results on Tuesday as its merger with Gala Coral, 
announced last July, continues to grind its way through a competition inquiry 
that isn’t expected to end until the middle of this year. Analysts at Numis 
expect pre-tax profit to have halved to £47.5m but for the chief executive, Jim 
Mullen, to report progress on a restructuring programme.

A thorny question is the role Andy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> will play. He is chief 
operating officer at Gala Coral and is meant to do the same job after the 
merger. It’s been an impressive rehabilitation for Hornby, best known as the 
boss of HBOS when the bank almost collapsed in 2008. But last month, the 
Financial Conduct Authority threw a spanner in the works by saying it would 
look again at whether there was a case for action against former HBOS managers. 
Those under examination could be barred from working in a job requiring FCA 
authorisation, though that wouldn’t stop Hornby working at a publicly traded 
bookie. And the FCA might find there’s no case for Hornby to answer.

It’s all a bit uncomfortable. Tuesday will be the first time Ladbrokes has 
faced questions since the FCA decision. It has so far declined to comment.

At home with profit

After a quiet half-term week, there’s a veritable deluge of company news on 
the way this week, including results from housebuilders Barratt, Bovis and 
Persimmon, online property portal Rightmove and Britain’s biggest estate agent, 
Countrywide.

Life has been tough for estate agents with transaction volumes low and 
competition fierce, but for housebuilders life couldn’t be much better. Prices 
are rising and the government’s Help to Buy scheme is putting the properties 
they build within reach of buyers. Planning restrictions are also loosening. 
Pay and dividends are up.

Yet there are clouds edging in to this vista. Hedge funds are starting to bet 
against the most London-centric housebuilder, Berkeley Homes, by taking out 
short positions on its shares. Berkeley updates the market on trading next 
month. A figure that has been doing the rounds for a year is also getting new 
interest: there are 54,000 central London homes expected to go on sale for £1m 
or more but in 2014 only 3,900 such properties sold.

Barratt, Bovis and Persimmon don’t build luxury London properties but if that 
market tanks the reverberations will surely be felt. Then again, wise heads 
have been warning about bubbles for a long time, and things keep rolling along.
 