
1962

Ali Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> is born into a police 
family in Tehran, where his grandfather was an assistant commissioner, his 
father the head of traffic police and his uncles police officers.

His father sent him to a UK boarding school, in West Sussex, and he studied 
law at City University inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> before 
gaining an MA and later a doctorate.

1986 

He joins Thames Valley police.

March 1999

He joins the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> as a superintendent. A 
keen bodybuilder, he was identified early on in his career as one of the Met's 
fastest-rising young officers and was tipped to become a commissioner.

July 1999

A covert investigation by Scotland Yard's anti-corruption squad begins.

January 2001

Dizaei is suspended from duty.

September 2003

He is acquitted by an Old Bailey jury of charges including misconduct in 
public office. The Crown Prosecution Service later drops other charges. The 
case triggers a boycott of the Met by its own ethnic minority officers.

October 2003

The Met reinstates Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/oct/31/race.ukcrime>. He is later promoted 
to chief superintendent.

March 2007

He publishes an autobiography, Not One of Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/feb/03/race.ukcrime>, serialised in the 
Times.The Guardian reveals MI5 passed suspicions about him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/mar/01/ukcrime.immigrationpolicy> to 
Scotland Yard.

Late June 2008

Dizaei, by now the leader of the National Black Police Association, is falsely 
accused of bigamy by a newspaper,which later has to pay damages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/24/daily-mail-evening-standard-dizaei>
.

September 2008

Dizaei is suspended from duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/21/police-commander-dizaei-charge-misconduct>
 for the second time in his career.

May 2009

Dizaei is charged over the alleged false arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/21/police-commander-dizaei-charge-misconduct>
 of Waad al-Baghdadi.

January 2010

The trial of Dizaei begins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/11/met-officer-ali-dizaei-court> at 
Southwark crown court. He is the highest-ranking police officer to face 
criminal charges in modern times.

February 2010

Dizaei is found guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/08/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-politce>
 of misconduct in public office and attempting to pervert the course of justice 
and jailed for four years.

March 2010

Dizaei is sacked by the Metropolitan police 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/mar/31/ali-dizaei-sacked-metropolitan-police>
.

May 2011

Dizaei's conviction is overturned. The court of appeal orders a retrial.

September 2011

Dizaei says he has been reinstated as a Metropolitan police commander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/sep/30/ali-dizaei-reinstated-met-police>.
 