
When Republican chairman of the House oversight and government reform 
committee,Representative Darrel Issa, called for the resignation of ATF acting 
director Kenneth Melson 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/news/167541-issa-calls-on-atf-director-melson-to-resign>
, few in American political circles found it controversial. Melson, after all, 
was responsible for overseeing theATF's botched gun-tracking operations 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2011/02/23/eveningnews/main20035609.shtml?tag=contentMain;contentBody>
 that led to the trafficking of thousands of weapons into Mexico and countless 
consequent deaths – including that of US customs agent Brian Terry.

Prior to the Republicans taking control of the House in the midterms, incoming 
chairman Issa had threatened to conduct "seven hearings a week, times 40 weeks" 
as a means of keeping Democrats on the defensive. Since assuming chairmanship 
of the committee, Representative Issa has led hearings into Tarp, the financial 
crisis and FDA, but to little avail. With Issa finally finding bipartisan 
support for his inquiry into the ATF, theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> faces the unique 
opportunity to turn Issa's witchhunt into a valuable discussion on US 
gun-regulation and national security.

Every day, 34 Americans are killed by handguns and semi-automatic weapons, 
many of which are purchased or owned illegally. Weapons like the 9mm Glock 
pistol used by Jared Loughner to kill six and critically wound US Representative
Gabrielle Giffords <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords> (as 
well as wounding 13 other people) this past January in Tucson, Arizona. 
Loughner's Glock, capable of firing an extended magazine of 30 rounds in 15 
seconds, was purchased at a local Tucson sporting goods store and could be 
lawfully carried throughout the state without a concealed weapon's permit. As 
those who eventually tackled and subdued Loughner attest, if the shooter had 
had to take a moment to reload his weapon sooner, they might have been able to 
spare some of the lives lost that day.

The Tucson shooting, like others in recent US history, brought Americans 
together and reignited the nation's ongoing debate on gun control and the 
second amendment to the US constitution (which protects the right to bear 
arms). The recent ATF scandal highlights a secondary, yet equally important 
consideration in addressing the nation's safety.According to a recent US 
congressional report <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-13758499>, 
70% of firearms recovered from Mexican crime scenes in 2009 and 2010 originated 
from the US. The most frequently recovered firearms include calibres of .22in, 
9mm and 7.62mm, the latter two commonly used respectively in assault pistols 
like the Glock owned by Loughner and assault rifles like the AK-47 (capable of 
firing 600 rounds per minute) used by Mexican organised crime gangs in the 
slaughter of over 400 migrants recently discovered in mass graves throughout 
Mexico's northern states ofDurango 
<http://mexico.cnn.com/nacional/2011/05/27/suman-223-cuerpos-encontrados-en-fosas-de-durango>
 andTamaulipas 
<http://mexico.cnn.com/nacional/2011/04/26/solo-dos-de-las-183-victimas-de-tamaulipas-han-sido-identificadas>
.

The firepower wielded by organised crime groups in Mexico has not only led to 
mounting instability in the US's southern neighbour, but also contributed to 
lawlessness on the two countries' shared border and the deaths of American 
agents. As the US invests millions in Mexico's security through theMerida 
initiative <http://www.state.gov/p/inl/merida/>, it does itself a disservice by 
allowing lax gun regulation to arm the same groups it is trying to combat. Poor 
gun regulation and oversight also threatens the US by providing potential 
terrorists with easy access to military grade weapons, as was boasted by 
American-born al-Qaida memberAdam Gadahn in a recent video 
<http://vimeo.com/24683074>.

Following representative Gifford's shooting, opinion polls throughout the 
nation <http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2011/images/01/17/rel1c.pdf> made it 
abundantly clear that most Americans support better background checks for gun 
purchasers and back a reinstatement of the ban on assault weapons. Public 
sentiment following the Giffords shooting thus led President Obama to call for 
improved background checks in purchasing weapons and prompted the US House of 
Representatives to introduce the, yet to be passed, Fix Gun Checks bill of 
2011. The Fix Gun Checks bill would, among other things, close the "gun show 
loophole" that currently provides an avenue for felons, terrorists and the 
mentally ill to purchase weapons without a background check.

Going further to prevent mass casualties and improve US security, Congress 
should renew the 1994 assault weapons ban (which expired in 2004) and ratifythe 
CIFTA treaty <http://www.state.gov/p/wha/rls/49907.htm>, which combats the 
illegal manufacturing of firearms, ammunition and explosives throughout the 
Americas.

As the Obama administration rebuffs speculation on Melson's future, while at 
the same time meeting with candidates to replace him 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2011/06/19/acting-head-atf-likely-out-after-fast-and-furious-fiasco/>
, the administration would do better to accept the ATF's faults and those of US 
justice department, which oversees the agency, and instead, channel the current 
public and political momentum against assault weapons to improving the security 
of the US and its partner Mexico.

While the National Rifle Association (the leading US gun rights lobbying 
group) outspends gun control advocates by a factor of roughly 3 to 1 – making 
congressional backing for gun reform highly difficult – the president can use 
his executive powers to prohibit the import of assault weapons to the United 
States and increase the regulatory capacity of the ATF (especially in the 
states that supply the largest numbers of weapons to Mexico).

If ever there were a time for Democrats to take Republicans to task over the 
firearms dimension of improving border safety and upholding the nation's 
security, now would be it. Opportunities like this are few and far in between.
 