
The evergreen weekly sketch show Saturday Night Live (SNL) has for more than 
40 years been a crucible for the development of America’s best comedians – with 
alumni including John Belushi, Bill Murray, Gilda Radner and Eddie Murphy, and 
more recently Kristen Wiig, Maya Rudolph, Chris Rock and Will Ferrell, it would 
be quicker to list the comic talent that has not passed through its doors at 30 
Rockefeller Plaza in New York.

That pre-eminence has not made it any easier to locate on British television, 
but the internet has allowed its most popular items to float free of the 
caprices of television scheduling, which is how a joint address from the 
vice-presidential candidates, Sarah Palin and Hillary Clinton, became in 2008 
the show’s most watched viral video, with almost 6m views in a week (readers of 
this newspaper voted itone of the five greatest SNL moments of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/13/saturday-night-live-at-40-five-best-sketches>
).

Of course, it wasn’t really Palin and Clinton. Tina Fey, a former head writer 
on the show, stood in for the Republican, while a fellow SNL cast member,Amy 
Poehler <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler>, played Clinton. But 
the sketch had such precision and power that it came to eclipse the real-life 
political standoff it was satirising. When Poehler, as Clinton, addressed the 
audience by saying: “I believe that diplomacy should be the cornerstone ofany 
foreign policy,” she was interrupted by Fey as Palin, who declared brightly: 
“And I can see Russia from my house!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvSOLz1YBFG0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvSOLz1YBFG0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvSOLz1YBFG0&media=>
 Tina Fey as Sarah Palin and Amy Poehler as Hillary Clinton 
That sublime inanity became imbedded in popular culture to the extent that it 
has frequently been misattributed to Palin, and may well have done her as much 
harm as any of the declarations she came out with herself. With that, the world 
beyond the US had its first inkling that Fey and Poehler might be a comic force 
to reckon with.

 They were not complete strangers to international comedy fans. By 2008, Fey 
had written and starred in one hit film (Mean Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2013/jan/29/tina-feys-mean-girls-movie-classic>
), appeared in another (Baby Mama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/25/comedy1>) and was two years into 
her own NBC sitcom,30 Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jan/31/tina-fey-30-rock-funniest-scenes>
, which was based on her experiences of working on Saturday Night Live. 
Poehler, less well known at this time, also starred in Mean Girls and Baby Mama 
but was a year away from playing Leslie Knope, the go-getting mid-level local 
bureaucrat in another NBC sitcom,Parks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/25/parks-and-recreation-finale-perfectly-pitched>
, which would give her the same currency as 30 Rock did for Fey.

The pair had already worked fruitfully together in the Weekend Update 
mock-news section of SNL. But it was the indelible brilliance of the Palin/ 
Clinton sketch (written by Poehler with her fellow SNL regular Seth Meyers) 
that cemented their appeal as a double act.

Sisters review – cracking, crowdpleasing comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/10/sisters-review-crowdpleasing-cracking-comedy>
 This weekend, that partnership translates into a rambunctious movie, Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/14/can-sisters-survive-star-wars>
. Fey and Poehler play chalk-and-cheese siblings: the former is scratching out 
a living as a terrible hairdresser while being parented by her own teenage 
daughter and wearing unacceptable levels of leopard print, while the latter is 
a prim nurse who bypassed adolescence. When the sisters learn their parents are 
selling their childhood home, they grab the chance to have one last party in 
the house. Drugs are consumed, ceilings collapse, objects are accidentally 
inserted into orifices for which they were never intended, and the past is laid 
to rest in the most undignified manner possible.

 Sisters deserves to do well; not only is it genuinely funny – the Guardian’s 
film critic Peter Bradshaw gave the“cracking, crowdpleasing comedy” four stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/10/sisters-review-crowdpleasing-cracking-comedy>
 – it will also provide a valuable cinematic refuge from Star Wars. Box office 
numbers show thathit films about women are more profitable than their 
male-oriented counterparts 
<http://mic.com/articles/127095/here-s-exactly-how-much-movies-about-women-make-at-the-box-office-versus-movies-about-men#.0r1rdv3ce>
, with female-led successes making an average of $126.1m (£84.5m) compared with 
$80.6m for ones prioritising male characters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Ftina-fey-amy-poehler-sisters-comedy-rip-into-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f32fd73772fd4a5a6fd50cb4f406b1d8574d1%2F0_144_1514_908%2F1514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tina%20Fey%20and%20Amy%20Poehler%3A%20sisters%20in%20comedy%20rip%20into%20the%20boys'%20club&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Ftina-fey-amy-poehler-sisters-comedy-rip-into-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tina%20Fey%20and%20Amy%20Poehler%3A%20sisters%20in%20comedy%20rip%20into%20the%20boys%27%20club&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Ftina-fey-amy-poehler-sisters-comedy-rip-into-boys-club%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f32fd73772fd4a5a6fd50cb4f406b1d8574d1%2F0_144_1514_908%2F1514.jpg>
 Tina Fey and Amy Poehler in a scene from the film Sisters, which is released 
this weekend. Photograph: KC Bailey/AP 
This is one reason it is a rich time creatively for women in comedy. Trainwreck
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/trainwreck-review-amy-schumer-romcom-judd-apatow>
 provided a convincing launchpad for its writer and star, Amy Schumer. Melissa 
McCarthy, who at $23m per film is the world’s third highest-paid female star, 
will appear alongsideKristen Wiig in a Ghostbusters reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/26/kristen-wiig-bummed-out-by-ghostbusters-backlash>
 next year in which all the major players are women.Julia Louis-Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/17/julia-louis-dreyfus-seinfeld-enough-said>
 has attracted the sort of acclaim for Veep that equals even her tenure on 
Seinfeld. At the lower end of the budgetary scale, Desiree Akhavan wrote, 
directed and starred inAppropriate Behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/appropriate-behaviour-desiree-akhavan-review>
, a lively comedy about a Persian-American bisexual in Brooklyn. It can’t be 
long before things are so advantageous for female comedians that we won’t even 
refer to them as female comedians any more.

Amy Poehler: ‘Vanity is the death of comedy’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/13/amy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy>
 Even before Sisters, there was evidence that Fey and Poehler were made for 
one another (Poehler calls Fey her “comedy wife”). Their combined career 
highlight to date has arguably been thejoint hosting of the Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/11/tina-fey-amy-poehler-jokes-golden-globes>
, where they have excelled at ribbing the rich and famous, and shone a piercing 
comic light on the industry’s sleaziest corners – including a joke about the 
allegations that a once-cherished industry stalwart has a history of drugging 
and raping women (“Sleeping Beauty thought she was just getting coffee with 
Bill Cosby,” Poehler said, straight-faced).

But the biggest laughs in their 2014 Golden Globes routine came from the 
pair’s trenchant commentary on everyday sexism. There was the observation that 
the science-fiction hitGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review> showed “how 
George Clooney would rather float away into space and die than spend another 
minute with a woman his own age”. Matthew McConaughey, they noted, lost 45lbs 
for his role inDallas Buyers Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/06/dallas-buyers-club-review> – “Or 
what actresses call ‘being in a movie’.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgolden-globes-tina-fey-amy-poehler-opening-speech-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F1%2F13%2F1389594839075%2FTina-Fey-and-Amy-Poehler--001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Globes%202014%3A%20Tina%20Fey%20and%20Amy%20Poehler's%20opening%20speech%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgolden-globes-tina-fey-amy-poehler-opening-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Globes%202014%3A%20Tina%20Fey%20and%20Amy%20Poehler%27s%20opening%20speech%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgolden-globes-tina-fey-amy-poehler-opening-speech-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F1%2F13%2F1389594839075%2FTina-Fey-and-Amy-Poehler--001.jpg>
 Golden Globes 2014: Tina Fey and Amy Poehler’s opening speech 
 Fey and Poehler’s paths crossed early in their careers. “We met each other 
when we were poor and single,” Poehler wrote in herautobiography, Yes Please 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/26/yes-please-amy-poehler-review-memoir>
. “Now we are both rich as shit and have husbands all over the world.” Both 
women came to comedy through training with the renowned Second City improv 
group in Chicago in the early 1990s, where they wrote their own show, Women of 
Colour, featuring characters such as the cops Powderkeg and Shortfuse.Poehler 
moved to New York to become part of another improv group, the Upright Citizens 
Brigade, while Fey applied successfully to be a writer on SNL, joining in 1997. 
A year later, she was head writer.

She was kind of goofy​​ looking, but everyone had a crush on her because she 
was so funny and bitingly mean
Steve Higgins on Tina Fey when she joined SNL 
“When she got here she was kind of goofy looking, but everyone had a crush on 
her because she was so funny and bitingly mean,” said Steve Higgins, an SNL 
producer. Alec Baldwin, her co-star in 30 Rock, calls her “a woman you don’t 
easily give advice to – she’s very self-reliant.”

 In 2001 Poehler joined her as a cast member. Both women’s triumphs on the 
show are too numerous to list, though it is worth mentioning Fey’s brilliant 
mock-commercials for products such asMom Jeans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2aVxNH6iN9I> and Excedrin For Racial Tension 
Headaches <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nDR27rfe1dg>, while Poehler’s high 
points include a mean Madonna impression, as well as dotty characters such as
Amber, the one-legged hypoglycemic reality contestant 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJasKGv90zM>. 

“Amy performed in a way that you could tell she was having fun and just didn’t 
give a shit – pure confidence and joy,” said Bill Hader, star of Trainwreck, 
who was in the SNL cast at the same time. About Fey he was no less 
complimentary, naming her “one of the best, if not the best, sketch writers 
I’ve ever worked with.” Poehler says Fey communicates affection through her 
comedy. “Tina shows her love for you by writing for you,” she said. “I can’t 
tell you how many times she wrote something special and wonderful for me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Ftina-fey-amy-poehler-sisters-comedy-rip-into-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda43530ea5dc5b530e3ab3a8555dc05eb1de9ed4%2F0_53_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tina%20Fey%20and%20Amy%20Poehler%3A%20sisters%20in%20comedy%20rip%20into%20the%20boys'%20club&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Ftina-fey-amy-poehler-sisters-comedy-rip-into-boys-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tina%20Fey%20and%20Amy%20Poehler%3A%20sisters%20in%20comedy%20rip%20into%20the%20boys%27%20club&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Ftina-fey-amy-poehler-sisters-comedy-rip-into-boys-club%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda43530ea5dc5b530e3ab3a8555dc05eb1de9ed4%2F0_53_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The pair worked together in Weekend Update, the mock-news section of Saturday 
Night Live. Photograph: NBC via Getty Images 
 When Poehler joined SNL, Fey was overjoyed. “Weirdly, I remember thinking: 
‘My friend is here! My friend is here!’” One incident in particular cemented 
her professional respect for her co-star. Poehler and Meyers had been goofing 
around during the weekly read through when Jimmy Fallon, the future chat show 
host and then star of SNL, responded to something she was doing by saying, only 
half-jokingly: “Stop that! It’s not cute! I don’t like it!” Poehler rounded on 
him instantly. “I don’t fucking care if you like it,” she said. Fey was 
gobsmacked. “Amy made it clear that she wasn’t there to be cute. She wasn’t 
there to play wives and girlfriends in the boys’ scenes. She was there to do 
what she wanted to do and she did not fucking care if you like it.”

 That refusal to play the boys’ game has persisted in Fey and Poehler’s work 
ever since. It even informed the Palin/Clinton sketch that was so significant 
in their mutual success – the real point was to show that both women had 
encountered sexism. “This sketch easily could have been a dumb catfight between 
two female candidates,” wrote Fey.

“What Seth and Amy wrote, however, was two women speaking out together against 
sexism in the campaign. In real life these women experienced different sides of 
the same sexism coin. People who didn’t like Hillary called her a ballbuster. 
People who didn’t like Sarah called her Caribou Barbie. People attempted to 
marginalise these women based on their gender.” She was proud that the sketch 
had smuggled through a legitimate attack on inequality. “Not that anyone 
noticed. You all watched a sketch about feminism and you didn’t even realise it 
because of all the jokes.”

Best TV of 2015: No 1 – Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/dec/17/best-tv-of-2015-no-1-unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-30-rock-tina-fey-robert-carlock>
 The pair turned down the chance to host the Golden Globes next year and have 
their hands full on individual projects – Sisters could be their final joint 
venture for a while. Fey is co-creator ofUnbreakable Kimmy Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/10/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-tina-fey-triumphs-again>
, an unorthodox sitcom about an escapee from a doomsday cult that was recently 
named the best TV show of the year by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/dec/17/best-tv-of-2015-no-1-unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-30-rock-tina-fey-robert-carlock>
. Next year she stars in the filmWhiskey Tango Foxtrot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxAcIWDi8ps> as a journalist posted to 
Afghanistan, the trailer for which suggests Private Benjamin with a political 
conscience.

 Poehler’s film career took a leap this year when she voiced Joy in Pixar’s 
Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/26/inside-out-review-pixar-emotional-rollercoaster>
 and she can currently be seen on Netflix appearing alongside Bill Murray in 
the seasonal specialA Very Murray Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/04/a-very-murray-christmas-george-clooney-netflix-special>
, and is filming The House alongside Will Ferrell.

But the prospect of Poehler and Fey working together again cannot be 
discounted. “People think of us as a comedy team and I am not quick to correct 
them,” Poehler has said. “Why wouldn’t I want to connect myself to the fiercest 
and most talented voice in the comedy world?”
 