
The first rule of Tiree is that no one talks about Tiree. Ever. It just 
doesn’t happen. Nobody talks about it so it doesn’t exist. An island 18km long 
with 650 inhabitants completely dematerialises. There is no Tiree so there is 
no discussion of Tiree; in the space west of Mull, there’s now only sea.

Perhaps once in a while, if you happen to hang around in Edinburgh’s New Town 
or near the fancier restaurants in London, you might chance on a couple of 
initiates trading code words (“lobster”, “ferry charge”) on city benches. 
Otherwise, silence. Try bringing the subject up and people come over all 
peculiar. They stop returning your calls. If they do pick up the phone, they 
give a stagey sort of gasp and say, “I’m not supposed to talk to you!” If 
you’re persistent, then they remember urgent holidays. Old friends advise you 
to drop the subject, or are conspicuously out when visibly in. Twenty-year 
friendships start to look a bit rickety. This is the law ofomerta: starts with 
ostracism, ends with baseball bats.

Chef Fergus Henderson, who has been coming on holiday here since he was four, 
caused consternation bytalking about his summer holidays in a recent edition of 
Observer Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/21/chefs-on-the-beach-fergus-margot-henderson-holidays-tiree>
 Monthly. Now he admits: “I’m a bit squeamish about talking about Tiree.”

Naturally, all this secrecy does make Tiree seem a whole lot more interesting. 
My God, you think, this place must be sensational! Last time I was there it 
looked quite like a Scottish island, but maybe now it’s become a Bond-style 
arch-villain lair, or one of those rare geological anomalies warmed by hot 
springs with palm trees and crofters sipping mojitos. Maybe the island is 
hiding something, like gold, or roaming Serengeti-like herds of grazing 
celebrities. Whatever it is, it has to be genuinely astounding to be worth all 
this fuss.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441191774146%2Ffbb4f171-03ae-4d75-8118-7555bb8c547b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tiree%3A%20Scotland's%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tiree%3A%20Scotland%27s%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441191774146%2Ffbb4f171-03ae-4d75-8118-7555bb8c547b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Island living: celebrity chef Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall is a regular visitor 
to Tiree. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Observer 
The murmurings you do pick up are confusing, and none of them includes 
anything about cocktails or gold. Instead, there’s stuff about crabs andHugh 
Fearnley-Whittingstall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>, a few 
ominous-sounding rumours involving foraging, and the occasional mention of 
dinner parties. Dig deeper and you draw a few unsubstantiated sightings of 
foodies and politicos – Heston Blumenthal, Alastair Campbell, SNP Deputy First 
Minister John Swinney. There are encrypted warnings involving kite-surfing and 
a music festival which blew away. “It’s simple,” one initiate confesses after 
prolonged rendition. “Nice people go, and they bring other nice people with 
them.”

So, as befits a totally secret island which doesn’t exist, Tiree is served by 
two scheduled flights a day from Glasgow plus the ferry from Oban. “Welcome to 
the island!” calls across one of the airport ground staff, pointing at the 
sunny sky. “Today is summer!” The summer of 2015 may have been ordinary in 
England, but in Scotland it’s been impressively bad, moving smoothly from 
winter to hurricane and completely ignoring any of the bits about spring.

It’s simple, says one island initiate. Nice people go, and they bring other 
nice people with them

Still, since I’m lucky enough to arrive during the 24 hours when there isn’t 
an active storm warning, I get going. Strangely, Tiree looks a lot like it 
always did; a sort of Hebridean East Anglia. Looking out over the water, I can 
see the mountains of Mull on one side and Barra on the other, but Tiree itself 
is almost flat. It has some spectacular wild flowers, but none of the usual 
heather-and-majesty stuff that tourists expect from Scotland. Instead it has 
beaches, 18 of them in total, fabulous alluring white-sand spaces which, on a 
day like this, look almost Caribbean until you stick your naked toe in the 
water and it instantly shrivels to half life-size. It’s those beaches that draw 
the surfers. If conditions aren’t right on one side of the island, all they 
need to do is shift to another side to find exactly the right wave.

Driving around, it becomes clear that over the past decade or so, Tiree has 
been completely Trip Advisored. Every one of the island’s distinctive 
black-roofed houses appears to have been restored, whitewashed, reglazed and 
laid out for letting with the statutory national allocation ofEmma Bridgewater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jan/04/what-see-mirror-emma-bridgewater>
 crockery. There are other signs of a thriving middle-class tourist industry: 
the island’s only shop has an impressive selection of £35 bottles of Moët and 
12-year-old single malts, down on the beach a man flies a camera drone over the 
body-boarders, and at the fish van a woman asks its owner if his chips are 
gluten-free.

In other ways, Tiree has kept its island qualities. The police station has its 
own flock of chickens, at the airport the keys to the hire car are left 
trustingly in the ignition, and people chat. It doesn’t take long to discover 
that, far from being secretive, those who live and work on the island are more 
than happy to talk about Tiree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192470840%2Fceeaeaab-3f14-4bf0-8d97-18b464bf59b5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tiree%3A%20Scotland's%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tiree%3A%20Scotland%27s%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192470840%2Fceeaeaab-3f14-4bf0-8d97-18b464bf59b5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Blown away: a local gets the washing out. Photograph: Martin Hunter for the 
Observer 
John Holliday worked first with the Aboriginal health service in Australia 
before coming here more than 30 years ago. A life-sized plastic human skeleton 
sunbathes by the window while Dr Holliday sits at his desk arranging pens into 
the shape of a triangle, placing his words with consideration. When he first 
arrived Tiree had only a handful of tourists a year. Now, he says, “We get 
26,000 visitors a year, we think. You see people coming off the ferry with 4x4s 
with four bicycles on the back, three surfboards on the top, and three hulking 
teenagers staring at their iPads – that’s the classic entry into Tiree. They’re 
not coming to look at the beaches. The parents want something healthy and 
educational for their kids to do, which makes it very much a place for families 
to come for hormonal kids to let off their steam.”

As a holiday option, it’s not cheap. A return from Oban on the CalMac ferry 
for a family of five with an ordinary car is £184, plus the cost of 
accommodation (around £800 to £1,000 per week for a four-bed house), plus the 
automatic freight premium added to all island imports, plus the cost of any 
activities on top of that. And those activities tend to be of the bracing, 
hooray-limpets-for-tea sort. There are two hotel bars but no pub, no 
restaurants, no cash machine, and Dr Hollidayis the NHS: “There are no x-rays, 
no blood tests, no hospital beds. So if you break a leg and you need to go to 
hospital, then I call a plane and you go. If you are very unwell, I can call a 
drill team – a consultant and an anaesthetist – and they come here. But it can 
be foggy and the plane can’t get in, or it could be a force 10, and your broken 
leg would be stuck. That’s not uncommon – you can’t get people off, and if you 
have appendicitis or you have a heart attack and you can’t get to hospital, 
then you can’t go to hospital.”

So why is there this extraordinary level of secrecy about the place? Talking 
to Dr Holliday, it becomes apparent that the social radar system built into 
every Briton is calibrated to hair-trigger acuity on Tiree. Basically, it’s 
tribal. There are the native-born Tirisdeachs, many of whom choose to go to the 
mainland for jobs or education but who come back either periodically or to 
settle here when older. Then there are the incomers who have moved here full 
time and who throw themselves gladly into the ongoing life of the island. Then 
there’s the second-homers, many of whom have been coming here every summer for 
four generations or more. Then there are the holiday homers who have been 
coming for only a few years. And finally there are the blow-ins who rent a 
place for a couple of weeks over the holidays.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192801239%2F1b810a5f-8940-46db-b188-ec1c3299074c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tiree%3A%20Scotland's%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tiree%3A%20Scotland%27s%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192801239%2F1b810a5f-8940-46db-b188-ec1c3299074c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 “I’m a bit squeamish about talking about Tiree,” chef Fergus Henderson, who 
has been going to the island since he was four, pictured with his wife Margot. 
Photograph: James Higgins/Corbis 
The secrecy comes not from the inhabitants, but from a few second homers who 
love this place, feel proprietorial about it, and don’t want the secret to 
become any better known. But as Steve Thomson, who moved to Tiree in 2004, 
points out, it’s a bit late for that: “I’ll tell you, from my experience, it’s 
them and about half of Edinburgh.” Or, as Dr Holliday puts it, “That’s a 
perfectly understandable view to have about your pet location, but I think 
there’s a natural balance. We’re approaching a tipping point. There’s a sense 
that Tiree has become full. If you want to get to Tiree in June, July, August, 
and you haven’t booked a place on the ferry six months in advance, you won’t 
get in. We have now got a situation where we’ve got an excess capacity of 
accommodation and people can’t get to it. Or they book it, don’t take it, and 
the people who rebook can’t get here.”

To get to Tiree in June, July, August, if you haven’t booked the ferry six 
months ahead, you won’t get in

Even when they do get here, it’s not everyone’s cup of tea. On a good day this 
place may look like Croyde in Devon, but then there haven’t been any good days 
this summer. Michael Heseltine, whose daughter Annabel had her 50th birthday 
here last summer, is said to have looked round at the Hebridean splendour laid 
out before him and asked, “Why aren’t we in Tuscany?” On a bad day, you either 
sit on the beach in a hurricane, picking flotsam out of your sandwiches and 
pretending this is a whole lot more fun than being in a hot country like, say, 
England, or you end up stuck in a blackhouse complaining about the patchy 
mobile signal while trying to think of new ways to cookdulse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/21/how-to-forage-for-seaweed>
.

As for winter, even islanders speak of it with awe. “Horrific,” says William 
Angus, 38, born and bred on the island and director of Wild Diamond, Tiree’s 
biggest watersports company. “We get 17- or 18-hour nights and six, seven hours 
of daylight a day. When it’s force 10 round from the right and pitch dark, 
you’re pretty much stuck in the house. If you’re tied into a nine-to-five 
regime as well, then that poses some serious issues for your general sanity.” 
Steve Thomson, who moved himself and his family to the island in 2004, ran his 
Russian aerospace consultancy from there and managed 11 winters before he 
cracked. “It’s not that it’s bad weather,” he says. “It’s that it’s bad weather 
for weeks. That’s what gets you down – gales and rain, day after day.”

Tiree is the windiest place in Britain (the local anemometer once registered a 
gust of 120mph before it too blew away), and Thomson says though he’s a big man 
– 16½st – one gust knocked him flat last winter. Back in June, the Tiree Music 
Festival <http://tireemusicfestival.co.uk/> (TMF) had a taste of that weather. 
Thomson has teenage daughters who look forward to TMF every year. On the first 
night this year, the winds rose far past the forecast. “I was terrified,” he 
says. “I got there at 2am, and it looked like one of those disasters on TV. It 
was pitch black because all the lights had gone out and I walked through this 
bomb site – all the tents had blown away and I got to our tent and there were 
my daughters just clinging on with these four lads I’d not met before. One of 
them had nothing but his shorts and a T-shirt because everything else had blown 
away.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441193219996%2F8723187b-5e8d-497b-8ba0-ca114256f4b0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tiree%3A%20Scotland's%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tiree%3A%20Scotland%27s%20chilly%20St%20Tropez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftiree-scotland-chilly-st-tropez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441193219996%2F8723187b-5e8d-497b-8ba0-ca114256f4b0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A politic choice: Alastair Campbell has been spotted holidaying on Tiree. 
Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Observer 
Sam Lomas, protégé of Hugh Fearnley- Whittingstall’s River Cottage, is chef at 
the pop-up Beachcomber Craft Café over the summer. He arrived just before the 
festival and got hurled straight in. “I think they’re still scraping canvas off 
the fences, but we got through it somehow.”

And that sense of resourcefulness suits some people. When Thomson moved here 
and discovered that there was no broadband, he didn’t hang about. He went into 
partnership, rented a satellite, bought the equipment for a wireless service 
from Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and set about assembling a network which 
now serves 140 island subscribers.

He also realised that, on an island this small, there was no such thing as 
privacy. “It’s a bit like you’re in your own little drama. I’m living in the 
city now and I just about know my neighbours, but I know absolutely utterly 
everything about everyone around us in Tiree. And they know everything about us 
– they’ve seen our children grow up, they know all the grannies, the aunties 
and uncles, etc. So it’s like living in a goldfish bowl.” The perfect example 
is the story of the flying toilet. When works were being completed to a house 
on a nearby islet, islanders enjoyed watching a new loo being flown over Tiree 
below a helicopter.

The odd thing is that Tirisdeachs and second homers and holiday-makers are all 
after the same thing. What each of Tiree’s tribes wants is an island just full 
enough of members of the same tribe, but where they can still exist completely 
without self-consciousness. Despite fears of total invasion, it seems likely 
that stalking John Swinney MSP round the machair will remain a niche interest. 
Either way, the game is up. It was up a long time ago. Once you’ve reached 
26,000 visitors a year, you better accept you’re an open secret.

Bella Bathurst is working on a book about Bert Hardy and The Picture Post. 
It’s up for pledges on Unbound. Visitunbound.co.uk/books/the-long-shot 
<https://unbound.co.uk/books/the-long-shot>
 