
If it hadn't been for music, I would never have picked up a camera. Of that I 
am pretty much certain.

As a shy 17-year-old, I asked my dad if his camera could be my companion at a 
daytime concert in our local town square. I was brave enough to send some of 
those photos to a music magazine, which printed three. Suddenly I'd found a 
purpose in life: becoming a rock photographer would enable me to be near the 
music I loved, yet stay kind of unnoticed at the same time. Very appealing to a 
shy person.

I started to look at photography and found inspiration through the eyes of Lee 
Friedlander, Robert Frank, Diane Arbus, Helmut Newton and others. I began to 
understand that the importance of how someone was photographed was often 
greater than the importance of that someone. That's when I became a 
photographer.

In the 70s and 80s I photographed man and his environment. I would encounter, 
say, John Martyn or Steely Dan or David Bowie and more or less take the photos 
where I met them. I call it my period of "looking in from the outside". I 
hardly ever prepared, as I didn't trust my own ideas, didn't bring lights or an 
assistant, and would rely completely on the location of our meeting. A lot of 
intuitive and nervous decisions, but somehow it worked most of the time.

By the mid-80s I'd started doing videos, where ideas are a must. Mine were 
liked, which helped my confidence - and the photos were getting noticed, too. I 
started to have the confidence to arrange my subjects in a particular 
environment to create a unique image. For this period of "looking in from the 
inside", I switched my Nikon for a Hasselblad to make the change more 
noticeable. And I spent time in LA to get sunlight in my photos.

Another change happened: I decided to photograph all kinds of artists that I'd 
become interested in. Meetings with Clint Eastwood, Isabella Rossellini, Allen 
Ginsberg, Stephen Jay Gould, Martin Scorsese and Marianne Faithfull followed: 
the photos became more portrait-like and, although I didn't change much about 
the preparations and still used available light, I became a bit more forceful 
in getting the right photograph.

A good example is this 
<http://www.taipeitimes.com/images/2001/09/30/thumbs/20010929175102.jpeg> this 
image of Luciano Pavarotti. I met him backstage before, during and after a 
concert in Turin. He liked to meet people in his dressing room and I found him 
an imposing figure of a man. But what was really striking was the contrast 
between the photos I knew of him, and the man I was seeing then, on- and 
backstage. No funny hats or Hawaiian shirts or smiles there. He was a much 
darker- looking character, fully aware of the impact of being Pavarotti.

I realised this was how I wanted to photograph him. I had a brief discussion 
with his assistant Nicolette (who later became his wife) and told her I liked 
the dark makeup lines on his face and that this, and a black T-shirt, was all I 
needed for the photo. After a loud and very entertaining dinner in their hotel 
suite, I arranged for a late-morning shoot with Luciano in his other suite 
(there were two: one for sleeping and one for eating).

I turned up with my Hasselblad at midday and waited for him to enter. When, 
finally, he did, he was in a dark mood - not helped by my insistence on the 
black T-shirt and stage makeup. As I had no one with me to apply the makeup, he 
took to this himself, getting his assistant to hold the pocket mirror.

When I tried to have a closer look, he told me in no uncertain terms to "get 
out of the light". Then, once he'd finished, he demanded to see a Polaroid and, 
after looking at it for a fraction of a millisecond, declared he needed to be 
closer to the window. I took another after he'd moved all of 5cm closer, and he 
approved that one from a distance - he knew right from the start who was in 
charge. But I was getting the photo I wanted.

The shoot was over in less than 10 minutes as the room had to be prepared for 
lunch, of course. But he saw the photo a few months later and loved it. A truly 
larger-than-life kind of a man.

By the late-90s, however, I'd grown annoyed with all the celebrity photography 
that now seemed to occupy every magazine cover - and everybody's life. What I 
found so upsetting was that all the mystery had disappeared from what I'd 
thought was as an interesting art-form, the paparazzi photograph.

To bring back some mystery, I set upon taking a series of fake film stills, 
partly inspired by Cindy Sherman's work and partly because I was bored with the 
seriousness of my own photos. I worked with a lot of actors, shooting them with 
a flash on top of my Leica and using Polapan film, a kind of instant 35mm film 
you could develop yourself in about two minutes. The photos were printed 
monochromatic blue with some red, like faded movie posters left to the sun in 
an old movie theatre. I thought of characters for the people to play: Keith 
Richards, Robert De Niro, Catherine Deneuve, Tom Waits and Lars von Trier were 
all up for this approach. It was great fun making these images, my period of 
"looking out from the inside".

And yet, I was still questioning why my work was led by so many teenage 
influences. Of course it had to do with my formative years, when my family 
lived in a village on an island south of Rotterdam. The lack of anything 
interesting going on there made me believe that all events outside the island 
were of great importance. The Beatles and the Stones playing in Holland, movies 
we saw on TV ... it was a big, mysterious world and I wanted to be somebody in 
it.

But this wasn't the way I'd been brought up, with my parents focused firmly on 
life after death, and the series of self-portraits that emerged in my mid-40s 
(for which I dressed up as deceased musicians) expressed the contrast between 
my parents' obsession with religion, and my obsession with the outside world. 
Now, however, after that period of "looking out from the outside", my work has 
come full circle. I am looking forward to a colourful future.

Â· Anton Corbijn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn> is the 
director of Control, the biopic of Joy Division's Ian Curtis

corbijn.co.uk <http://www.corbijn.co.uk>
 