
I’m not religious or spiritual, I don’t believe in psychics or conspiracy 
theories, but a handful of superstitions have wormed their way into my day to 
day life. I don’t use petroleum-based lip balm, because once in the mid-90s, 
Oprah said you could get addicted to it, and who am I to naysay Oprah? I 
subconsciously avoid standing in front of the microwave when it’s on, because 
of “rays” (my high school teacher had a sign taped to hers that read, “Stand 
here if you ENJOY CANCER”). I made a valiant effort to abandon antiperspirant 
because of the “unknown dangers” of aluminium absorption, but that didn’t last 
long (you’re welcome). I buy organic fruits and vegetables and milk and meat, 
even though I can’t quantify, exactly, how much of thatdesignation benefits my 
health and how much is just marketing 
<http://lifehacker.com/5941881/what-does-organic-really-mean-and-should-i-buy-it>
. I do it because I feel like it’s a more natural way to be and, for some 
reason, that feels right. I understand that impulse – to strive for the 
natural, whatever that means – and the only adverse effect is on my wallet. 
(Also, keep those hormones and antibiotic-resistant bacteria a minimum 10 miles 
away from my mouth.)

So, generally, I think it’s stellar for people to hold on to the routines, the 
rituals, the hunches – even the magic spells – that help life make sense, that 
might fend off mortality for an extra day, a month, a year. Objectively, I 
don’t believe that rays or armpit aluminium or a non-organic orange is going to 
be the end of me – or, at least, not any sooner than stress or car travel or 
choking on a peach pit or falling down the stairs will be – but those little 
rules make me feel safer. And, most importantly, unlike the potential 
repercussions of the current pro-“natural” anti-vaccination movement, none of 
my armchair opinions about lip balm has ever caused a person with Aids to 
pointlessly die of an entirely preventable disease.

Disneyland measles outbreak leaves many anti-vaccination parents unmoved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/25/disneyland-measles-outbreak-anti-vaccination-parents>
Perhaps you have not caught up on the anti-vaccination movement currently 
whipping up a brand new measles epidemic for America’s young and 
immunocompromised. It stems fromAndrew Wakefield’s now-discredited 1998 Lancet 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/23/struck-off-mmr-doctor-quackery-award>
, which suggested a link between vaccines and autism, and created asimilar 
panic in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/25/mmr-scare-analysis> more than 
10 years ago. ThisNew York Times paragraph handily sums it up 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/31/us/vaccine-critics-turn-defensive-over-measles.html>
:
 “Today, the waves of parents who shun vaccines include some who still believe 
in the link and some, like the Amish, who have religious objections to 
vaccines. Then there is a particular subculture of largely wealthy and 
well-educated families, many living in palmy enclaves around Los Angeles and 
San Francisco, who are trying to carve out ‘all-natural’ lives for their 
children.” 
I believe that it is good to be sceptical of massive, opaque government 
agencies and the way that they exploit people’s innate fears in order to funnel 
profits to pharmaceutical giants (and the diet industry, and defence 
contractors, and banks, and oil companies, and on and on and on). However, I 
have never been so doggedly suspicious of the government’s canoodling with big 
business that it seemed worth letting an infant baby go blind,develop seizures 
and mental degeneration, and die of measles-induced panencephalitis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/23/parent-protect-kids-measles-vaccines-not-disney>
.

I honestly can’t believe that there’s still ground to tread in this ludicrous 
non-debate, but apparently it needs to be repeated: anti-vaxxers, please do not 
give measles to my tiny, helpless future baby. Your bodily autonomy does not 
extend to my family. Denying science is not innovative or progressive. Even if 
your worries about vaccines were true, it is not better to be dead than to be 
autistic.

But you do, actually, have one unassailable point here: babies dying of 
measles is “natural”. The child mortality rateamong hunter-gatherer communities 
is estimated at around 30 to 40% 
<https://condensedscience.wordpress.com/2011/06/28/life-expectancy-in-hunter-gatherers-and-other-groups/>
. Is that the “natural” you had in mind?

If anyone needed more evidence that opposing vaccination is an antiquated, bad 
idea, look no further than the fact that several US Republicans – the ultimate 
talent scouts for antiquated, bad ideas – have recently come down on the 
anti-vaxxer side. Just this week, Kentucky senator (and disingenuous, prattling 
fool) Rand Paul said, vaguely, that he’d heard of “many tragic cases” of kids 
developing “profound mental disorders” after being vaccinated. New Jersey 
governor Chris Christie argued that “parents need to have some measure of 
choice” because “not every vaccine is created equal”. Neither politician 
offered any specifics about which “tragic cases” and which disproportionately 
dangerous vaccines they were referring to, but if citations mattered, we 
wouldn’t be having this conversation in the first place. (Great to hear you 
conservatives are all about bodily autonomy now, though. I assume you’re going 
to apply that to women’s bodies, too? … Hello? Guys?)

Andrew Wakefield: autism inc
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/06/what-happened-man-mmr-panic> 
Most importantly, vaccination is a class issue. If I stopped being able to 
afford to shop at the organic hippy co-op, I could just go back to scrubbing 
the pesticides off my own goddamn leeks, just as we did when I was a kid. But 
when it comes to vaccines, the stakes are so much higher. Ifanti-vaxx activist 
Jenny McCarthy’s voluntarily unvaccinated baby 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/hiltzik/la-fi-mh-jenny-mccarthy-antivaxxer-public-menace-20150127-column.html#page=1>
 transmits vanity-measles to the involuntarily unvaccinated baby of an 
impoverished single mother, whose baby is more likely to receive adequate 
medical care? Whose baby is more likely to die?

And that’s the whole point. Herd immunity isn’t about my individual 
hypothetical baby, or yours, or Jenny McCarthy’s – it’s about public health, 
investing in a collective. It’s a testament to the idea that we can care about 
human life independent of self-interest. That empathy extends beyond our own 
children. If that’s “unnatural”, I’ll take it.
 