
In 1950, computer science pioneer Alan Turing famously predicted that "... in 
about 50 years' time it will be possible to programme computers ... to make 
them play the imitation game so well that an average interrogator will not have 
more than 70% chance of making the right identification (between computer and 
human) after five minutes of questioning."

In some ways, Turing was spot on: today's artificial intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/artificialintelligenceai> (AI) has 
become an integral part of many everyday relationships between consumers and 
brands. It's the automated chatbot that helps with your banking inquiry, the 
voice-recognition software that takes your call to the airline company, the 
self-checkout technology in the supermarket. We talk to the machine and the 
machine talks back, but often, not very well.

The problem is that today's AI is pretty functional and often does very little 
to convey thepersonality of the brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/brand-marketing>. No matter how 
sophisticated the logic, a standardised service which redirects a call or 
offers basic information is still light years away from truly convincing 
conversation or linguistic intelligence. True, AI can be attentive and 
empathetic - and as personal data analytics improves and begins to create 
opportunities for genuinely smart recommendations, this will only grow - but at 
the moment, computers still fall far short of the Turing test, the 
philosophical test of a machine's ability to demonstrate intelligence that's 
indistinguishable from that of a human.

As consumers, we hate being treated like parts on a production line, or lines 
in an algorithm. We get frustrated by AI that lacks the emotional intelligence 
or common sense to work through even a simple problem. But - and here is the 
conflict - consumers want speed as well as humanity in their brand 
interactions. We want the benefits of self-service technologies but the 
yearning for the human element. For example, an empathetic, intelligent 
response to complaints is still strong.

The good news is that if the traits of speed and humanity are currently seen 
as mutually exclusive, the trade-off is becoming smaller. Future Foundation 
data shows that between 2009 and 2012 the number of British consumers who saw 
the inanimate nature of self-service as a benefit nearly doubled, to 32%. Can 
the strengths of AI - its speed and consistency - end up making it more 
attentive than the humans it replaces?

So where next? The key to future success will lie in systems that operate as 
true brand ambassadors, as real artificial personalities with a credible range 
of human qualities. The point isn't really to pass the Turing test, but rather 
to come close enough to make the human-AI interaction a smooth one; to have 
enough linguistic intelligence to complement logical intelligence; and to be 
equipped with enough of the individual's behavioural data to make each 
recommendation truly expert but also truly personal.

The in-store environment could make much of this trend, as it answers 
complicated questions about customer service, and allows for ever-more 
personalised responses. Maximising services - those giving recommendations - 
will become better able to offer tailored advice for more complicated parts of 
our lives - our leisure time or our media consumption, for instance.

There are plenty of interesting examples emerging from around the world. 
Toshiba's 
<http://www.toshiba.co.uk/?utm_medium=ppc&gclid=CM-3r-P-x7kCFS3HtAodATcA7w&gclsrc=aw.ds>
 next generation of self-checkout terminals, for example, set for introduction 
next year, can visually identify fruit and learn from any mistakes it makes. 
How long before self-checkout gets even more intelligent, initiating 
discussions, answering personal health questions, helping you make ethical 
purchases based on your own personal beliefs? Japanese retailerUnited Arrows  
<http://www.united-arrows.co.jp/en/shop/>used an Xbox Kinect to create shop 
window mannequins that mimic the actions of passers-by. The technology affords 
customers a unique view of clothes on a moving body, exerting a powerful human 
pull on a previously inanimate experience.

This is also where big data starts to come into its own - recommended 
purchases may soon be determined based on the intricacies of a consumer's 
individual health, finance, even genetic profile. This information can be 
digested by the artificial personality in an instant, with insights delivered 
in unique, flowing prose. Take for example Hada Memori, an automatic skin 
diagnosis system in Japan that tracks changes in your skin's condition - this 
highly personalised information is paving the way for brands to create equally 
personalised offers and communication.

But the counter-trend is strong. Disquiet about "always on" lifestyles is 
constant. Voices bemoaning our modern day info-addictions - endless 
information, 24-hour work culture, status update obsessions - are far louder 
than those calling for further data-sharing. Human contact is not something 
that anyone - parents, teachers, doctors especially - would argue needs to be 
reduced. Why should anyone choose not to talk to a knowledgeable human being?

Overall however, we believe that treated as an opportunity to express brand 
identity rather than just an automated access point, artificial personality 
avatars will become powerful brand assets.

Karen Canty is an account director at the Future Foundation 
<http://futurefoundation.net/Int/>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> â€“ this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 