
A thousand or more years ago there were blue harvests in the fields around 
Odell. The village was named after the plants that produced the vivid dye 
beloved of ancient Britons, though, over time, the Saxon’s Woad Hill contracted 
into its modern form.

Today the fields grow no woad, but harvests of a different sort can be found 
on the clay cap on top of the hill, where the great wood still stands.

A wide avenue close to the church, flanked by beeches and poplars, offers a 
mock grandiose path sweeping up to the wood itself. There is a “gatehouse” at 
its foot – a stable and field where a pair of donkeys give giant-toothed grins 
in return for a good rub on the nose.

I enter the wood on what is effectively the rim of a wheel, for a series of 
wide rides were cut through a couple of centuries ago, like the spokes of a 
cartwheel. From the hub, I am lured into shady ground beneath the trees by a 
series of little lights, shining like cat’s eyes on the ground. I duck under an 
overhanging oak bough and an ape-like shuffle brings me under coppiced hazel 
bushes to a string of pale, sunlitfungi 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-6e3gaz>, their fresh young caps 
wrinkled like old skin.

Of hungry badgers and hidden worms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/of-hungry-badgers-and-hidden-worms-country-diary>
The reward for my curiosity proves transient, for, within a couple of minutes, 
the gleam on cream goes as sunbeams striking the fungi are lost behind a cloud. 
The string of pearls loses its lustre.

These toadstools had grown in a wiggly line, a strong indication of their being
connected to roots <http://www.mycolog.com/mycorrhiza.htm> radiating out from a 
nearby oak. Tracing the line back to the trunk over ground littered with rotten 
acorns and rodent-raided hazelnuts, I find a cherry tomato beginning to sprout 
from the moss. Or rather, the domed top of a cherry-red fungus. Some small 
animal with big teeth had denied the toadstool its fruiting glory by taking a 
huge bite out of the centre.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>

A Tale of Trees: The Battle to Save Britain’s Ancient Woodland by Derek 
Niemann; Short Books, £14.99. To order for £12.29, go tobookshop.theguardian.com
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tale-of-trees.html> or call 0330 333 6846.
 