
Welcome to day three of the campaign. Apparently there has been some 
controversy about whether Sunday, whenMalcolm Turnbull went to the governor 
general’s house to ask for parliament to be dissolved, was day one or day zero.
Katharine Murphy and I both agree day one is the first full day (Monday) so 
consider it settled.

The big picture

The finger pointing over supposed preference deals between the Liberals and 
the Greens and if there could be a Labor-Greens coalition governmentrumbled on 
through the night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/labor-liberals-greens-asylum-policy>
 with the shadow treasurer,Chris Bowen, appearing on 7.30 to say it will be 
“Labor governments alone, or not at all”.

Liberals' extra from central casting gives glimpse into reality of Turnbull 
show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/11/liberals-extra-from-central-casting-gives-glimpse-into-reality-of-turnbull-show>
Multiple Greens have said they would be open to negotiating with Labor to form 
government in the event of a hung parliament, leaving Labor open to a scare 
campaign from the Liberals.

Meanwhile, the Liberals have reportedly been making their own cosy arrangement 
with the Greens in negotiations (no firm deal yet) over preference swaps in key 
marginal Labor seats.

The Victorian Liberal president, Michael Kroger, told Andrew Bolt on Tuesday 
nightthat there was a case for the Liberals to do preference deals with the 
Greens 
<http://www.theage.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016-opinion/no-deals-major-parties-rule-out-return-to-gillardera-coalition-government-20160510-goqst4.html>
.

“Here’s the reason why people in the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>, hard-headed people, 
think that our policy might have to change,” he said. “Because this: Labor have 
gone to the left in recent years and now our view is there isn’t much to 
distinguish Labor and the Greens.”

The Greens lower house MP Adam Bandt was still out and about on the nightly 
news:

Samantha Maiden (@samanthamaiden) 
HEARTBREAKING: @AdamBandt <https://twitter.com/AdamBandt> saying on 7pm news 
that@billshortenmp <https://twitter.com/billshortenmp> can say "tell them 
they're dreaming well sometimes dreams come true."
 <https://twitter.com/samanthamaiden/status/729961349069955072> May 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/samanthamaiden/status/729961349069955072> 
The Australian reports Bandt as saying it was Labor who were “begging” the 
Liberals 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-well-win-in-our-own-right-say-greens/news-story/1176daf9f10be335ee494bb94f456374?utm_content=SocialFlow&utm_campaign=EditorialSF&utm_source=TheAustralian&utm_medium=Twitter>
to help them stay in parliament, and the Greens would win their target seats in 
their own right.

The Liberal party is set to receive $4.4m in public funding after handing over 
the details of donors to the New South Wales Electoral Commission. The 
commission waswithholding the money after an Independent Commission Against 
Corruption investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/arthur-sinodinos-threatens-legal-action-against-nsw-electoral-commission>
 into illegal donations. It examined the Free Enterprise Foundation and the 
Liberal party had not revealed who had donated to the party through the 
enterprise in 2011.

The Daily Telegraph reports on Wednesday that the party has handed over the 
donation details and the commission will hold a meeting to decide whether to 
hand over the money. Many of the donations were from property developers which 
was made illegal in 2009.


Bill Shorten has been in north Queensland visiting two schools in as many days 
whereGabrielle Chan reports one of the principals says the defence department 
should be forced to raise funds with chook raffles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/gonski-funding-let-defence-try-to-raise-funds-with-chook-raffles-says-principal>
 rather than schools.

The Heatley school principal, Louise Wilkinson, said:

Because it’s about dollars, and dollars are allegedly short, it’s about a 
suite of competing priorities and I would argue … that it’s about time defence 
did some chook raffles and sold tea towels.

My theory – and this is why I have stayed in education for over 30 years – I 
believe if we had better educated people and more active citizens then we might 
have less violence and less need for all the patch-ups that occur.”

Meanwhile, Tony Abbott was kept busy pushing a broken-down car 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/federal-election/if-i-was-in-the-trenches-thats-who-i-would-want-beside-me/news-story/a8b3d5bb9cb02c6a438a9b0efc0f89d9?from=public_atom&utm_content=SocialFlow&utm_campaign=EditorialSF&utm_source=News.com.au&utm_medium=Twitter>
 off the Wakehurst Parkway in the northern beaches, with a very pleased 
rubbernecker recognising him as the traffic made its way around the car.

Good old Tony, if I was in the trenches that’s who I would want beside me.

Draw your own metaphors and analogies.

To keep in the loop in the afternoon sign up here for our special election 
2016 email, the Campaign Catchup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/guardian-campaign-catchup>
, a quick read on the campaign news of the day, delivered every afternoon.

On the campaign trail

Malcolm Turnbull’s campaign had moved to Sydney by Tuesday afternoon and will 
be in the strategic western suburbs on Wednesday whileBill Shorten’s campaign 
awoke once again in Townsville.

The race you should be paying attention to right now

Barnaby Joyce was out campaigning in Queensland on Tuesday, an effort to help 
the “toff” Turnbull, as the Courier-Mail put it, but thing are not well for him 
in his own seat.

New England <http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/nsw/new-england.htm> in northern 
NSW is shaping up as a fierce contest betweenJoyce, and his predecessor, the 
independent candidateTony Windsor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/29/vendetta-barnaby-joyce-says-electoral-battle-with-tony-windsor-is-personal>
.

Windsor retired in 2013 and Joyce was easily elected without serious 
opposition. Windsor had won New England with relative ease against weaker 
Nationals opponents before 2013. Both candidates have won New England easily in 
the past but never in a tight contest.

And another thing(s)

David Marr has written about what this election means 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/australians-crave-change-but-this-election-wont-deliver-it-david-marr>
, what will change at the end of this gruelling campaign? Not much apparently.

Government should be so easy in this prosperous, orderly country. But it is 
remarkably hard. Parliaments are short. Leaders don’t last. Power is 
fragmented. This is the land of unfinished political business.

Each election campaign is much like the last. Only the faces change.

Laura Tingle has been very impressed with Chris Bowen’s performance and writes 
inthe Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/election/election-2016-chris-bowen-shows-it-is-done-20160510-gorsba#ixzz48HarBhQP>
 that Labor is “creaming” the government when it comes to policy in this 
election campaign so far.

Bowen is one of those Labor frontbenchers who speaks with the confidence and 
authority of someone who has recently done the actual job in government – he 
was after all, however, briefly, Labor’s last treasurer before the 2013 
election defeat.

Scott Morrison, by comparison, has had three jobs in three years and still 
talks as though he has left his freshly painted framework of policy principles 
out on the back verandah to dry off.

The Greens are snapping at the heels of Labor seats, particularly in Sydney 
where electoral redistributions have putAnthony Albanese’s seat of Grayndler at 
risk. There is a ripple effect too, asMichelle Grattan writes in the 
Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/go-target-the-liberals-albanese-tells-the-greens-on-his-tail-59110>
.

 Albanese is one of the best ‘retail’ politicians in the parliament. They are 
much in demand by their respective sides to campaign in the marginal seats. But 
each is having to spend more time than is ideal defending his home turf.

In the enemy-of-my-enemy-is-my-friend moment of the day
Christopher Dore (@wrongdorey) 
Front page of The Daily Telegraph. Tele endorses Albo to stop loony Greens in 
Grayndler#auspol <https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/uhzO14Ckb2 <https://t.co/uhzO14Ckb2>
 <https://twitter.com/wrongdorey/status/729992732974833664> May 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/wrongdorey/status/729992732974833664> 
• Follow the day’s developments live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/11/australian-election-2016-the-daily-telegraph-endorses-anthony-albanese-in-preferences-spat>
• Sign up here to receive Campaign  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/guardian-campaign-catchup>
Catchup in your inbox every afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/guardian-campaign-catchup>
 