
Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> supervillian, accomplished 
thespian, internet catnip … Tom Hiddleston’s swift and varied career has 
already seen him collect both MTV and Olivier awards.

As he continues to impress on the small screen in BBC thriller The Night 
Manager, and before he continues to cement his blockbuster credentials with 
roles in franchises Kong: Skull Island and Thor: Ragnarok, he’s front and 
centre of Ben Wheatley’s divisive new JG Ballard adaptation,High-Rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/high-rise>. In it, he plays a doctor who 
moves into a socially segregated tower block that descends into chaos.

Here are his career highlights so far:

Unrelated
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do37dUcurN5g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do37dUcurN5g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do37dUcurN5g&media=>
Hiddleston found an early collaborator of some measure in writer-director 
Joanna Hogg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joanna-hogg>, whose naturalistic 
work brought out the best of his under-utilised ability to play, you know, 
regular folk. As the arrogant son of the family whose Italian holiday is 
startled by a troubled guest, he gives a confident performance that doesn’t 
betray his relative inexperience.

Archipelago
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMuMkEGBQNbQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMuMkEGBQNbQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMuMkEGBQNbQ&media=>
Hiddleston reunited with Hogg for her next film, another tale of a family 
struggling while on holiday together. Again he plays the son, but this time 
he’s undergoing something of a quarter-life crisis and offers up an impressive 
performance that rings true in in an entirely different way. He worked with 
Hogg once more in 2013’s Exhibition and one hopes they collaborate again in 
future.

The Deep Blue Sea
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWLFUWZTXB4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWLFUWZTXB4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWLFUWZTXB4&media=>
While Rachel Weisz generated a deserved Oscar buzz for her devastating turn as 
a woman debating suicide while reliving a doomed affair, Hiddleston’s equally 
impressive performance went rather overlooked. His rakish, temperamental cad 
was simultaneously charming and odious, perfectly encapsulating a lover who 
always seems just slightly out of reach.

The Avengers
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXfvPTo6HKzU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXfvPTo6HKzU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXfvPTo6HKzU&media=>
Marvel’s reinvention of the superhero genre has been largely successful, 
offering up wit and vibrancy alongside the usual spectacle, but one common 
complaint is a lack of nasty or interesting villains. The one major exception 
has been Thor’s insidious wronged brother Loki, a character which, in the hands 
of a broader actor, could have been played for ham. Thanks to Hiddleston, he’s 
a compellingly evil presence.

Only Lovers Left Alive
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp1CbBkunbrY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp1CbBkunbrY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp1CbBkunbrY&media=>
Pairing Hiddleston with Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton> in a tale of centuries old 
vampires is one of the smartest ideas that Jim Jarmusch (or any director) has 
ever had. They’re a transfixing pair, each dealing with their immortality 
differently and Hiddleston’s gothic turn is better than his later work in 
Guillermo del Toro’s Crimson Peak.
 