
12.17pm GMT 

And off he goes, after signing some autographs of course. Stanislas Wawrinka, 
then. On Sunday, he will play in his first ever grand slam final at the age of 
28. He's got two days to prepare. Don't go too hard on the popcorn, Stan - 
either Roger Federer or Rafael Nadal is lying in wait. Do join us tomorrow for 
their semi-final. It should be a classic. Thanks for reading. Bye.

12.14pm GMT 

Would Wawrinka like an all-Swiss final against Roger Federer? "Yeah, for sure, 
it would be amazing," he says. "Roger is the best player ever. He texted me 
last night saying it was really happy that there are two Swiss guys in the 
semi-final for the first time. I said for you it is normal! I am going to watch 
the match tomorrow on tv with some popcorn."

12.12pm GMT 

"I don't know what to say," says Stanislas Wawrinka, blinking back the tears. 
"I'm speechless." 

12.11pm GMT 

Tomas Berdych walks down the tunnel, left to reflect on playing two dismal 
tie-breaks in the final two sets. He played well, typically solid on serve, but 
the big moments never went his way. The double-faults didn't help.

12.10pm GMT 

STANISLAS WAWRINKA WINS 6-3, 6-7, 7-6, 7-6

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych 4-7 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): But there's no 
escape for Berdych this time! Wawrinka sends a hard serve down the middle and 
Berdych can't react, his return flying way long! Stanislas Wawrinka wins! He's 
in theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final!

12.09pm GMT 

Key event

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych 4-6 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): And now would 
you believe this! Wawrinka double-faults! He's still got one serve, though.

12.08pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych* 3-6 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych smacks 
a forehand long! Wawrinka has match point!

12.07pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych* 3-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): A storming 
forehand from Berdych keeps Wawrinka at bay for now.

12.06pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych 2-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Ace! He's two 
points from the final! 

12.05pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych 2-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych 
restores some hope as he tears into a forehand and Wawrinka's defensive 
backhand goes long. Wawrinka played too safe.

12.04pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych* 1-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Would you 
believe it? Berdych has double-faulted again! He challenges but it's 
embarrassingly long! This is Wawrinka's to lose now!

12.04pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych* 1-3 Wawrinka (*denotes server): A great 
forehand from Berdych draws the error from Wawrinka. He's off the mark.

12.03pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych 0-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A Berdych 
backhand lands this far long. He thought he'd made it. But no. He doesn't 
challenge.

12.03pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych 0-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych slashes 
long, Wawrinka leaves it. Well judged.

12.02pm GMT 

Fourth-set tie-break: Berdych* 0-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): What the ...? 
What the hell happened here? Wawrinka goes for the backhand pass and it looks 
like Berdych will make the volley. It looks like the ball is over. And suddenly 
it's bouncing all over his racket and landing on his side! He completely mishit 
it! 

12.01pm GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 6-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka 
has to hold to take this to a tie-break. He misses a backhand. 0-15. He 
succeeds with a backhand. 15-all. Berdych then slices wide to make it 30-15 but 
then he jumps on to a second serve and blasts a backhand return down the line 
to make it 30-all. But what nerve from Wawrinka! He skims a forehand down the 
line and Berdych is left shaking his head in frustration. 40-30. A brilliant 
second serve sees him hold and we've got a hat-trick of tie-breaks. They've 
each one won. A second for Wawrinka and he's in his first grand slam final.

11.55am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 6-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): What 
Wawrinka would give to break here. But Berdych isn't in the mood for such 
frivolous nonsense. Iron serving takes it 40-0. Then the crowd starts DOING 
BANTER and the umpire tells Berdych to wait for them to shut the hell up before 
serving. Berdych doesn't hear him and serves anyway, missing his first serve. 
The umpire tells him to hit it again, to Wawrinka's irritation. Eventually 
Berdych holds. Over to Stan.

11.51am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 5-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A 
double-fault from Wawrinka to start the game. Nerves. 0-15. But Berdych chooses 
the wrong shot on the next point, missing a forehand down the line for 15-all. 
A backhand then flashes wide from the Czech, who is starting to go for it. Two 
aces seal the hold, though. Time for new balls.

11.46am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 5-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych 
punches a forehand volley away to make it 15-0 and Wawrinka then can't do 
anything with a big serve. 30-0. In the crowd, someone shouts: "Stan, you can 
do it!" Inspired, Wawrinka belts a forehand return past Berdych. 30-15. Berdych 
responds with two massive serves.

11.44am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 4-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The level 
of the serving is such that 0-15 is viewed as a chance. But Wawrinka wallops a 
forehand through the middle and Berdych nets a backhand. He challenges but a 
wry smile suggests he knew it caught the line, which it did. A fine cross-court 
forehand from Wawrinka makes it 30-15 and Berdych then whistles a forehand just 
wide. 40-15. Wawrinka finishes it off with an ace. 

11.41am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 4-3 Wawrinka (*denotes server): This is 
getting tense. We're trundling towards a third tie-break. No one can make any 
impression when returning, largely because the serving is so impressive. I must 
say that neither player has choked on the big stage.

11.37am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 3-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): At 30-0, 
Wawrinka thinks he's got a second serve ace - but it's miles out. Berdych 
challenges and Hawkeye confirms it. How did the line judge miss that? 
Double-fault, 30-15. Soon it's 40-30 but although Berdych has the Swiss on the 
rack, he nets a forehand. Another hold.

11.32am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 3-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych 
whacks a forehand into the net to make it 0-15 but then thrashes his 19th ace 
down the T to make it 15-all, before putting away a smash for 30-15. Wawrinka 
then defends impeccably, though, and takes control of the rally after clinging 
on, Berdych eventually netting a backhand. 30-all. Solution? Ace. 40-30. A 
raking inside-out forehand wraps it up. It's going to ... oh, you get the 
picture.

11.28am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 2-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka 
has so much talent and entertains the crowd with an array of drop-shots and 
forehand winners in this game, holding to love. It's going to be another 
tie-break, isn't it.

11.25am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 2-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych 
holds comfortably to 15. No drama here. It's going to be another tie-break, 
isn't it.

11.20am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 1-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka 
slumps to 15-30 but an ace makes it 30-all and Berdych then nets a forehand 
which was probably harder to miss. 40-30. And Berdych sends a return long. "I 
didn't really know who to support for this one... but when I saw Berdych's 
outfit, the decision was obvious," says Tom Moran. "I'd like to thank him for 
raising the profile of my beloved Kilmarnock FC - I've no doubt our famous blue 
and white stripes were the inspiration for the shirt he and his team are 
sporting this week. I'm sure I speak for literally tens of fans in East 
Ayrshire when I say that it'd be fabulous if he could take some time out of his 
busy schedule to come and visit Rugby Park sometime." Sheffield Wednesday fans, 
Kilmarnock are making a cheeky play to nab your man! What are you gonna do 
about it?

11.17am GMT 

Fourth set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-7, 1-0 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych 
must be kicking himself. Two double-faults in one tie-break, one on set point. 
You can't be doing that in a grand slam semi-final. Or this - at 15-all, he 
completely messes up a drop shot, the ball failing to make it over the net. He 
goes back to what he knows on the next point, a forehand winner to make it 
30-all but then whips a forehand wide - or has he? "Correction!" cries the 
umpire. Wawrinka challenges and waddayaknow, the umpire was right. The point is 
replayed - and Berdych nets a forehand. Nothing the umpire can do about that. 
30-40. Break point. Huge serve. Deuce. Then Berdych double-faults again. What 
the devil is going on? A second break point. Berdych saves it but we stay on 
deuce. There's no escape from deuce or this game, though it's got nothing on 
the mini-classic between Federer and Murray in the fourth set yesterday. 
Eventually Berdych holds as Wawrinka slaps a backhand into the net. My, that 
was a struggle.

11.01am GMT 

STANISLAS WAWRINKA WINS THE THIRD SET 7-6 TO LEAD 2-1 IN SETS

Third-set tie-break: Berdych 3-7 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych thinks 
he has an ace. Out. He challenges. Out. And then he misses his second serve! 
Another double-fault! Two in one tie-break. That's dismal. Wawrinka won't care. 
He's dug in and he's regained his lead. One more set and he's in the final!

10.59am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych 3-6 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A monstrous 
serve down the middle and Wawrinka has two set points!

10.59am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych 3-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych nets a 
forehand on a second serve. Oh dear.

10.58am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych* 3-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Wawrinka chips a 
forehand return long.

10.57am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych* 2-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych 
double-faults! Wow.

10.56am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych 2-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The advantage 
goes as Berdych murders a forehand into the corner - Wawrinka gets there but 
Berdych is in the right place for the smash and Wawrinka nets a forehand.

10.55am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych 1-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka kicks a 
second serve to the backhand and Berdych loops long.

10.55am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych* 1-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych thinks 
two Wawrinka shots are going long. They're not ... but he stays focused, ramps 
up the power and eventually Wawrinka nets.

10.54am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych* 0-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych sends a 
backhand long. Wawrinka gets the mini-break early on.

10.53am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Berdych 0-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A big serve from 
Wawrinka and Berdych splutters a backhand into the net.

10.52am GMT 

Third set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 6-6 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Given what 
happened in the second-set tie-break, Wawrinka probably wants to avoid another 
one. But he's soon applauding a gloriously crisp forehand from Wawrinka to make 
it 30-0. In that context, it would have been gentlemanly for Berdych to 
replicate after a monstrous backhand from Wawrinka bangs down an ace; instead 
he just bangs down an ace to take us into another tie-break.

10.48am GMT 

Third set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 5-6 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A bad start to 
this game from Wawrinka, as an erratic forehand lands in Sydney. 0-15 soon 
becomes 0-30 as Berdych lets fly with a forehand return, Wawrinka nowhere near 
it. Wawrinka hauls himself back to 30-all with an ace and another makes it 
40-30. Another big serve and the game is Wawrinka's. What a hold.

10.45am GMT 

Third set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 5-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych has to 
hold now and Wawrinka wins the first point as a speedy forehand return leads to 
Berdych missing a forehand. 0-15. But he's got such power in his groundstrokes. 
I don't think a right hook from Berdych would be a particularly fun experience. 
It's soon 40-15, Berdych finding the lines with his forehands. Berdych holds as 
Wawrinka sends a forehand long.

10.39am GMT 

Third set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 4-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka 
foolishly drops a ball in the middle of the court and Berdych sends a forehand 
back past him with interest. 0-15. Wawrinka then gets himself in a tangle with 
a backhand, sending it horribly wide. 0-30. Wawrinka is in a hole - but a big 
serve and a backhand into the net from Berdych makes it 30-all. Berdych has a 
dark look on his face after that backhand. A needless miss. But he's soon 
clenching his fist as he waits, waits, waits, waits and waits some more and 
then rips a forehand down the line to earn his first break point of the match. 
He can't take it, though, Wawrinka letting out a primal roar after a Berdych 
miss on a backhand takes the game to deuce. He's soon bouncing around the back 
of the court after another Berdych error gives him the game. That was big.

10.34am GMT 

Third set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 4-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Another love 
hold. If you held a gun to my head - please don't, why would you do that - I'd 
say that Berdych is the favourite at the moment.

10.30am GMT 

Third set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 3-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): These games are 
incredibly rapid. There's barely time to pause to think. Wawrinka bangs down an 
ace and then produces two forehand winners to make it 40-0 and Berdych sends a 
forehand long to make it another love game. There's something strangely low-key 
about this match - neither man seems to be enjoying it, as if they've been 
gripped by the knowledge of what a brilliant opportunity this is to reach a 
grand slam final.

10.27am GMT 

Third set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 3-3 Wawrinka (*denotes server): A double-fault 
from Berdych is a dodgy way to begin this game but he rights that wrong with 
two thumping forehands to make it 30-15. Wawrinka then hits long off two 
returns. Another hold.

Updated at 10.27am GMT

10.23am GMT 

Third set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 2-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): It must be said 
that both players are playing exceptionally on serve. Two ripsnorting forehands 
from Wawrinka make it 30-0 and Berdych then nets a return. But then a 
double-fault from Wawrinka, his first, keeps the game alive and poor forehand 
makes it 40-30. No matter, a decisive forehand keeps this set on serve.

10.19am GMT 

Third set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 2-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Saying that, 
he's getting annoyed with the increasing number of errors he's making with his 
most devastating weapon, the backhand. He needs to keep his focus, because 
Berdych is in the zone now. He holds to love.Again.

10.16am GMT 

Third set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 1-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The crowd is 
very much on Wawrinka's side. Poor Berdych. Someone cheer for Berdych! I'll 
cheer for Berdych. Yay Berdych! Tomas Berdych, he's the man, if he can't do it, 
no one ... well, I guess someone will. Probably Nadal. Forget I said anything. 
Because it's another double-fast service game from Wawrinka. He's not too 
downhearted after losing that second set.

10.13am GMT 

Third set: Berdych* 3-6, 7-6, 1-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Mats Wilander - 
who I could listen to all day, ma mate Mats - is talking about the difference 
between three-set tournaments and grand slams and then he gets emotional, 
noting that tournaments like the Australian Open will be held for "hundreds and 
hundreds of years - as long as the planet is around." Does he know something we 
don't? Berdych holds to love. He's serving well.

10.10am GMT 

Third set: Berdych 3-6, 7-6, 0-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Here we are 
then, a third set, the match deliciously in the balance. Who knows which way 
this one is going to go? Well, Wawrinka will be pleased to see his backhand 
flowing again. He glides one down the line to hold to 15.

10.06am GMT 

TOMAS BERDYCH WINS THE SECOND SET 7-6 TO MAKE IT 1-1 IN SETS

Second set tie-break: Berdych* 6-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych only 
needs one of those set points. Wawrinka nets a backhand return and this 
semi-final is on! Five-set classic please! 

10.04am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych 6-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych has 
played this tie-break so well. A whopping forehand down the line forces 
Wawrinka to send a backhand long. Five set points.

10.03am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych 5-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): An outstanding 
rally! Berdych hangs in there with some brilliant defence and then spanks a 
cross-court backhand from left to right to take complete control of this second 
set!

10.02am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych* 4-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Another 
humongous serve. 

Updated at 10.02am GMT

10.02am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych* 3-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): A big serve 
from Berdych and Wawrinka nets his return.

Updated at 10.02am GMT

10.01am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych 2-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych attacks 
the net again and another dodgy backhand from Wawrinka plops into the net. 

10.00am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych 1-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): An emphatic 
forehand from Wawrinka levels it.

10.00am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Berdych* 1-0 Wawrinka (*denotes server): A tight 
backhand from Wawrinka goes long.

9.59am GMT 

Second set: Berdych 3-6, 6-6 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka has to hold 
again and a massive forehand down the line from Berdych makes it 0-15. A chance 
here, but he's forced back by Wawrinka and nets a backhand. 15-all. A perfectly 
positioned ace makes it 30-15, before Wawrinka misses a backhand as Berdych 
mixes it up by attacking the net. 30-all. But then Berdych loses his footing a 
little on the baseline and sends a backhand long to make it 40-30. Wawrinka 
swooshes an ace down the middle - Berdych challenges unsuccessfully - and we'll 
have ourselves a tie-break.

9.54am GMT 

Second set: Berdych* 3-6, 6-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): What a get from 
Berdych on the first point! Wawrinka mishits a backhand down the line but 
Berdych somehow reaches it low down and scoops a magnificent half-volley over 
the net for a winner. 15-0. A Wawrinka return then drifts wide. 30-0. Another 
goes long off a body-serve. 40-0. A second-serve ace and it's a love hold. Over 
to Stanley.

9.51am GMT 

Second set: Berdych 3-6, 5-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka needs to 
hold to stay in the second set. Now wouldn't be a bad time for Berdych to get a 
break point for the first time. He could do without Wawrinka hitting three 
successive aces, though. 40-0. Mightily impressive. Then he wallops a forehand 
wide. Oh. But he holds comfortably. Pressure? What pressure?

9.48am GMT 

Second set: Berdych* 3-6, 5-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Wawrinka is 
surprisingly making a few errors on the backhand. It's being suggested by Mats 
Wilander that it's because Berdych hasn't targeted it, meaning Wawrinka hasn't 
been able to find his range properly - now when he has to hit it, the aim is 
askew. Nothing wrong with Berdych's all of a sudden, though - at 30-0, he 
stoops low and pins one into the corner. Berdych holds to love and the pressure 
is on Wawrinka now.

9.45am GMT 

Second set: Berdych 3-6, 4-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): This was the point 
at which Berdych was broken in the first set. Will lightning strike ... well, 
not exactly twice. But you catch my drift. He wins the first point ... but 
Wawrinka wins the next three with some fine serving. An ace ends any hope 
Berdych might have had of breaking.

"I'm a bit flummoxed over the Sheffield Wednesday crack, I assume that Berdych 
is kicking balls around.... should be my favourite Djokovic out there, boo hoo, 
but it's still nice to see new blood coming up, the Federer/Nadal/Djokovic 
monopoly is getting rather monotonous," says Diana Badder in Spain. "Nadal is 
our national hero of course and everything revolves around him although I 
personally don't like his aggressive bullying style."

Berdych is in chunky blue and white stripes - or a Sheffield Wednesday kit.

9.40am GMT 

Second set: Berdych* 3-6, 4-3 Wawrinka (*denotes server): From, 30-0, two poor 
errors from Berdych allows Wawrinka to level. He glares at his box. Not a great 
sign. A big serve makes it 40-30 but Wawrinka forces deuce with a cracking 
forehand. Berdych looks in disbelief at the line. That bloody line. That was 
the 11th forehand winner; a superbly angled 12th brings up break point. Berdych 
saves it with a big serve and then ekes out the advantage with a cute volley. 
That's more like it. Berdych holds, though it was a close run thing. 

9.34am GMT 

Second set: Berdych 3-6, 3-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A rare backhand miss 
from Wawrinka makes it 0-15 but Berdych's returning has been scratchy, meaning 
he's not been able to build any momentum on the Wawrinka serve. It goes to 
30-all but Wawrinka then wrong-foots Berdych with a change of direction with a 
forehand, before the Czech hits a forehand into the net. Berdych rarely has a 
foothold in the rallies because of Wawrinka's intelligence, so he can't unleash 
his power.

9.30am GMT 

Second set: Berdych* 3-6, 3-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Berdych is starting 
to hit those aces, though when Wawrinka has time, he is capable of playing some 
outstanding shots, especially on the backhand side. Berdych is taken to 40-30 
but he clobbers a forehand into the corner and then shows a light touch at the 
net to hold, demonstrating the more subtle side to his game. "It's been a rough 
season so far for Sheffield Wednesday, so I'm delighted to see one of our 
players reach the semi final of the Australian Open," says Andy Hockley of 
Tomas Berdych. "Torn between wanting him to win, or thinking we might need him 
at Rochdale this weekend."

9.26am GMT 

Second set: Berdych 3-6, 2-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka is having a 
bit more trouble on serve in this set. A tetchy debate with the umpire unfolds 
at 30-all over a disputed line call. Wawrinka loses the debate; he was never 
going to win. So he wins the next point instead, a punchy forehand doing the 
damage. An angry ace ends the issue. 

9.21am GMT 

Second set: Berdych* 3-6, 2-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): A double-fault from 
Berdych, the first of the match, makes it 0-15 but he doesn't let him affect 
him; some rock-hard serving and it's soon 40-15. One more ace and Berdych 
holds. The Czech will be encouraged by his response to the misery of the first 
set.

9.19am GMT 

Second set: Berdych 3-6, 1-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Berdych seems to be 
playing a bit more freely. At 0-15, he starts to let rip with his forehand but 
Wawrinka stands firm and eventually one lands long. 15-all. It's soon 30-all 
but Wawrinka takes charge of the next rally, pulling Berdych all over the place 
and then landing the final blow with a forehand winner. We go to deuce but 
Wawrinka is never in trouble.

9.13am GMT 

Second set: Berdych* 3-6, 1-0 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Wawrinka goes up 
0-15 but Berdych responds well, taking advantage of some forehand misses to 
assume a 40-15 lead. He rattles an ace down the middle to hold.

9.10am GMT 

STANISLAS WAWRINKA WINS THE FIRST SET 6-3!

Wawrinka, then, serving for the first set. He quickly assumes a 15-0 lead and 
Berdych then skelps a backhand return wide to make it 30-0. Two points. The 
moment possibly gets to Wawrinka, though, as he nervily hits long to make it 
30-15 and then fails to finish off a forehand - Berdych defends well and 
Wawrinka, forced to stoop low, dabs a volley into the net to make it 30-all. A 
huge serve brings up set point, though, and a bouncing second serve unbalances 
Berdych, who sends his backhand wide to give Wawrinka the first set! He's been 
the better player. Berdych hasn't got going at all and what a crazy miss that 
was on break point in the previous game.

9.06am GMT 

First set: Berdych* 3-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): New balls! New balls! New 
balls. Berdych doesn't seem to like them. Two missed forehands give Wawrinka a 
look at 0-30. Dangerous territory for Berdych, promising for Wawrinka. Berdych 
responds with a smash and a "Come on!" to make it 15-30 but Wawrinka then 
overpowers him, a stinging forehand forcing a submissive Berdych to hit into 
the net, making it 15-40. Break point. The first of the match. What can 
Wawrinka do? As it turns out, he doesn't have to do much. Berdych looks certain 
to save the first break point as a defensive shot from Wawrinka loops up into 
the air but having watched it all the way, Berdych splatters his smash wide! 
What a miss! Dearie me. Wawrinka will serve for the first set.

9.00am GMT 

First set: Berdych 3-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): For the first time, 
Berdych wins the first point when returning - he reads a Wawrinka serve and 
crunches a forehand down the line. It's not coming back. It stayed hit. But two 
errors on the following returns make it 30-15. Wawrinka seals it with an ace. 
No one's budging an inch on serve yet - there's barely been a sniff of a break 
point. I'm starting to wonder if they even exist or if they're make-believe.

8.57am GMT 

First set: Berdych* 3-3 Wawrinka (*denotes server): If he was worried, he's 
not showing it. Two aces make it 30-0. It's one way to stop Wawrinka hitting 
those winners. He holds to 15.

8.54am GMT 

First set: Berdych 2-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): What a shotmaker Wawrinka 
is! Another explosive forehand leaves Berdych with no chance on the first point 
and then he charges forward to put another forehand away for 30-0. He's in the 
mood. Berdych then tries to attack a second serve but his backhand fizzes 
inches wide - Wawrinka shows him how it's done with a stunning forehand down 
the line to hold to love. After a nondescript but solid start, he's starting to 
hit his shots, and that's got to be worrying for Berdych.

8.52am GMT 

First set: Berdych* 2-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Hello! Berdych starts to 
whir up the power, flexing his muscles, but Wawrinka stands up to him and 
batters a cross-court forehand from right to left, the ball landing just on the 
line for 0-15. A mishit forehand follows but when Berdych lopes forward, his 
approach shot is dreadful and Wawrinka isn't about to miss with his backhand 
pass. Easy, really, and it's 15-30. Wawrinka can't deal with an awkward serve 
from Berdych, though, and the Czech then bangs an ace down the middle. 40-30. 
Another Wawrinka return goes long and Berdych holds from 15-30 down.

8.47am GMT 

First set: Berdych 1-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A lovely start to this 
game from Wawrinka, who Federers forward and drops a cute backhand volley over 
the net for 15-0. It's soon 40-0 but Wawrinka then misses a gimme of a volley 
to make it 40-15 - a sign of tightness. He then knocks a backhand long. 40-30. 
40-0 soon becomes deuce, a slice drifting long. Sloppy. Very sloppy. But a big 
serve gets him out of an awkward situation. That's followed by his first ace.

8.43am GMT 

First set: Berdych* 1-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): It's very quiet on court. 
Both players seem understandably nervous in these early stages, the match yet 
to take off. A Wawrinka forehand clunks into the net to make it 15-0 to 
Berdych. Big serving from Big Berd makes it 40-0, before he slashes a forehand 
past the baseline to make it 40-15. But a booming ace out wide seals the hold.

8.39am GMT 

First set: Berdych 0-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The first Australian Open 
mens' semi-final is underway. Stanislas Wawrinka won the toss and chose to 
serve. The corporates haven't bothered to turn up for the start. Perhaps 
someone can be employed to bash their heads together. It's a fairly quiet start 
from both players, errors from both ends giving Wawrinka a 30-15 lead. A 
Berdych return fails to beat the net, making it 40-15. Another makes it a 
comfortable hold for Wawrinka.

8.37am GMT 

Tok! Tok! Tok! The players are knocking up. Wawrinka is in a white t-shirt and 
red shorts. Berdych is dressed as a deck chair.
 Tomas Berdych warms up. Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA 
8.22am GMT 

The last time these two met was the fourth round of the US Open last year. 
Berdych won the first set but Wawrinka fought back to win 3-6, 6-1, 7-6, 6-2. 
If he's in the same form he was against Djokovic, I make him the favourite to 
reach the final - though there is that sneaky feeling he might struggle to 
maintain that intensity.

8.10am GMT 

A SONG FOR EACH COMPETITOR

One for Berdych.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WNrx2jq184&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WNrx2jq184>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WNrx2jq184&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WNrx2jq184&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WNrx2jq184>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WNrx2jq184&media=>
close 
And a cheery number for Stan.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrguzOOX2gjI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrguzOOX2gjI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrguzOOX2gjI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrguzOOX2gjI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrguzOOX2gjI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrguzOOX2gjI&media=>
close 
5.45pm GMT 

Novak Djokovic has won the past three Australian Opens. What an achievement it 
would be to win four in a row. Many people expected him to do it. And then 
Stanislas Wawrinka tore up the script.

Truth be told, we're still trying to get our heads round Djokovic's absence 
from this semi-final. But like Wawrinka cares. What a performance it was from 
Stan the Man, who finally saw off his nemesis in five sets, having 
agonisingly lost to him in th Australian Open and the US Open last year. Yet 
he's been playing some terrific tennis for some time now; his backhand is as 
beautiful as ever, his forehand is venomous, his serve a major weapon and, most 
crucially, his movement has improved immeasurably. It's taken a while for 
Wawrinka to realise his potential bit what a treat it is to see him playing 
like this.

He'll have the support of the neutrals, no doubt. But like Tomas Berdych will 
care. Yes, there is another man in this semi-final. It's not all about 
Wawrinka, much as we'd like it to be. And tennis has a funny way of working 
sometimes - most wanted Sabine Lisicki to beat Marion Bartoli in the Wimbledon 
final and look what happened there. No one is talking about Berdych, who has 
gone about his business quietly, and that lack of pressure and expectation 
might suit a man who has plenty of experience of these situations. Wawrinka has 
more natural talent but Berdych, with that enormous wingspan and booming ground 
strokes, will be a dangerous foe if he gets into his long stride. This one is 
fascinatingly poised, then. Strap in. 

Play begins at: 8.30am

Updated at 8.05am GMT
 