
Toni Erdmann <https://www.theguardian.com/film/toni-erdmann>, an uproarious 
German comedy about a tricky father-daughter relationship, has swept the board 
at the European film awards, becoming the first movie made by a woman to win 
the top prize in its 29-year history.


Maren Ade’s movie won best film, best acting awards for the two leads and for 
Ade herself best screenwriter and best director – the latter from a strong 
shortlist that also includedKen Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach>, Pedro Almodóvar, Cristian Mungiu 
and Paul Verhoeven.

“And finally some statistics,” said Ade, accepting her award at the end of a 
long night in Wrocław,Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>. “It is 
the first time that a film made by a woman wins this award and it is 2016.”

The European film awards were created as a kind of European arthouse 
alternative to the Oscars in 1988, when Krzysztof Kieślowski’sA Short Film 
About Killing <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/feb/24/artsfeatures1> won 
best film.

Loach has previously done well at these awards, winning for Riff-Raff and Land 
and Freedom, and there was a positive mood around his and Paul Laverty’s 
blistering, stomach-punching portrait of British life below the poverty line,I, 
Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftoni-erdmann-sweeps-the-board-at-european-film-awards-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac7fa4ab1a6b025d50cd811dec2de4937a71128%2F0_6_4582_2749%2F4582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toni%20Erdmann%20sweeps%20the%20board%20at%20European%20film%20awards%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftoni-erdmann-sweeps-the-board-at-european-film-awards-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toni%20Erdmann%20sweeps%20the%20board%20at%20European%20film%20awards%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftoni-erdmann-sweeps-the-board-at-european-film-awards-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac7fa4ab1a6b025d50cd811dec2de4937a71128%2F0_6_4582_2749%2F4582.jpg>
 Actors, directors and producers of Toni Erdmann with their prizes at the 2016 
European film awards: (from left) actor Hadewych Minis, producer Michel Merkt, 
producer Jonas Dornbach, actor Sandra Hüller, director Maren Ade, actor Peter 
Simonischek, producer Janine Jackowski and actor Trystan Puetter. Photograph: 
Janek Skarżyński/AFP/Getty Images 
But it was not to be. Toni Erdmann was all-conquering, with Sandra Hüller 
winning best actress and Peter Simonischek winning best actor.


The film will not be released in the UK until February, but it was lauded by 
critics at its premiere in the spring in Cannes.

It tells the story of Ines, a serious, sophisticated management consultant, 
and her deeply embarrassing dad, who enjoys farting, practical jokes, comedy 
wigs and joke teeth.

The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/toni-erdmann-review-long-german-comedy-is-slight-biting-little-miracle>
 said it had “a lot of big laughs” and, for all its comedy, it “gradually 
mutates into something darker and more disorientating”. Variety called it“a 
humane, hilarious triumph” 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/reviews/toni-erdmann-review-1201773917/>.

Toni Erdmann did not pick up prizes in Cannes but is a possible contender for 
best foreign film at next year’s Oscars, with the shortlist due to be released 
in the coming days.

The European film awards ceremony was held in Wrocław, Poland’s fourth biggest 
city, chosen because it is this year’sEuropean capital of culture. 
<http://www.wroclaw2016.pl/>

The Saturday night ceremony was heavy on political message, with the city’s 
mayor, Rafał Dutkiewicz, setting the tone when he said: “There is a wave of 
nationalism going through our continent and nationalism is something similar to 
stinking sweat. One has to wash it from his body. Take a shower, Europe!”

It was an evening when speakers repeatedly talked about the need to stick 
together, about the power of film to transform.

Later the choir of the Wrocław University of Economics sang Zbigniew 
Preisner’s Song for the Unification ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

There was fun too, particularly when a miked-up elderly woman was mistakenly 
guided carefully from the wings to collect the best production designer award 
for her outstanding work on Suffragette. At the same time, Alice Normington – 
the actual production designer of Suffragette – bounded on to the stage to 
receive her prize.

“I don’t understand why I’m here or what I’m doing but this is a beautiful 
prize,” said the other woman before being slowly guided off, stately as a 
galleon.

“I’m so confused now, I’m not quite sure what’s going on,” said Normington, 
who was encouraged to give her acceptance speech into the host’s face 
microphone. He asked the next winner for ID.

The evening also saw a European achievement in world cinema honorary award 
going to the actor Pierce Brosnan who, in his acceptance speech, rallied the 
audience to come together to make sense of what was happening in the world.

“To all you young men and women out there … keep good strength, keep good 
faith, whatever the politics of your nation is, be truthful to yourself. Be 
bold and go forth … make movies.”

A lifetime achievement award was presented to screenwriter Jean-Claude 
Carrière and an honorary award given posthumously to the Polish director 
Andrzej Wajda, who died in October. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/oct/10/acclaimed-polish-film-director-andrzej-wajda-dies-aged-90>

Best European comedy was given to the Swedish film A Man Called Ove and the 
documentary award was won byGianfranco Rosi for his film about the migration 
crisis, Fire at Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/fire-at-sea-review-masterly-and-moving-look-at-the-migrant-crisis>
.

Although Loach spent the evening in his seat – across the aisle from 
Almodóvar, who also missed out – members of the academy did get the chance 
earlier in the day to hear a speech in which he reflected on Britain’s exit 
from the European Union.

He had voted to remain but it was a difficult decision, he said, criticising 
the European Union for being in thrall to big business and privatisation.

The uncompromising 80-year-old director, who changed his mind about retirement 
to make I, Daniel Blake, called on film-makers to keep fighting the fight, 
although he joked that they did not have to follow his example.

“For God’s sake, no more social-realist films, please! Make comedies, make 
fantasies, the films should be as broad as a library, full of the wildest 
imagination you can imagine.

“We need to make films in many different ways and many different styles, in 
ways I can’t begin to imagine – but you can.”

 