
The problem with most garden books is that they are written by gardeners. 
Gardeners have a habit of filling pages and pages with homework-sounding words 
such as rhizosphere and loamy and pH, which isn’t even a word. It all sounds as 
exciting as algebra.


The other problem with garden books is that so many of them blabber on about 
an idea of nature that came into fashion in the time of hoop skirts and 
whalebone corsets. I’m talking about the ideology of the famed 19th-century 
conservationistJohn Muir <https://discoverjohnmuir.com/>, who wrote about 
wilderness as a place “to play in and pray in, where nature may heal and cheer 
and give strength to the soul”. I want to read about this fey “sacred space” 
concept of nature about as much as I want to slap on a lace bonnet and ride 
side-saddle.


Wouldn’t it be great to read a garden book that didn’t have the personality of 
a maiden aunt? Yes, it would! And that’s why I, a dedicated non-gardener, wrote
Gardens of Awe and Folly 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gardens-of-awe-and-folly.html>: to show that 
gardens aren’t demure! Gardens are sexy, and scary, sometimes even scandalous, 
and best of all, gardens are the perfect settings to serve up ice-cold 
cocktails and red-hot gossip … and any one of these books is the equivalent of
that kind of garden party.


1. Rambunctious Garden by Emma Marris 
<http://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/07/28/q-and-a-the-rambunctious-garden/?_r=0>
This book will set your hair on fire if you are the least bit sentimental 
about the sanctity of capital-n Nature. Marris, a science journalist and 
metaphorical flame-thrower (from Seattle), has taken the gutsy stance that the 
environmental purity imagined by John Muir and his ilk vanished about 6,000 
years ago with the planting of the first gardens in Mesopotamia, and can’t be 
restored. Happily, she offers a new, improved nature with her stories of 
radical rewilding, human-assisted migration of flora and fauna, and – gasp – 
the ecological godsend of invasive and exotic species. Oh yes, she goesthere.

2. The Gardener of Versailles: My Life in the World’s Grandest Garden by Alain 
Baraton <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gardener-of-versailles.html>
Baraton has been tending the Grand Parc de Versailles for more than 40 years, 
beginning as a ditch-digging gardener’s assistant in 1976 and, since 1982, as 
its gardener-in-chief. In this charmingly ardent memoir, Baraton spices things 
up with advice on the gardens’ best hidden corners for trysting, lush 
descriptions of nightfall in the royal groves, and soulful odes to the mighty 
fallen (trees, kings, and previous gardeners-in-chief). Baraton is proof that 
there is such a thing as a debonair gardener.

3. Sunlight on the Lawn by Beverley Nichols 
<http://www.timberpress.com/books/sunlight_lawn/nichols/9780881924671>
Any of the dozen garden books written between 1932 and 1968 by England’s most 
lovable snob would have been a perfect fit for this list. But Sunlight on the 
Lawn, from 1956, stands out for having the tastiest horticultural titbits 
dished up with the most generous helpings of the well-mannered malice at which 
the British gentry excels. Here is the ever-so-genteel Rose, thrusting 
honey-dipped insults at Miss Emily for her weeding methods, who parries with 
awe-inspiring sarcasm. Behind their backs is Mr Nichols, who lives for such 
scandals, stirring things up with his pronouncements on vulgar garden designs 
and tacky floral trends. Delicious.

4. The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-garden-34.html>
Here is a garden that is not only scary, but lethal. You probably already know 
the story of the orphaned Mary Lennox, “the most disagreeable-looking child 
ever seen”, and her rehabilitation of the spooky walled-in garden with the 
killer tree (the one the late Mrs Craven fell out of). But you probably did not 
know that Hodgson Burnett wrote this iconic English fable in the US, in her 
home on Long Island, less than three miles from where I live. This fact 
inspired me to believe that great garden writers can come from anywhere, even 
one’s own dull suburb.

5. The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-prince-21.html>
Another classic tale from Long Island. Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, in exile from 
his native France at the outbreak of the second world war, found himself living 
here, “a haven for writing, the best place I have ever had anywhere in my 
life”. And voila: the tale of the Rose, beloved of the title’s sensitive alien, 
was born. Even more heartening to me, as a self-taught watercolourist, is 
Saint-Exupéry’s artwork, which is, frankly, terrible, and yet beloved around 
the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-gardens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97748c4319778f7e475ae70c262fe9269c56796a%2F0_217_7259_4356%2F7259.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-gardens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-gardens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97748c4319778f7e475ae70c262fe9269c56796a%2F0_217_7259_4356%2F7259.jpg>
 There is such a thing as a debonair gardener … Waterfall, 2016 by Olafur 
Eliasson at the Palace of Versailles, 2016. Photograph: Anders Sune Berg 
6. Second Nature: A Gardener’s Education by Michael Pollan 
<http://michaelpollan.com/reviews/second-nature/>
Pollan writes about dirt (dirt!) and is utterly fascinating, even to a reader 
who has previously stated that this is the exact subject that she most dreads 
in garden books. That’s because dirt, like every other topic Pollan addresses 
(roses, weeds, trees, etc), is only the jumping-off point for a flight of fancy 
that alights on political history, popular culture and class distinctions, all 
the while being both highly entertaining and deeply thought-provoking. Surprise 
surprise, there is a whole lot more to a garden than its planting list. When I 
wrote Gardens of Awe and Folly this is the kind of value-added storytelling 
that I did my best to emulate, because outright plagiarism is wrong.

7. Green Thoughts: A Writer in the Garden by Eleanor Perenyi 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/07/books/07perenyi.html>
OK, this is the most boring title ever for a garden book. Which means that you 
will be all that more pleased by the verve and eccentricity of its author. As 
the American ex-wife of a Romanian baron, Perenyi has gardened in both the old 
and new worlds, in war and poverty, peace and affluence, and, lastly, 
Connecticut. Is she cultured and crotchety? Digressive and droll? Brainy and 
brash? Is she ever. Just read the chapter Onions, and I guarantee you will be 
as smitten with the lady as she is with scallions. One of my most treasured 
possessions is a photograph of Perenyi seated in her backyard parterre, a 
highball in one hand and a cigarette in the other. She lived to be 91, which 
goes to show how healthful the gardening lifestyle must be.

8. Our Life in Gardens by Joe Eck and Wayne Winterrowd 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/15/books/review/Browning-t.html?_r=0>
Nothing could convince me that I might be missing something by not having a 
garden of my own – except maybe this book. This cosy memoir shows the authors 
to be the most companionable and down-to-earth of garden world paragons. Gazing 
ata portrait of artist Rubens Peale 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7e/Rembrandt_Peale_-_Rubens_Peale_with_a_Geranium_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg>
, the authors observe that the subject is holding one of the most beautiful 
flowerpots they’ve ever seen. Well, if puttering about in a herbaceous border 
would make me half as refined, witty, and personable, then I’d gladly grab a 
hoe and have at it.

9. The Potting-Shed Papers by Charles Elliott 
<https://www.quartoknows.com/books/9780711220096/The-Potting-Shed-Papers.html?direct=1>
I began my education as a garden writer by devouring this collection of 31 
essays on gardens, gardeners, and garden history. Elliott roams to wherever his 
hyperactive curiosity takes him, from the invention of the lawnmower in England 
to the discovery of the blue poppy in China, with stops in the gardening 
cultures of Holland and Japan and, oh, almost everywhere else. Read this book 
and learn important stuff about the gardening mindset, such as how much 
determination it takes to grow a California sequoia in Gloucestershire, and how 
nutty and wonderful it is that anyone ever tried to do it in the first place.

10. The New Sylva: <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-sylva.html> A 
Discourse of Forest and Orchard Trees for the 21st Century 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-sylva.html> by Gabriel Hemery, 
illustrated by Sarah Simblet <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-sylva.html>
Lucky you, Guardian readers, to have been born at the right time to feast your 
eyes on this highly anticipated followup to the illustrious Sylva of 1664! As 
in the original, this is an exhortation to Britons to cherish and maintain 
their woodlands, with Hemery writing movingly about forests as both artefacts 
of civilisation and celebrations of tree-dom in your mystically green and 
astoundingly pleasant land.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-gardens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69329d81df18cb62f20bfa5d592bca71790ec438%2F51_304_1192_715%2F1192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-gardens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-gardens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69329d81df18cb62f20bfa5d592bca71790ec438%2F51_304_1192_715%2F1192.jpg>
 Astoundingly pleasant … Vivian Swift Illustration from Gardens of Awe and 
Folly. Photograph: Bloomsbury 
• Gardens of Awe and Folly by Vivian Swift is published by Bloomsbury, priced 
£18.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop for £15.57 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gardens-of-awe-and-folly.html>.
 