
Queen Levana, The Lunar Chronicles 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cinder.html> by Marissa Meyer

Levana is capable of mind-controlling others, and glamouring herself to appear 
more beautiful than she is. That, combined with her desire to murder the 
emperor, kill her family, and take over the world gives her a spot on the top 
10.

Amarantha, A Court of Thorns and Roses 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280824/> by Sarah J 
Maas

She wears her worst enemy’s eye on a ring so that he can watch all the 
atrocities she commits after she killed him. You can’t say she isn’t original. 
Extra points for having all the men under her control and being the Fae Queen 
too.

Eoin Colfer's top 10 villains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/may/23/eoin-colfer-top-10-villains>
Astrid and Athos Dane (The Dane Twins), A Darker Shade of Magic 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/darker-shade-of-magic.html> by VE Schwab

Purely sadistic, cunning and terrifying, the Dane twins have an incredible 
amount of hard won power. I can’t quite pinpoint it, but something about them 
sends chills down the spine.

Professor Moriarty, Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle

No list of villains would be complete without this criminal mastermind, who 
needs no explanation. If you haven’t already read the original Sherlock Holmes 
stories, what are you waiting for?

President Snow, The Hunger Games 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-12.html> by Suzanne Collins
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftop-10-villains-in-ya-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441894692086%2Fb3d9d85b-79f9-493c-af0f-f7d2e16f86ae-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20villains%20in%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftop-10-villains-in-ya-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20villains%20in%20YA%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftop-10-villains-in-ya-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441894692086%2Fb3d9d85b-79f9-493c-af0f-f7d2e16f86ae-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Donald Sutherland portrays President Snow in a scene from The Hunger Games: 
Mockingjay Part 1. Photograph: Murray Close/Lionsgate/AP 
You have to be pretty heartless to send 12 children to their deaths every 
year. And the thing with the roses makes him scary in a less traditional way.

Natasha, The Bone Season <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bone-season-2.html> 
by Samantha Shannon

She forces someone who committed treason against her to marry her as a 
punishment, which is all kinds of creepy.

Derek Landy's top 10 villains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/mar/01/derek-landy-top-ten>
Thiago (The White Wolf), Daughter of Smoke and Bone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/daughter-of-smoke-and-bone.html> trilogy by 
Laini Taylor

The things he does are horrific in so many ways, and Karou having to 
masquerade as him after what he does to her makes it so much worse.

Dolores Umbridge, the Harry Potter series by JK Rowling
 ‘Every bit as reprehensible as Lord Voldemort’ ... Imelda Staunton (left) as 
Dolores Umbridge in the 2007 film adapatation of Harry Potter and the Order of 
the Phoenix. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Like the Apparat, Umbridge doesn’t even admit to being evil. She hides behind 
pink and kittens, and terrifies us a lot more than Voldemort, the main villain 
of the series, because of how easily she gets away with what she does.

Men in general, Only Ever Yours 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/only-ever-yours.html> by Louise O’Neill

Top 10 ways to be evil in children’s books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/17/top-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe>
Because of how far they must have had to go to let things get to the stage 
they have got to in the book.

The Apparat, the Grisha Trilogy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ruin-and-rising.html> by Leigh Bardugo

So it was a tough choice between the Apparat and the Darkling, who are each 
brilliant villains in their own right. However the Apparat hides his true 
intentions behind religion, and pretends to be a friend to Alina when in 
reality, he is just as bad as the Darkling.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
Is there a books issue you’re just burning to write about? Join the Children’s 
books site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and you could do just that!
 