
Books by trans-identified authors have traditionally fallen into two 
categories: memoir and theory. The memoir came first –Lili Elbe 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lili_Elbe> (subject of the film The Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/eddie-redmayne-first-trailer-the-danish-girl-transgender-biopic>
) was one of the first recipients of sex-reassignment surgery, supervised by
pioneering sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnus_Hirschfeld>. Elbe died following an 
operation in 1931, but two years later,Man Into Woman 
<http://www.theskinny.co.uk/sexuality/lgbt/lili-gerda> was published. It was a 
strange text: edited by “Niels Hoyer”, the pen name of Ernst Ludwig Jacobson, 
it also used pseudonyms for Elbe and her friends. However, it launched a genre 
that developed in parallel with gender identity clinics’ management of people’s 
transitions and mass-media interest in transsexual and transgender people. The 
most widely read example in Britain remainsConundrum 
<http://medhum.med.nyu.edu/view/12261> by Jan Morris 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/1251/the-art-of-the-essay-no-2-jan-morris>
, published in 1974.


Trans: A Memoir by Juliet Jacques review – an honest account of gender 
transition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/23/trans-a-memoir-juliet-jacques-review-gender-transition>
By the late 1980s, authors were questioning the conventions of these memoirs, 
in particular how they represented the space between “male” and “female”– or 
failed to. They also spoke out both against gender identity clinics which told 
service users to keep their histories secret andtransphobia within second-wave 
feminism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feminist_views_on_transgender_and_transsexual_people>
.Artist/activist Sandy Stone 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandy_Stone_%28artist%29> brought these concerns 
intoThe Empire Strikes Back: A Post-Transsexual Manifesto 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandy_Stone_%28artist%29>, which circulated in 
early online communities. Opening some fascinating possibilities, it suggested 
that trans writers consider themselves “as a genre – a set of embodied texts 
whose potential for productive disruption … has yet to be explored”.

A range of theoretical texts followed, which sought to give a language to 
trans and genderqueer identities, self-defined rather than imposed. They aimed 
to organise a community and stimulate discussion within it, and the memoir – 
seen as written for the benefit of outsiders – became less popular. But most of 
these works drew on personal experiences, and in a time when autobiographical 
writing is in fashion, with many writers explicitly using their own lives in 
novels, such works can serve a useful purpose in bringing trans politics, 
history and culture to a wider audience in an accessible way. I’ve tried to do 
this with Trans: A Memoir, and these are some of the books that have inspired 
me.

1. Cobra by  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-severo-sarduy-1491791.html>
Severo Sarduy 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-severo-sarduy-1491791.html> 
(1972)
Where trans people have appeared in literary fiction, as minor characters, 
they have often served as a cipher for an author’s opinions about gender or to 
make scenarios more exotic. One exception is this novel by Cuban author Severo 
Sarduy, which put a transvestite who aims for physical transformation at its 
core. It seldom addresses any challenges of cross-gender living, instead being 
a radical, witty experiment with literary form, praised by Roland Barthes inThe 
Pleasure of the Text 
<https://emberilmu.files.wordpress.com/2011/08/roland-barthes-the-pleasure-of-the-text.pdf>
, but it is immersed in mid-20th century drag and transgender subculture.

2. Stone Butch Blues by  
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/11/24/leslie_feinberg_s_stone_butch_blues_is_a_great_novel_everyone_not_just_queers.html>
Leslie Feinberg 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/11/24/leslie_feinberg_s_stone_butch_blues_is_a_great_novel_everyone_not_just_queers.html>
(1993)
One of the first novels to seriously explore the gender identity of its 
protagonist, and written by the author ofTrans Liberation 
<http://www.transgenderwarrior.org/writings/pinkblue/pinkbluehome.htm> and 
Transgender Warriors <http://socialistreview.org.uk/366/transgender-warriors>, 
Feinberg’s book follows “stone butch” Jess Goldberg through small-town America, 
bars and factories, dealing with sexual violence, discrimination from the 
police and the medical establishment, before eventually deciding to stay safe 
and live as a man. It’s a moving insight into the difficulties of 
trans-masculine existence, made all the more powerful for its incorporation of 
Feinberg’s own experiences.

3. Gender Outlaw by  
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/kate-bornstein/gender-outlaw/>Kate 
Bornstein 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/kate-bornstein/gender-outlaw/> 
(1994)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Ftop-10-transgender-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445419062745%2F5708553b-e831-4088-ac27-680b86811b96-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20transgender%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Ftop-10-transgender-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20transgender%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Ftop-10-transgender-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445419062745%2F5708553b-e831-4088-ac27-680b86811b96-1020x612.jpeg>
 Gender outlaw ... Kate Bornstein. Photograph: D Dipasupil/FilmMagic 
Sold as “an account of Bornstein’s transformation from heterosexual male to 
lesbian woman, from IBM salesperson to playwright and performance artist,”Gender
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Outlaw made a demand for a new 
writing style that would help outsiders understand transgender experiences. It 
politicised the memoir in a bold new way, hooking autobiography into 
discussions of gender identity and sexuality, transphobia and transgender 
artists and writers past and present.

4. Man Enough to be a Woman by  
<http://forbookssake.net/2010/08/10/grrl-power-man-enough-to-be-a-woman-by-jayne-county/>
Jayne County 
<http://forbookssake.net/2010/08/10/grrl-power-man-enough-to-be-a-woman-by-jayne-county/>
(1995)
Many transsexual memoirs used surgery as a moment to move from one gender to 
another – County’s brought a couple of paragraphs explaining her decision not 
to botherinto a life story <http://www.jaynecounty.com/> that moved from Dallas 
to New York. It tells how she was present at Warhol’s Factory and the Stonewall 
riots, before becoming part of punk rock scenes in the US and London, andWest 
Berlin’s queer underground 
<http://www.3ammagazine.com/3am/returning-to-the-city-of-lost-souls>. It’s full 
of insights into a vanishing counterculture, and an enjoyable alternative to 
stories that prioritise a desire to fit into bourgeois norms.

5. Sex Changes: The Politics of Transgenderism by  
<http://www.thingsmeanalot.com/2011/03/sex-changes-transgender-politics-by.html>
Patrick Califia 
<http://www.thingsmeanalot.com/2011/03/sex-changes-transgender-politics-by.html>
(1997)
A comprehensive effort to define a past, present and future, exploring trans 
people’s relations with healthcare, feminism, academia and activism. Beginning 
with the categories created by inter-war sexologists, Sex Changes looks at how 
the first transsexual people used memoir to explain their motivations and 
actions, and then how community and culture developed in response to feminist 
attacks. It includes one of the first critical studies of the “transgender” 
texts that followed Sandy Stone, calling for a world in which sex and gender 
are far more flexible.


6. Invisible Lives: The Erasure of Transsexual and Transgendered People by  
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023%2FA%3A1021416423075#page-1>Viviane K 
Namaste <http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023%2FA%3A1021416423075#page-1> 
(2000)
Invisible Lives responded to 1990s theoretical works, grounding itself in the 
realities of cross-gender living. Namaste worried that the notion of 
“transgender” erased differences among gender-variant people, outlining the 
consequences of language’s failure to convey them – trans women being put in 
male prisons, for example. The chapter on gender-bashing, asking if and when 
violence recorded as homophobic was actually regulating people’s gender 
presentations, was a particularly important contribution.

7. Whipping Girl: A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of 
Femininity by <http://www.juliaserano.com/whippinggirl.html>Julia Serano 
<http://www.juliaserano.com/whippinggirl.html> (2007)
Serano’s collection of essays was a blistering combination of attacks on media 
stereotypes, reflections on feminist transphobia and interventions into 
transgender theory. Exploring how privilege and prejudice intersected, Whipping 
Girl is a powerful evisceration of “trans-misogyny” with plenty of suggestions 
for how trans and queer politics could evolve.

8. Transgender History by Susan Stryker 
<http://sealpress.com/books/transgender-history/> (2008)
Like Califia, Stryker focused on sexology, feminism and trans activism. Her 
book started with the industrial city, which allowed new levels of anonymity 
and ultimately the emergence of modern LGBTQI identities, and drew a line from 
1920s Berlin to post-war America. The book takes in theCompton’s Cafeteria 
<http://thetender.us/2009/06/25/remembering-the-comptons-cafeteria-riot/> and 
Stonewall riots, problematic relationships with gay and lesbian politics and 
then new levels of confidence in the early 21st century. It is a highly 
accessible starting point for those wishing to know more about what lies behind 
the apparent explosion in trans visibility in recent years.

9. Testo Junkie: Sex, Drugs and Biopolitics in the Pharmacopornographic Era by 
Beatriz/Paul Preciado 
<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/testo-junkie-sex-drugs-and-biopolitics/> (2008)
Like Bornstein, Feinberg, Serano and others, Preciado also brought personal 
experiences into a theoretical and historical text, but it sets identity 
politics aside to focus instead on how medical technology has changed people’s 
social and sexual possibilities. Testo Junkie alternates between high-octane 
accounts of Preciado’s testosterone use and relationship with writerVirginie 
Despentes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virginie_Despentes> and a history of 
hormone treatments and the industries behind them, heavily influenced byFoucault
 <https://www.nytimes.com/books/00/12/17/specials/foucault-sexuality.html>. 
It’s a dense read, always intelligent and often exhilarating.

10. Redefining Realness by  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285683/>Janet Mock 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285683/> (2014)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Ftop-10-transgender-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b04df60551489d6e3fd5da64e948751ab3960a2%2F341_49_1741_1045%2F1741.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20transgender%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Ftop-10-transgender-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20transgender%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Ftop-10-transgender-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b04df60551489d6e3fd5da64e948751ab3960a2%2F341_49_1741_1045%2F1741.jpg>
 Passionate advocate ... Janet Mock. Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
After coming out as transsexual in an article for Marie Claire 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2014/04/janet-mock-who-will-ever-love-you-if-you-tell-truth>
,journalist Janet Mock became a passionate advocate for trans people, 
particularly those of colour. In Redefining Realness– named after Jennie 
Livingston’s documentaryParis is Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/24/burning-down-the-house-debate-paris-is-burning>
–Mock hooks plenty of information about trans healthcare, communities and 
culture onto a personal narrative. This explains how her gender identity was 
policed and how she did sex work to fund surgery – and why she felt compelled 
to tell her story in the way she did.

 * Trans: A Memoir is published by Verso, priced £16.99. It is available from 
the Guardian bookshop for £11.89 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/catalog/product/view/id/327223/s/trans/>
.
 