
"Anything is possible it's just hard work and grafting," Mo Farah.

That attitude might get you a double Olympic gold but will it get you promoted 
at work? Probably not. Too many people think that doing a good job is all they 
need to get a promotion or an exciting new assignment, but it's unlikely to be 
enough. Here are some tips to make sure your grafting isn't wasted.

Know your goal

The biggest misconception about promotions is that they naturally occur with 
time. It's not enough to think you deserve one; you must understand and clearly 
demonstrate how you meet the requirements. Also, do you want a promotion within 
your current job or are you looking for a position elsewhere? Be clear on what 
you want from the offset so you can take the right action to help you get there.

Get your boss on your side

If you are aiming for an internal promotion you need to get your boss on your 
side. Schedule a one to one review meeting and let him/her know that you want 
to find out how you can be more effective at work.

Seek honest feedback from your manager on how you match up to higher levels 
within your company. You may need to learn to take a more strategic rather than 
tactical view of your organisation. Too many people only see their organisation 
through the view of their own department or profession. Look broader into IT, 
marketing and do some competitor analysis.

Help your boss

Set up a meeting with your boss to find out more about their objectives, so 
you can focus on helping him or her be successful. Volunteer to stay late if an 
urgent task needs completing - it demonstrates commitment to the job.

Anticipate

You can help your boss by anticipating what they will need. While Fran's boss 
was on holiday a new project request came in, with a deadline just two days 
after her boss's return. She collected relevant research and made suggestions 
for how to work on this. Her boss was very impressed and Fran was taken along 
to the meeting and was involved in developing future project proposals.

Keep your boss informed

Our bosses are often unaware of the mini successes we have in our jobs each 
week, so make sure you document them and send your boss a summary each month. 
If you have people who work for you, give your boss an update on their 
successes as well. Make sure you are on LinkedIn and start to get 
recommendations from your boss and the people you work with.

Demonstrate commitment to your own professional development

What courses could you take to increase your knowledge/experience? It doesn't 
have to be a masters level qualification, a short course may be useful. Make 
sure people within your organisation know when you have qualified. I was 
featured in my company newspaper after gaining an Open University degree part 
time alongside my full time job.

Identify trends and look out for new opportunities

In a competitive world your organisation will be seeking new projects, so if 
you notice a gap in the market make sure to let people know. You can produce an 
internal white paper based on research you have undertaken. Make sure your name 
gets known by including your name on the cover and some brief bio data at the 
end.

Look the part

If everyone else dresses casually you will stand out through being a bit 
smarter. Sound advice is to dress as if you are doing the job the level above, 
it helps others to visualise you in a different role. This also can help to 
increase our confidence, it makes us feel better and thus act better.

Get known

Offer to write for the company magazine. Doing so will mean you'll be seen by 
many people within the company. Get chatting to people from other parts of the 
organisation and find out about their work and challenges. You never know when 
this will prove useful, and there is often a need for cross functional project 
teams, the more you are known the more likely your name will be suggested.

Denise Taylor is a double award winning career coach and Chartered 
Psychologist with Amazing People, established in 1998. She is also the author 
of 7 books includingHow To Get A Job In A Recession 
<http://www.howtogetajobinarecession.com>, Now You've Been Shortlisted 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/190665932X/ref=s9_simh_gw_p14_d0_g14_i1?pf_rd_m=A3P5ROKL5A1OLE&pf_rd_s=center-2&pf_rd_r=0ZF9NSDJKDA5WR5YXJ82&pf_rd_t=101&pf_rd_p=467128533&pf_rd_i=468294>
 and Fat to Fantastic

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 