
Ten FTSE 100 leaders enjoyed combined pay rises worth nearly £100m last year, 
including a sixfold increase for Tony Pidgley, chairman of housing groupBerkeley
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/berkeleygroupholdings> Homes.

The figures drew fire from former business minister Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>, trade union officials and 
excess pay campaigners, who pointed to the more modest pay increases handed to 
ordinary workers.
Executive pay rises in percentage terms 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/ceo_pay_rises-zip/giv-125158kZISpoBndyr/>
 Executive pay rises in percentage terms. 
The largest increase in terms of monetary value went to Sir Martin Sorrell, 
chief executive of global advertising group WPP, whoexperienced a shareholder 
revolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/sir-martin-sorrell-pay-deal-faces-investor-revolt-at-wpp-agm>
 over his bumper pay deal this week.

Sorrell’s remuneration leapt from £42.7m to £70.4m last year, a 65% increase 
he defended by saying he reinvests the cash inWPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wppgroup>, which he founded.

The biggest rise in percentage terms went to Berkeley Homes founder-chairman 
Tony Pidgley, whose total deal soared from £3.8m in 2014 to £23.3m in 2015, a 
rise of 520%, courtesy of a new bonus scheme.

After Pidgley, Flemming Ornskov, the chief executive of medical group Shire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire>, was handed the second-largest 
percentage rise, a near sixfold increase from £2.5m to £14.1m.

The third largest rise was awarded to Sky’s Jeremy Darroch, who more than 
trebled his pay to £16.9m, followed by Pascal Soriot ofAstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca>, who more than doubled his 
package to just under £4.9m.

Seven of the top 10 saw their total pay packet at least double from one year 
to the next.

The increases compare with the 2.9% growth in wages for the average UK worker 
reported in September last year, when thefigure hit a six-year high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/16/uk-wages-rising-at-quickest-rate-in-six-years>
.

Cable, who introduced binding shareholder votes on executive pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/14/vince-cable-shareholders-vote-executive-pay>
 and the standardised single figure for chief executives’ pay, said 
remuneration remained a “toxic issue”.

He said the measures he introduced could only work “if shareholders have the 
inclination to argue back, which they won’t if you have a company dominated by 
one individual like Berkeley Homes or Sorrell’s outfit which he built up as a 
private company”.

Cable, who failed in a bid to force companies to publish the ratio of their 
lowest paid staff to the highest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jun/20/vince-cable-executive-pay-climbdown>
, said firms should be required to consult employees about executive pay.

Trade union officials backed calls for employees to be given a role in setting 
executive remuneration levels.

“These are huge increases on already excessive salaries,” said Paul Nowak, 
deputy general secretary of the TUC.

“When workers see only modest increases in their pay packets, it is 
particularly galling to see multimillionaires’ pay skyrocket.”

“But complaining won’t solve this problem. Ordinary workers need to be 
included on executive pay committees to add some common sense and reality to 
boardroom pay.”

Stefan Stern, director of the High Pay Centre, said the increases showed there 
was a case for revisiting the “powerful” idea of forcing firms to publish the 
ratio between executive remuneration and pay on the factory floor.
Executive versus average pay 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/ceo_v_employee-zip/giv-12515Bsp7D0GVXiUW/>
 Executive versus average pay. 
“The message employees are getting from the top is that times are tough and 
they have to exercise restraint and manage costs in a competitive world.

“Then they look up from their work and see what people at the top are getting. 
The restraint they’ve been urged to display themselves is badly lacking.

“We think pay ratios are something that ought to be embraced.”

Other notable recipients of significant pay rises include Ross McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ross-mcewan>, chief executive of Royal 
Bank of Scotland, which is still 72% owned by the government after its 2009 
bailout.

His remuneration more than doubled to £3.78m for a year in which the bank 
reported its eighth straight annual loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/rbs-chief-executive-ross-mcewan-pay-2bn-loss-results-royal-bank-of-scotland>
, of nearly £2bn.

Reckitt Benckiser, the firm behind products such as Nurofen and Cillit Bang, 
nearlydoubled boss Rakesh Kapoor’s deal to £23m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/04/reckitt-benckise-paid-chief-executive-23m-last-year-rakesh-kapoor-share>
 thanks to a bonus scheme but the 81.5% rise only put him eighth place in 
percentage terms.

AstraZeneca and Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> 
pointed out that their pay figures for 2015 were inflated by bonuses that paid 
out for the first time.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the recipients of the biggest rises earn huge 
multiples of what the staff they employ earn, in some cases several hundreds of 
times more.

Sorrell’s £70.4m deal means he earns more than 1,300 times the average WPP 
employee wage of £53,251, based on company data showing it has 124,930 staff 
and total staff costs, including pensions and social security, of £6.65bn.

And the 34,700 staff at Reckitt Benckiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/reckittbenckiser> earn an average 
£33,372, meaning 695 of them would have to club together to match chief 
executive Rakesh Kapoor’s 2015 pay deal.
•Additional reporting by Darya Luganskaya

• This article was amended on 13 June 2016 to correct a statement from Stefan 
Stern about executive pay.
 