
Barry Hines once told me that the novel he’d just finished reading was so good 
that he felt it was pointless to carry on writing his own. We had to agree to 
disagree. When I read something brilliant, it makes me itch to write. There are 
three truly great novels about long marriages that I have waited decades to 
engage with in writing. (Which is not to say that I imagine myself at their 
level, but, as the old saying goes, a cat may look at a king.)

Those novels are: The Tree of Man by Patrick White, The Rainbow by DH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence> and John Updike’s Rabbit novels. 
All three follow a marriage from beginning to end so minutely that the reader 
sees with new eyes the shifts and fascinating complexities within that age-old 
relationship, usually regarded as so dull that it only appears as a backdrop to 
other people’s interesting infidelities.


Conrad & Eleanor by Jane Rogers review – two perspectives on a dying marriage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/10/conrad-and-elanor-by-jane-rogers-review>
In Conrad and Eleanor <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/conrad-eleanor.html>, 
I wanted to write about a long marriage and the balance of power between two 
equally matched partners. I wanted to explore the ways in which memories can 
shift in light of later events, and the ways in which love can turn to hate and 
back to love again. I was interested in giving equal space to both partners’ 
voices and I was keen to explore the fallout from reversed gender roles in a 
marriage where there are children.

I chose “marriages” rather than “relationships” for this list because I am 
fascinated by the baggage that marriage carries. It is a template for living 
together and procreating that has been implanted in us by the Bible, by 
history, by literature, by custom. We still subscribe to the fairytale of it – 
all those white weddings – and give it tax breaks. It is not 
sexuality-specific; lesbians and gays subscribe to it as enthusiastically as 
heterosexuals. Most of us hunger for monogamy, even as we yearn for its 
opposite.

And that’s the subject of these 10 books: how does a couple live together, 
over years, over decades? What does each understand of the other; what do they 
gain, what do they lose? Whatis a long marriage, and how on earth do people do 
it? In the parts that therapy and Relate cannot reach – in the body and the 
heart and the imagination, whatis this ideal so many of us feel we must live? 
Surely only fiction can tell.

1. The Tree of Man by Patrick White 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tree-of-man.html> (1956)
Young Stan Parker clears a patch of Australian bush and builds a log house. 
Over time, he brings along bits of furniture and crockery on his horse and 
cart, and eventually he brings his new wife Amy. They are as innocent and 
isolated as Adam and Eve. Over time, people build on neighbouring plots. 
Children are born, the bush is ravaged by fire and a neighbour murders her 
brother. Stan and Amy both hope for revelation and meaning in their lives. The 
constant to-ing and fro-ing of their (often mistaken) understanding of one 
another is held steadily in focus.

2. The Rainbow by DH Lawrence <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rainbow.html> (
1915)
A Nottinghamshire farmer falls in love with a Polish widow, and marries her. 
She already has a daughter, and they go on to have two more. The novel spans 30 
years. Like Patrick White, Lawrence uses free indirect style to fully reveal 
his characters’ thoughts, but what is more extraordinary is how he manages to 
convey tectonic shifts of emotion, of distance and closeness, that neither 
character can articulate.


3. Rabbit, Run by John Updike 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rabbit-run.html> (1960)
I’m really recommending four books here. The three that follow are Rabbit 
Redux, Rabbit is Rich, and Rabbit at Rest, which together span the lives and 
lifelong marriage of Janice and Harry “Rabbit” Angstrom. For much of Rabbit, 
Run, Updike puts Harry centre stage and restricts the novel to his point of 
view, chronicling his edgy hunger for freedom and sex, his affair with buxom 
Ruth, his frustration with his job and his dozy alcoholic wife. So when the 
novel switches to Janice’s point of view – hurt, betrayed, drunk and utterly 
incapable of looking after a baby daughter – the effect is electrifying. 
Janice’s character gains strength as the novels progress, and this blackly 
comic version of marriage is as eye-opening and sexy and convincing as any I 
have read.

4. Middlemarch by George Eliot  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/28/middlemarch-george-eliot-martin-amis-as-byatt>
(1871-2)
This great classic contains an impressive variety of long marriages, each 
finely drawn and in contrast to its fellows. There’s Lydgate, with his idealism 
and adoration of Rosamond’s beauty, who is brought up short against her simple 
selfishness; Dorothea, whose self-sacrificing devotion runs aground on the 
shallows of Casaubon’s self-importance; ruined Bulstrode with his loyal wife; 
practical Celia and generous Sir James, and sensible Mary Garth with feckless 
Fred Vincy. Eliot plays with the idea of marriage, the illusions that initiate 
it, the deceptions and self-deceptions that damage it, the humour and loyalty 
and selflessness that enable it to survive.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Ftop-10-books-about-long-marriages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2098063318d06e164831a736f1ffdf2b85934eb%2F0_169_4076_2445%2F4076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20long%20marriages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Ftop-10-books-about-long-marriages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20long%20marriages&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Ftop-10-books-about-long-marriages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2098063318d06e164831a736f1ffdf2b85934eb%2F0_169_4076_2445%2F4076.jpg>
 Self-importance and self-sacrifice Jamie Newall (Casaubon) and Georgina 
Strawson (Dorothea) in Dorothea’s Story from in The Middlemarch Trilogy at the 
Orange Tree Theatre in 2013. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
5. A Spool of Blue Thread by Anne Tyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/15/anne-tyler-interview-i-am-not-a-spiritual-person-spool-of-blue-thread>
 (2015)
Tyler often writes about marriage, and always writes true. The first 10 pages 
of this novel are almost entirely dialogue and reveal Abby and Red Whitshank 
brilliantly. They are arguing helplessly over how to handle a phone call from 
their son Denny announcing he is gay. Abby theorises that his getting a girl 
into trouble while he was still at school might have been a symptom of 
homosexuality. Red asks, “Come again?” “We can never know with absolute 
certainty what another person’s sex life is like.” “No, thank God.” Their love 
for one another is as comfortable and worn as the old slippers and colourless 
dressing gown each wears.


6. Ghana Must Go by Taiye Selasi 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ghana-must-go.html> (2013)
This is not really about a long marriage, because Kweku abandons his family in 
the US after being pressurised into conducting surgery on a dying woman. He is 
unjustly blamed for her death and can’t bring himself to tell his wife. He 
vanishes. They move back to different destinations in west Africa and their 
children scatter; they never meet again. Yet they are always present in one 
another’s lives. A romantic, enduringly loving version of marriage, that is 
paradoxically (inevitably?) only sustained through absence.

Top 10 books about middle age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/15/top-10-books-about-middle-age> 
7. The Children Act by Ian McEwan 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/children-act-283455.html> (2014)
McEwan very cleverly reveals just how much the turmoil in Fiona’s marriage is 
affecting her work as a high court judge. The economy and precision of the 
writing enable us to glimpse quite vividly her husband’s side of the story, and 
indeed the whole history of their 35-year-old marriage.

8. To the Lighthouse by Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/sep/07/classics.margaretatwood> (1927)
One of the novel’s many strands, and the one that first fascinated me as a 
young feminist, is the way it contrasts the complexity of Mrs Ramsay’s married 
life with the single life of artist Lily Briscoe. The long marriage itself is 
not precisely the subject of Woolf’s great novel, but the question of what a 
marriage might give and what it might take away from a woman is a key component.

9. Things My Mother Never Told Me by Blake Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/sep/21/features.weekend> (2002)
This is biography: the story of Morrison’s mother’s life, revealing all she 
gave up for her marriage (her Irish family background, her Catholicism, her 
work as a hospital doctor) and how she reinvented herself for a man whom many 
might call domineering and who went on to be unfaithful to her. And yet it was 
a long, solid marriage. Towards the end of it she told her son, “I’ve had a 
good life.” A fine exploration of the complexity and conundrums of marriage.

10. East Coker from Four Quartets by TS Eliot (1943)
I will leave you with a poem. Eliot incorporates a quote from The Boke named 
the Governour, 1531 
<https://archive.org/stream/bokenamedgouerno01elyouoft/bokenamedgouerno01elyouoft_djvu.txt>
, by his ancestor Sir Thomas Elyot, in a passage which beautifully encapsulates 
marriage as ritual and as nature:

… if you do not come too close,

On a summer midnight, you can hear the music

Of the weak pipe and the little drum

And see them dancing around the bonfire

The association of man and woman

In daunsinge, signifying matrimonie –

A dignified and commodious sacrament.

Two and two, necessarye coniunction,

Holding eche other by the hand or the arm

Which betokeneth concorde. Round and round the fire

Leaping through the flames, or joined in circles

… Keeping time,

Keeping the rhythm in their dancing

As in their living in the living seasons ...

The time of the coupling of man and woman

And that of beasts.

I’d be very interested to hear readers’ recommendations of other books on this 
topic.

• Conrad and Eleanor by Jane Rogers is published by Atlantic, priced £12.99, 
andis available from the Guardian bookshop for £10.39 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/conrad-eleanor.html>.
 