
The Glenelg Inn, Glenelg

Sea bream stuffed with chorizo, langoustines from nearby Loch Hourn and wild 
venison from the hills … that's just some of the fare you can tuck into in the 
cosy, beamed bar of this traditional whitewashed inn. There's a roaring fire in 
the grate, seafaring memorabilia – old buoys and a ship's wheel – on the 
wood-panelled walls, fairy lights and a bulging bookcase. The inn is at the end 
of a single-track lane in the pretty village of Glenelg. Tables and benches in 
the garden look over the sea to Skye, a gate leading onto the beach for 
blustery walks. The bedrooms have sea views over the Sound of Sleat, which you 
can cross during the summer on the original Skye ferry, which carries just a 
few cars at a time across the Kylerhea narrows.
• 01599 522273, glenelg-inn.com <http://www.glenelg-inn.com>. Doubles from 
£120 B&B

The Schoolhouse Rooms, Dornie
 The Schoolhouse Rooms, Dornie 
The Schoolhouse Rooms in the pretty, pastel-painted village of Dornie is part 
B&B and part self-catering holiday let. There are three contemporary en suite 
rooms and a communal kitchen in the old stone cottage. Mary Drummond provides 
bread, cereals, fresh coffee and milk but there's no full Scottish fry-up. What 
there is, however, is the freedom to cook for yourself – and Mary's buzzing 
little cafe next door, the walls scattered with local art for sale, rustic 
wooden floors, fairtrade teas and a piano in the corner. Outside, turquoise 
chairs and wooden benches look out over the loch which laps against the most 
photographed castle in Scotland, Eilean Donan (remember thoseBBC trailers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hjOJun2QVUo>?).
• 01599 555482, highlands-info.co.uk/dornie/rooms.html 
<http://www.highlands-info.co.uk/dornie/rooms.html>. Doubles £80 (make your own 
breakfast)

Plockton Gallery and Guesthouse, Plockton
 Plockton Gallery 
Checking into the Red Room or Blue Room of this lovely old manse in pretty 
little Plockton could end up costing you a fortune. Not because owner Miriam 
Drysdale charges too much, but because the place also doubles as an art gallery 
– and we're not talking views of the Cuillins or amateur seascapes. Miriam is 
an artist herself, holds a summer exhibition each year and also offers tuition 
and courses. As you'd expect, the house has bags of character – the breakfast 
room is bright pink – paintings and etchings plaster the walls, and there's 
even a desk with paper and paints in the eaves where guests can while away a 
few creative hours.• 01599 544442, plocktongallery.com 
<http://www.plocktongallery.com/>. Doubles from £90 B&B

Plockton Inn and Seafood Restaurant 

 Plockton Inn 
Plockton is so picture-perfect it's graced many a television screen over the 
years, most famously as the setting for three series of the BBC's Hamish 
Macbeth, starring Robert Carlyle. Yachts moor in a bay ringed by mountains, 
while the waterfront is a charming stretch of seaside cottages, restaurants and 
shops. The Plockton Inn is a cosy old hostelry with 14 comfy rooms split 
between the inn and an old cottage across the street. It also has a popular 
seafood restaurant – owner Kenny smokes his own fish in his little smokehouse 
behind the hotel. There's live music from local musicians Tuesdays and 
Thursdays, a quiz night on Fridays, a log fire in the bar and a good selection 
of malts.• 01599 544222, plocktoninn.co.uk <http://plocktoninn.co.uk>. Doubles 
£52pp B&B

Grants at Craigellachie, Ratagan, Glenshiel
 Grants 
You can gaze out over the Five Sisters of Kintail 
<http://www.walkhighlands.co.uk/kintail/Fivesisters.shtml> (a popular ridge 
walk) from this little restaurant-with-rooms, originally a factor's house on 
the banks of Loch Duich. And if you fancy bagging a munro, three of the peaks 
are over the requisite 3,000ft. There are two sweet little rooms in the main 
house with views of Loch Duich and the mountains beyond, but two in the "but 
and ben" (two-room traditional cottage) at the back are the luxury option: 
smart and contemporary with private decks. The tiny restaurant seats just eight 
and is only open for dinner. For a real treat book a gourmet weekend break with 
a wine-tasting course.
• 01599 511331, housebytheloch.co.uk <http://www.housebytheloch.co.uk/>. 
Doubles from £100 B&B

Seadrift B&B, Avernish, Nostie
 seadrift 
An old tin cottage once stood on the shore of Loch Alsh where you'll now find 
this contemporary A-frame house. Catherine and her husband knocked down her 
late mother-in-law's ramshackle cottage and built an all-singing, all-dancing 
three-bed B&B. The main attraction is the tranquil setting. Veering off the 
busy A87 between Dornie and Kyle of Lochalsh you crawl down a tiny dirt track, 
over a little bridge towards the shore and the peace wraps itself around you. 
The house is light and modern, the view from the bedrooms onto the water, the 
only sound seagulls.• 01599 555415, seadrift.co.uk <http://www.seadrift.co.uk>. 
Doubles from £50 B&B

Tingle Creek Hotel, Erbusaig
 Tingle Creek 
This small family-run hotel on the coast between the Kyle of Lochalsh and 
Plockton looks out across the bay of Erbusaig towards Skye and Raasay. Flinging 
open your window you can taste the salty tang on the air. There are just 12 
contemporary rooms with tartan trim, while in the lounge there's a log fire for 
thosedreich days when the mist rolls in and the Cuillins are lost from view. 
You can walk down to a rocky beach and watch yachts sail past – the water here 
isn't deep enough for them to anchor so they scud across the waves to Plockton 
– or soak up the sunset over Raasay on the decking with a beer. A popular 
reception venue for people getting married at Eilean Donan castle, it's also 
handy for the island ofEilean Ban <http://www.eileanban.org/>, where Gavin 
Maxwell penned Ring of Bright Water. Today you can visit his museum and otter 
hides.
• 01599 534430, tinglecreek-hotel.co.uk <http://www.tinglecreek-hotel.co.uk/>. 
Doubles £90 B&B

Applecross Campsite, Applecross
 Photograph: Alamy 
The remote Applecross peninsula was catapulted into the limelight by Monty 
Halls' first Great Escape series on BBC2. As he tried his hand at crofting, the 
Applecross Inn, already famous for its lively atmosphere and fresh seafood got 
a fair bit of airtime. In the summer there's also the Potting Shed cafe in a 
lovely old walled garden and, at the campsite, the Flower Tunnel Cafe and Broch 
Bar – in a plant-strewn polytunnel. The campsite covers six acres, with 
stunning views to Skye and Raasay. As well as room for 60 tents, there are a 
handful of heated wooden camping cabins.
• 01520 744268, applecross.uk.com/campsite 
<http://www.applecross.uk.com/campsite/index.htm>. Camping huts (sleep four) 
cost £42 for two adults, £10 extra adult, £7 child. Open 1 March-31 October

Loch Dubh B&B, Lochcarron
 Loch Dubh 
Perched on the hillside above the village of Lochcarron with views over the 
loch to the mountains beyond, this contemporary, three-bed B&B has the 
wow-factor design-wise, with its two-storey cathedral-style picture windows. 
Inside things are simple: clean lines, wooden floors and a beige and cream 
palette. It's on a working eight-acre croft, with its own trout loch, a boat 
for sea fishing and salmon and sea trout fishing available on the Carron River.•
 01520 722854,lochdubh.com <http://www.lochdubh.com/>. Doubles £60 B&B 

The Stationmaster's Hostel, Stromeferry
 Stationmasters house, Stromeferry. 
The Stationmaster's House was built in 1888 for the man in charge of the 
Inverness to Kyle of Lochalsh railway <http://www.kylerailway.co.uk/>. The 
stretch from the village of Stromeferry to Kyle, an engineering feat of 
cuttings, causeways and bridges, hugs the shore of Loch Carron and was featured 
in Michael Palin's Great Railway Journeys of the World TV series. Today, the 
old house is a small independent hostel with just 20 beds in a mix of dorms and 
private rooms. The remote setting is perfect for those wanting to get away from 
it all: there are woodland and beach walks – dolphins and otters are regularly 
sighted – from the door and plenty of activities for outdoor enthusiasts. It's 
worth noting that the village has no shop and the nearest pub is in Plockton, 
seven miles away.
• 01599 577212, stationmastershostel.co.uk <http://stationmastershostel.co.uk>
, dorm beds £18, doubles £50, family room from £60, all including help-yourself 
light breakfast
 