
Fans of Inspector Zen, the Italian detective played by Rufus Sewell, will be 
disappointed: the BBChas axed the show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-13221071>, with controller Danny 
Cohen citing concerns that there are too many male detectives cluttering up 
BBC1.

A slew of female-led detective shows are due to grace our screens this year, 
including The Body Farm, a spin-off fromWaking the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/17/waking-the-dead-piers-morgan?INTCMP=SRCH>
. But these shows will be following in the footsteps of some iconic female 
investigators. Here is my top 10 list of female characters who broke boundaries 
and helped redefine the image of the investigator. Who would be on your list?

1. Nancy Drew

The original, the iconic teenage detective, any list of female detectives 
inevitably starts withNancy Drew 
<http://womenshistory.about.com/od/writers20th/a/nancy_drew_rem.htm>, who has 
been solving mysteries for more than 80 years, with Hilary Clinton and Sonia 
Sotomayor among thehigh-profile women 
<http://www.usatoday.com/life/books/news/2010-04-27-nancydrew27_ST_N.htm> to 
cite her as an inspiration. The character may still be a teenager, but she has 
evolved over time – notably some of the early stories were rewritten to expunge 
the racism of the original versions.

2. George

George (emphatically, not Georgina) from Enid Blyton's Famous Five books, is 
similarly essential. These books similarly show many signs of their age to a 
modern reader. But George, the brave, tousle-haired tomboy, was still an 
alternative and important role model for young readers.

3. Miss Marple

Agatha Christie's amateur detective Miss Marple conceals a sharp intelligence 
<http://feministreview.blogspot.com/2008/05/caribbean-mystery-miss-marple-mystery.html>
 in a visage which our culture sees as the epitome of the unthreatening: an 
elderly "spinster" living in the English village of St Meade's. She hasbeen 
reimagined repeatedly 
<http://hoydenabouttown.com/20100319.7343/friday-hoyden-miss-jane-marple/> in 
TV and film adaptations. Confoundingly, Disney is about to remake the character 
yet again, casting Jennifer Garner as Miss Marple in her younger days.

4. Precious Ramotswe

It's notable that the rest of the detectives in this list are white women, 
either American or European. Representations of black female investigators are 
still thin on the ground, butPrecious Ramotswe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precious_Ramotswe> from Alexander McCall Smith's 
series, The Number 1 Ladies Detective Agency, has helped redefine the image of 
the detective. The adaptation by the BBC and HBO, starring Jill Scott as 
Precious, has alsowon praise 
<http://www.womanist-musings.com/2010/06/ladies-no1-detective-agency-comfort-of.html>
 for its positive representation of Botswana.

5. Jane Tennison

DCI Jane Tennison (Helen Mirren) from the ITV series Prime Suspect set the 
mould for police procedurals and female cops struggling in the male-dominated 
workplace. She's tough, she gets the job done. Tennison could be back on our 
screens again soon, in the form of aUS remake 
<http://www.avclub.com/articles/nbcs-prime-suspect-remake-casts-maria-bello-as-its,51997/>
, relocating the show from London to New York, and starring Maria Bello.

6. Veronica Mars

In the mid-2000s, the teenage girl detective evolved into Veronica Mars 
(Kristin Bell), the hero of the eponymous American TV series. Mars is witty, 
tough and a brilliant investigator. But she's not bulletproof: in the first 
episode, we learn Mars was roofied and sexually assaulted at a party. The case 
is dismissed by the police; she must go back to high school with the boys who 
assaulted her.

7. Lis Salander

Much has been written about whether Stieg Larsson's Millennium Trilogy is 
feminist or misogynist 
<http://www.thefword.org.uk/reviews/2009/09/larrson_review>. Lis Salander is 
the strongest argument in the books' favour: her extreme hacker skills are 
crucial to getting to the bottom of the crime and corruption in the books. 
She's an unusual character in this genre: while most amateur detectives work in 
tandem with the police, or do their job for them, Salander has been a victim of 
state violence, she has her own agenda and she works to her own moral code.

8. Sarah Lund

In the first episode of the winding Danish detective series The Killing, we're 
introduced to Sarah Lund (Sofie Gråbøl). She's meant to be moving to Sweden 
with her boyfriend and son, it's her last day on the police force. But Lund 
quickly realises she can't leave her less competent replacement to solve her 
last case, the murder of a teenage girl. The success of the show has led to it 
beingremade in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/04/amc-the-killing-review>
.

9. Temperance Brennan

Temperance Brennan is the hero of a series of detective books by Kathy Reichs, 
then very loosely adapted for television in the US series Bones, where she puts 
her skills as a forensic anthropologist to use on current-day murder cases with 
FBI partner Seeley Booth. Spiky and socially awkward, Brennan is brilliant at 
everything except interacting with other humans.

10. Marge Gunderson

In the Coen brothers' film Fargo, Frances McDormand plays the chief of police, 
Marge Gunderson, who carefully unpicks the homicides that are occurring in the 
small American town. She comes into the film 31 minutes in, only to steal the 
show. Seven months pregnant, she defies the image of the lone and lonely 
hard-boiled detective, an oasis of common sense, competence and good humour.
 