 BA289E DON'T LOOK BACK 1967 Leacock-Pennebaker film with Bob Dylan and Alan 
Price don't look back bob dylan alan price film films movie movies music rock 
Photograph: Alamy 
10. Don't Look Back  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83504/don-t-look-back>

DA Pennebaker's 1967 documentary is significant because it may be the first 
serious attempt to show what was actually happening in rock'n'roll as it 
struggled to find maturity. The film followsBob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> on his 1965 tour of England – just 
a year before the famous one, in which he affronted his traditional folk 
audience by plugging in his guitar – which proved to be a watershed period in 
his life, resulting in his being heckled at the Free Trade Hall in Manchester 
with the sanctimonious one-liner "Judas!".

By then, though, Dylan didn't much care, and, if nothing else, the film proves 
it. Pennebaker has said since that the title came from African-American 
baseball player Satchel Paige, who once said, "Don't look back. Something might 
be gaining on you." This would appear to be Dylan's philosophy of the time: out 
was the fresh-faced folkie look, replaced by leather and shades and a spidery, 
speed-freak demeanour. Gone too were the camaraderies of the old folk scene; 
what shocked audiences when the film was first released was Dylan's 
bite-the-hand-that-feeds attitude, not simply to his audiences but also the 
press, whom he treated with arrogance and contempt.

Seen now, the film is a perfect time capsule, practically the big bang of 
modern rock. Through Pennebaker's film we see for the first time the 
machinations of an artist who knows he has to destroy his past to create a 
future – something the Beatles did in a more passive-aggressive way by refusing 
to tour – but we also see the start of the bemused media's attempt to co-opt 
and contain a youth movement that is growing and evolving by the minute. The 
proto-music video clip that shows Dylan dismissively holding up the lyrics to 
Subterranean Homesick Blues behind the Savoy hotel has become its MTV legacy, 
but in reality Don't Look Back is about much more than that – it is about the 
making of a modern rock star, a role Dylan obligingly played to perfection.
Damon Wise

9. Jailhouse Rock  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89076/jailhouse-rock>
 Original Caption: 1957- Elvis Presley, after participating in a prison riot, 
grimaces as he suffers the severe punishment dealt out by guard Bill Hickman. 
"Jailhouse Rock" ... Elvis stars in MGM's dramatic new story with music, an 
Avon Production directed by Richard Thorpe. Photograph: © Underwood & 
Underwood/CORBIS 
The spoiling of a raw but provincial and naive talent – fleeced by cheating 
managers and ruined by the toxic side-effects of fame – has been the backbone 
of the rock'n'roll movie ever since, but Jailhouse Rock, only Elvis Presley's 
third movie as an actor, after the soporific Love Me Tender and Loving You, 
still gives a jolt. Starring Presley as Vince Everett, a short-fused 
construction worker jailed for manslaughter after defending himself in a bar 
brawl, the film is a particular favourite of Quentin Tarantino, who penned the 
ultimate tribute to it in his script for True Romance. "In Jailhouse Rock," 
says Clarence Worley, "[Elvis] was everything rockabilly's about. I mean, heis 
rockabilly. Mean, surly, nasty, rude. In that movie he couldn't give a fuck 
about nothing except rockin' and rollin', living fast, dying young and leaving 
a good-looking corpse."

That the film was made by 61-year-old Richard Thorpe, a mostly unremarkable 
director for hire since the silent era, is especially fascinating, since the 
film not only nails the dangerous allure of rock'n'roll – Vince frequently 
loses his temper in self-destructive situations – it completely captures the 
generation gap that it caused. On the one hand there is Hank Houghton (Mickey 
Shaughnessy), Vince's prison mentor who sings clapped-out country and western, 
and on the other there is the sophisticated social circle of the film's love 
interest, Peggy Van Alden (Judy Tyler). One incredible scene finds Peggy taking 
Vince to a middle-class party, where the talk is of jazz and a lady who lunches 
describes atonality as a passing phase. "What do you think, Mr Everett?" 
Presley's dead-eyed retort is the film in a nutshell: "Lady, I don't know what 
the hell you talkin' about."DW

8. Saturday Night Fever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76832/saturday-night-fever>
 A groovy kind of memento mori: John Travolta in Saturday Night Fever (1977) 
Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/PARAMOUNT 
It would be difficult to overestimate the influence and importance of John 
Travolta <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-travolta> and Saturday Night 
Fever on images of masculinity in cinema. From the moment we first clap eyes on 
him, as disco wide-boy Tony Manero, strutting through the Brooklyn streets to 
the sounds of the Bee Gees' Stayin' Alive, he owns the screen and the movie. As 
much as Robert De Niro, John Wayne or Steve McQueen, Travolta represented both 
a celebration of male arrogance and inarticulacy – and a pitiless analysis of 
it. As Tony, he is lovably cocksure, but prone to an emotional volatility that 
can be revealed at the drop of a stylus on vinyl. His passion for disco, and 
the tenderness with which he approaches his evenings on the glowing dancefloor 
(with the intensive grooming regime this entails), is strangely ennobling. It's 
away from the disco that his troubles accumulate.

John Badham was brought in after disagreements between John G Avildsen, the 
Oscar-winning director of Rocky, and the film's producer, Robert Stigwood. 
Badham's main accomplishment is to keep the camera on his star, fill our ears 
with the vivid and electrifying soundtrack and evoke Tony's love-hate 
relationship with the grimy vitality of Brooklyn; the dance contest that he 
enters with his similarly restless girlfriend Stephanie (Karen Lynn Gorney) 
becomes a crucible for his dreams, but also a focus for the injustices that 
persist beyond the disco walls. There's a playful rapport between the two 
lovers that gives Travolta ample opportunity to flash his insouciant grin. 
("Nice move, did you make it up?" asks Stephanie admiringly. "Yeah, well I saw 
it on TV first," Tony shrugs, "then I made it up.") The actor quickly became a 
byword for bad career choices and squandered potential, but Saturday Night 
Fever alone is enough to ensure his place in cinema history.Ryan Gilbey

7. This Is Spinal Tap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/81384/this.is.spinal.tap>

A rock mockumentary important enough to be selected for preservation in the US 
Library of Congress, This Is Spinal Tap is one of the all-time greats, and its 
influence looms large to this day. Ostensibly following a semi-forgotten rock 
band's comeback tour, Tap manages to hit so many targets – the labyrinthine 
backstage corridors, the onstage mishaps, the unwanted influence of a resident 
Yoko Ono figure – that several real-life rockers admit that they struggle to 
find the humour in it. But their loss is everyone else's gain.

Even if you haven't seen This Is Spinal Tap, you know about it (there's a 
reason why the BBC iPlayer volume switch goes up to 11), and you've probably 
been quoting it for years. Shriekingly funny, full of standout performances and 
containing some of the best parody songs you're ever likely to hear, This Is 
Spinal Tap is so much better than you could ever expect from a film starring 
Harry Shearer (the voice of Ned Flanders), and Baron Haden-Guest.Stuart Heritage

6. 8 Mile <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/94082/8.mile>
 TO GO WITH STORY TITLED EMINEM 8 MILE** Eminem, portraying Jimmy "Rabbit" 
Smith Jr., appears in a scene from the new semi-autobiographical film, "8 
Mile," in this undated publicity photo. T Photograph: Eli Reed/AP 
John Ford once opined that it was easier to teach an actor to ride than a 
cowboy to act. He never made a musical and thus remained silent on the issue of 
whether it is easier to teach an actor to sing than a singer to act. Rap 
artists, like opera singers, are engaged in a kind of dramatic performance and 
have made the transition quite naturally in movies that reflect the conflicts 
of the black ghettos that inspire their numbers - one thinks of Ice Cube in in 
Boyz N the Hood and and the late Tupac Shakur in Gridlock'd.Eminem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem> is fortunate to make his movie debut 
in 8 Mile.

The film was shot in Eminem's native Detroit, the most rundown of America's 
great cities, in steady decline since the appalling riots of 36 years ago. The 
title refers to the Eight Mile Road, the perimeter that divides the dangerous, 
neglected inner city, home to poor whites and deprived blacks where Eminem was 
reared, from the relatively well-off suburbs where the middle classes reside in 
closely guarded estates. Rodrigo Prieto, the brilliant Mexican photographer who 
shot Amores Perros, turns a remorseless eye on the decaying Detroit where 
Eminem's character, Jimmy "Rabbit" Smith, lives with his feckless, low-life 
mother (Kim Basinger), her four-year-old daughter, and her seedy lover Greg, a 
high-school contemporary of Jimmy's.

Almost everything in the film points towards semi-autobiography: the absent 
father, the uneasy relationships with a wayward mother, a rejected girlfriend 
and a new lover; his hanging out with a multiracial crew (presumably forged in 
high school) dedicated to each other's welfare and, above all, the expressive 
gifts as a rap performer that arise from his specific social situation the way 
that the blues came out of slavery and its aftermath, and country music arose 
from the condition of poor Southern whites.

The film 8 Mile most obviously brings to mind is Saturday Night Fever, a tough 
movie written by an old-time socialist, Norman Wexler, and resembling in tone 
and texture Hubert Selby Jr's Last Exit to Brooklyn until it was bowdlerised 
and reissued in a version that John Travolta's teenybopper fans could see.
Philip French

5. End of the Century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101484/end.of.the.century> 
 UNITED STATES - JANUARY 01: CBGB'S Photo of Johnny RAMONE and RAMONES and Dee 
Dee RAMONE and Joey RAMONE, L-R. Johnny Ramone, Joey Ramone, Dee Dee Ramone 
(Photo by Roberta Bayley/Redferns) Photograph: Roberta Bayley/Redferns 
Despite the fact that End of the Century documents the makers of some of the 
most infectiously ecstatic, amphetamine-fun music of all time, no punk rock fan 
could watch it now without a creeping sense of melancholy. Here are interviews 
with all the major players: gentle Joey Ramone (dead by 2001), rambunctious Dee 
Dee Ramone (who died while the film was being made), and gloriously cussed 
Johnny Ramone (dead the year after it was released), as well as The Clash's Joe 
Strummer, who went to the big Roundhouse in the Sky in 2002. Even CBGB, the 
Bowery venue where they first claimed fame, is no more and the subject of its 
own rock doc. Some still living – founder drummer and producer Tommy, his 
replacement Marky, his replacement Richie, erstwhile bassist CJ – are also 
present and correct, contributing to directors Jim Fields and Michael 
Gramaglia's solid 4/4 band documentary.

It's a track-marks-and-all history, that while celebrating the band's 
vitality, innovation, and huge influence (a savvy map montage illustrates how 
one early tour inspired and seeded groups like the Dead Kennedys and The Cramps 
across the country), it never shies from showing the dark side. Coverage is 
given to Dee Dee's rent boy days, the drugs no rock doc is complete without, 
and how Joey and Johnny fell out with each other so badly the latter didn't 
even go to Joey's funeral. There's even material on their fraught collaboration 
with Phil Spector for the album that gives the film its name, when he 
brandished guns to force them to stay on partying.

But the strength of the film lies in its quietly authoritative assessment of 
their skills as performers and musicians, despite the three-chord austerity of 
the tunes, and how despite their different personalities the core three clicked 
in place together just enough to produce classics like Sheena Is aPunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/punk> Rocker, Blitzkrieg Bop, and I Wanna Be 
Sedated. Best of all, it's such an absorbing enough story even non-fans find 
themselves entranced by this history-sweeping account of irascible figures, 
record-industry ups and downs, and bowl haircuts.Leslie Felperin

4. Buena Vista Social Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79654/buena.vista.social.club> 
 RY COODER Film 'BUENA VISTA SOCIAL CLUB' (1999) Directed By WIM WENDERS 12 
February 1999 CTE15242 Allstar/Cinetext/CHANNEL 4 **WARNING** This photograph 
can only be reproduced by publications in conjunction with the promotion of the 
above film. For Editorial Use Only Entertainment Orientation Landscape Couples 
Film Still Documentary MUSIC Wearing Sunglasses Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/CHANNEL 4 
It could be convincingly argued that this documentary about elderly Cuban 
musicians whom composer-performerRy Cooder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ry-cooder> assembled into a super-group in 
1997 still represents the best thing German director Wim Wenders has made since 
his New German Cinema glory days in the 1970s; or, if you're feeling more 
generous, his last truly good feature film, Wings of Desire (1987). It's 
certainly one of his most influential films. Shot on digital, a massive novelty 
at the time, its jittery handheld aesthetic, bleached-out-in-post colour range, 
and understated mix of atmospheric observational anecdotes intercut with slabs 
of unmediated concert and performance footage have become such music-doc 
clichés it's easy to forget that they were fresh once. This is the film that 
invented them.

What's more, this in many ways is also the movie, a huge unexpected arthouse 
hit, that first introduced many people to world music, enticed thousands of 
tourists toCuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> in search of vintage 
cars, charming old Communist duffers and swinging parties, and launched scads 
of follow-up albums. No doubt many a middle-class dinner party was soundtracked 
by its sultry mix of mambos, boleros and cha-chas.

But, man, the music really is great. The sequence where Ibrahim Ferrer, the 
once-famous bolero singer whom Cooder found shining shoes in the street, sings 
Silencio with Omara Portuondo, is a neck-shiverer of the highest order, a 
moment made all the more tender by their almost-fragile voices, showing off a 
mastery of phrasing that only comes with age and experience. Ruben Gonzalez's 
darting, elegant piano solo represents another showstopper.

Meanwhile, it's impossible not to be seduced by the laid-back, amused vibe as 
the camera follows cigar-puffing Compay Segundo around town in search of the 
titular dancehall, or be charmed by his hopes to father, as a nonagenarian, a 
sixth child. The scene where the members wander around New York awestruck by 
capitalism feels a little staged and gimcrack, but it's but a fleeting duff 
moment in an otherwise enchanting work.LF

3. A Hard Day's Night  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36251/hard.day.s.night>
 After a hard day .... John Lennon and Wilfred Brambell in Richard Lester's 
1964 film A Hard Day's Night 
That Hard Day's Night should still be a movie milestone 50 years after it was 
first released is astounding, since it was conceived as a $150,000 loss-leader 
that would recoup its budget from US album sales. Directed by a jazz fan, 
Richard Lester, who was approved of by its subjects because of his close ties 
with the stars of BBC radio's comedy series The Goon Show, the first Beatles 
movie only had one proviso: that it had to be in cinemas before Beatlemania 
died an inevitable death. "We started shooting in March 1964 and had to be in 
the cinema by July 7, because United Artists genuinely thought the Beatles 
would be a spent force by then," said Lester.

TV writers Johnny Speight and Galton and Simpson were considered but 
unavailable, so Lester turned to Liverpool screenwriter Alun Owen, who was 
inspired by the band's description of their quotidian routine as "a train, and 
a room, and a car, and a room, and a room" to make the film "an exaggerated day 
in the life of the Beatles". With no plot to speak of – the band travel from 
Liverpool to London to film a TV show – Lester was able to focus on character, 
developing the variously sarcastic and playful personas that had been adopted 
by the band in recent months.

More importantly, perhaps, he created some striking musical set-pieces in a 
way that hadn't been done before. Chief among these is a scene in the baggage 
car of a train: the band are enjoying a respite from their fans, playing cards, 
watched by Paul's "grandfather" (Wilfred Bramble), when almost imperceptibly 
the moment segues into the lip-synched song I Should Have Known Better… and the 
modern music video is born. Said Lester, "I like to think it was the first time 
that had happened so casually on film – a development from the Stanley Donen 
musicals, like On the Town or Singin' in the Rain, which had dream sequences 
and gave you that sense of being in two realities at once."DW

2. Control <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/118797/control>

The portraits of Joy Division by the photographer Anton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn> contributed to the band's 
austere iconography; so it's fitting that Corbijn made his feature debut with 
Control, a film about Joy Division's singer Ian Curtis, who killed himself in 
May 1980 at the age of 23. Corbijn shoots in metallic black and white, the 
better to emphasise his cast's sunken cheeks and the grim Macclesfield 
landscape through which Curtis (Sam Riley) trudges in a donkey jacket with 
"HATE" emblazoned on the back.

But Control doesn't leave its subject's sombre mythology entirely unchecked. 
Corbijn and his screenwriter, Matt Greenhalgh (adapting the book Touching From 
a Distance by Curtis's widow, Deborah), recognise that this story has elements 
of the gloomy but dryly funny kitchen-sink films of the 1950s and 1960s, and 
have fashioned their picture accordingly. That means you get something you 
wouldn't expect — laughter amidst the darkness. Most of the humour comes 
courtesy of Rob Gretton (Toby Kebbell), who delivers a monologue (littered with 
a c-word that isn't "control") outlining why he should manage the band. By this 
time, Curtis is married to Debbie (Samantha Morton) and chafing against 
domesticity. Add to this his epilepsy and depression, the pressures of Joy 
Division's success, and an affair with the journalist Annik Honoré (Alexandra 
Maria Lara), and you can see why he was never going to be Manchester's answer 
to Sacha Distel.

The film takes its time cataloguing the singer's indecisive shuttling between 
Debbie and Annik, but then it would be hard to convey the intensity of his 
brief life without this degree of scrutiny, or performances as heartfelt as 
those of Morton and Riley (who also does his own singing). Lara fares less well 
in the sketchier role of Annik but, in her favour, she delivers the immortal 
line "Tell me about Macclesfield" in a Belgian drawl without wincing. A few of 
Corbijn's touches, such as the illuminated Sex Pistols marquee that fizzles out 
the momentJoy Division <https://www.theguardian.com/music/joydivision> is 
formed, are straight from The Beginner's Guide to Biopics. What distinguishes 
the film is its skill in balancing both the public version of Curtis and the 
private one this concealed.RG

1. Dig! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/103298>
 Film - DIG, dir. Ondi Timoner, 2005 
Sometimes, a film-maker just happens to be in the right place at the right 
time to find the wrong people doing the wrong things. Dig! is more than just a 
rockumentary, although it's become a tour-bus favourite and a training manual 
for many a group. It's a real-life story with all the elements of a florid 
morality tale – a sort-of post-grunge Faust with added Spinal Tap. It's a story 
of money versus integrity, of friendships gone sour, of excess, instability, 
ambition, hubris, and every other rock'n'roll lesson that people thankfully 
never learn because there wouldn't be any rock'n'roll if they did.

The two bands at the heart of Dig! – the Dandy Warhols and the Brian Jonestown 
Massacre – are almost footnotes now, to the extent that the film itself could 
be what they're best remembered for. But when we first meet them, though, 
they're preparing for the big time. They're rock stars in waiting: two bands at 
the tip of a 60s-influenced garage/psychedelic sound that's about to go 
mainstream, with two charismatic but flawed frontmen. They love each other's 
music, they play onstage together, they party offstage together, and they're 
here to "start the revolution". When their fortunes diverge, though, that 
friendship and mutual respect turns into something else.

BJM's Anton Newcombe is the wildman of the piece. He's either a talented, 
prolific genius or an egotist with mental health issues, depending on how you 
see it. Despite his projected stardom, Newcombe seems to screw up every break 
the band gets. That leads to a hilarious "industry showcase" during which he 
insults the audience, demands a drink, announces the next song is "about love", 
then gets into a messy onstage brawl with his band members, before the bouncers 
eject him. "They fuckin' broke my sitar, man," he moans, out on the street.

The Dandy Warhols' Courtney Taylor, who narrates the film, admits to being 
less talented than Newcombe (if no less an egotist), but he's more privileged, 
better adjusted and cannier professionally. Thus, the Dandies get the 
major-label recording contract, enter the industry and proceed to sell their 
heroin-chic souls – particularly in the eyes of the BJM, who turn up to the 
Dandies' big-budget video shoot to sneer at the dancing syringes and steal the 
sandwiches. In return, the Dandies audaciously crash the BJM's scuzzy rented 
house and use it as a set for their own photoshoot. Blur versus Oasis seems 
rather tame by comparison. One band falls and the other rises, but neither gets 
the satisfaction they craved, let alone the "revolution".

You couldn't make this stuff up. But at the same time, director Ondi Timoner 
does a magnificent job of shaping a gripping, coherent, energetic story out of 
the vast amount of material she accumulated over seven years of following both 
bands. That's a lot of being in the right places at the right times: to capture 
the roadside police encounters, the hedonistic partying, the barely attended 
gigs that go on till 4.30 in the morning, the myriad bust-ups within the two 
bands, between the two bands, between the bands and their audiences, and so on. 
It was worth it. Despite the specificity, Dig! captures all that's comic and 
tragic about the music business in particular and humanity in general, and it's 
riotously entertaining to watch. As Courtney Taylor succinctly puts it, "If 
it's good, it's fun. And if it's bad, it's funny."Steve Rose

• This article was amended on 22 December 2013. The original said Don't Look 
Back followed Dylan's "famous tour" when he was called "Judas", in fact it was 
the year before. This has been corrected.

More Guardian and Observer critics' top 10s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/top-10-films>

• Top 10 romantic movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/07/top-10-romantic-movies>
• Top 10 action movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/10/top-10-action-movies>
• Top 10 comedy movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/11/top-10-comedy-movies>
• Top 10 horror movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/14/top-10-horror-movies>
• Top 10 sci-fi movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/16/top-10-sci-fi-movies>
• Top 10 crime movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/18/top-10-crime-movies>
• Top 10 arthouse movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/21/top-10-arthouse-movies>
• Top 10 family movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/25/top-10-family-movies>
• Top 10 war movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/28/top-10-war-movies>
• Top 10 teen movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/01/top-10-teen-movies>
• Top 10 superhero movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/04/top-10-superhero-movies>
• Top 10 westerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/08/top-10-movie-westerns>
• Top 10 documentaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/12/top-10-documentaries>
• Top 10 movie adaptations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/15/top-10-movie-adaptations>
• Top 10 animated movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/20/top-10-animated-movies-films>
• Top 10 silent movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/22/top-10-silent-movies-films>
• Top 10 sports movies 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/filmblog/2013/nov/25/top-10-sports-movies>
• Top 10 film noir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/29/top-10-film-noir>
• Top 10 musicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/03/top-10-movie-musicals>
• Top 10 martial arts movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/06/top-10-martial-arts-movies>
• Top 10 biopics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/12/top-10-biopics-movies>
 