
A record 3bn television and radio programmes were accessed on the BBC's 
iPlayer last year, with half of the top 20 TV shows made up of BBC2'sTop Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear>.

The first part of an Africa special of the Jeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> motoring show was requested 
3.4m times on the BBC's on-demand service, making it the most popular iPlayer 
programme in 2013, the corporation has revealed.

The 50th anniversary special of Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> was its third most 
popular show, followed by an episode of BBC3's Jack Whitehall comedy Bad 
Education, which was boosted by being made available online before transmission.

But not even Top Gear could match the dominance of Test match cricket among 
the iPlayer's most popular radio programmes. Despite England's Ashes drubbing 
by the Australians, Test Match Special, which airs onRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4 long wave and the digital station 
5 Live Sports Extra, accounted for 19 of the top 20 requested radio shows.

The total of 2.2bn TV programmes and 800m radio shows requested last year was 
a third up on 2012 with requests on iPads and other tablets growing more than 
100%.

Dan Taylor, the head of BBC iPlayer for BBC future media, said: "The iPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> is giving people greater 
flexibility not only when they watch but where they watch, taking their tablet 
or laptop into kitchens and bedrooms and watching programmes on the commute to 
work or on holiday.

"It started out as a catch-up service and that is still happening, but what we 
have seen is that people are arriving without a particular programme in mind 
and wondering what we have got to watch."

Viewings of programmes downloaded from the iPlayer peak in the morning and 
early evening as people commute, with another peak later in the evening as 
people watch in bed, according to theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
.

Viewers will have longer to watch shows later this year, with the catch-up 
window set to be extended from seven to 30 days, alongside advanced plans for a 
BBC Store in which viewers will be able to buy and download programmes 
permanently.

Following the success of online-only "webisodes" of shows such as Sherlock and 
Doctor Who, the BBC will put more exclusive content on the iPlayer.

The Peter Kay comedy Car Share, his first BBC series which is expected to air 
on BBC1 in the spring, will go on TV only after it has appeared in its entirety 
on the iPlayer.

The on-demand service will be relaunched in the next six months, moving from a 
"purely catch-up service to more of an entertainment destination, helping 
people find the full range and breadth of the BBC's output," said Taylor.

Also in the iPlayer top 20 were episodes of David Attenborough's natural 
history series Africa, the sitcom Miranda, the Saturday night talent show, The 
Voice, and the animated film Madagascar.

Top BBC iPlayer programmes, 2013 

1 Top Gear: series 19, Africa Special, part 1 – 3,422,000

2 Top Gear: series 19, episode 1 – 3,220,000

3 Doctor Who: The Day of the Doctor – 3,144,000

4 Bad Education: series 2, episode 1 – 2,907,000

5 Top Gear: series 19, Africa Special, part 2 – 2,764,000

6 Top Gear: series 20, episode 1 – 2,649,000

7 Top Gear: series 19, episode 2 – 2,625,000

8 Africa: episode 1 – 2,617,000

9 Doctor Who: The Bells of Saint John – 2,610,000

10 Madagascar – 2,417,000

11 Miranda: series 3, episode 2 – 2,406,000

12 The Voice UK: series 2, episode 1 – 2,379,000

13 Bad Education: series 2, episode 2 – 2,359,000

14 Top Gear: series 20, episode 2 – 2,322,000

15 Top Gear: series 20, episode 4 – 2,311,000

16 Miranda: series 3, episode 3 – 2,304,000

17 Doctor Who: The Rings of Akhaten 2,289,000

18 Top Gear: series 20, episode 5 – 2,260,000

19 Top Gear: series 19, episode 5 – 2,226,000

20 Top Gear: series 19 episode 4 – 2,224,000
 