
In 1987, the surrealist artist Leonora Carrington devoted a canvas to a 
sensual, spectral portrait of a red cabbage 
<http://picasaweb.google.com/michelesato/ArtLeonoraCarrington#5288304798487920786>
 – and portrait is the right word, because a cabbage is like a head. Larger and 
heavier than most other vegetables, it is both common and extraordinary. 
Carrington's paintings are often concerned with forms of alchemy, and in this 
work she suggested a latent vegetable magic.

Carrington was taking her place in art and literature's long history of 
cabbage worship, which I discovered while researchingRomantic Moderns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/25/romantic-moderns-alexandra-harris>
, my book about modernism and the English imagination. In the 1930s, the famous 
and hugely influential floristConstance Spry 
<http://designmuseum.org/design/constance-spry> filled an impressive vase with 
curly kale. With all its glossy crinkles and frills, kale seemed to her worthy 
of the kind of admiration more usually accorded to roses or lilies. A few years 
later, Gulley Jimson, the painter hero ofJoyce Cary's novel The Horse's Mouth 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/376465.The_Horse_s_Mouth>, paid another 
tribute: Jimson decides a mural is incomplete without a cabbage patch. After 
all, he thinks, "curly kale, as a work of the imagination, beats Shakespeare".

The roots of this fascination go right back to the ancient Egyptians and 
Greeks, who attributed special powers to the vegetable. The Romans venerated 
the life-giving properties of cabbage such that a whole branch of medicine grew 
up around it. Cabbage leaves were placed on wounds; cabbage juice was mixed 
with honey to salve the eyes. Above all, cabbage protected against the effects 
of alcohol. If eaten in great quantities before a feast, there would be no 
hangover. The cabbage, then, was the ancient licence for excess.

No wonder that, many centuries later, it appealed to the baroque sensibilities 
of Italian artistTommaso Salini, who painted Young Peasant with Cabbages 
<http://www.museothyssen.org/en/thyssen/ficha_obra/203> in about 1610. A 
half-draped boy rises tanned and vigorous from behind the splayed, curling 
leaves of enormous cabbages: a buoyant god emerging from a swirling cabbagey 
sea.

Yet the cabbage has been more readily a symbol of ordinariness, if not the 
dingy and frankly disgusting.Laurence Sterne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/11/laurencesterne>'s Tristram 
Shandy is a novel of voluptuous digressiveness, scornful of the straight 
narrative lines it keeps promising to adopt. When Tristram thinks of straight 
lines – mechanical, inexpressive, unimaginative – the image that comes first to 
mind is the cabbage patch. He cannot tell his story in orderly lines. It would 
be inhuman not to digress a little: "I defy the best cabbage-planter that ever 
existed . . . to go on coolly, critically, and canonically, planting his 
cabbages one by one, in straight lines, and stoical distances . . . without 
ever and anon straddling out, or sidling into some bastardly digression."

Plainness and stoicism: these are familiar ideas in relation to cabbage. In 
the 20th century, with the modernist valorisation of plainness, the cabbage 
acquired new status among the avant garde. Cabbage was a favourite with the 
leading abstract painterJean Hélion 
<http://www.galeriequintessens.nl/tentoonstellingen/jean.html>, who praised its 
very ordinariness. A simple diet could be part of a modern rebellion against 
extravagance and superfluous decoration. So when the architectAdolf Loos 
<http://www.greatbuildings.com/architects/Adolf_Loos.html> campaigned against 
the profusion of ornament on every possible surface in Vienna, he extended his 
argument to include not only buildings, pictures, and trinkets, but food as 
well. The modern citizen, wrote Loos, distinguished himself by his diet: "The 
vegetables he likes are simply cooked in water and served with a knob of 
butter." It is no surprise to find that Loos was a supporter of cabbage.

Few others have felt quite so refreshed by it, though. Cabbage is more usually 
to be found as a lingering smell in a bedsit, or swimming in water beside 
unappetising meat. Cabbage is part of the miserable suburban life that George 
Bowling tries to escape inComing Up for Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jan/21/more-to-george-orwell-politics>
, by George Orwell, and part of the claustrophobic horror of hisNineteen 
Eighty-Four <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/10/1984-george-orwell>.

The cabbage has been variously conceived as extravagant, magical, curative, 
plain, pure, noxious, smelly, sublime and ridiculous. Watching laden carts 
going along Piccadilly in 1869, "piled up to the height of the second-floor 
windows with cabbages", Charles Dickens wondered where all these cabbages could 
possibly go. Who ate them all and where were the leftovers? He had a vision of 
a world covered in cabbage, such that an extra layer would be added to the 
crust of the earth. It was a surrealist fantasy, as extravagant and banal as 
they come.

My favourite cabbage painting is The Dustman by Stanley Spencer 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?imgurl=http://s3.artknowledgenews.com/files2008a/Spencer_The_Lovers.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.kwantes.com/SSG%2520website/locations.html&usg=__Djv9hRrZ-6vQbMQFREbhslmHfBg=&h=618&w=643&sz=136&hl=en&start=0&zoom=1&tbnid=53M2AXFcy-dqyM:&tbnh=157&tbnw=163&prev=/images%3Fq%3DThe%2BDustman%2Bby%2BStanley%2BSpencer%26um%3D1%26hl%3Den%26client%3Dfirefox-a%26sa%3DN%26rls%3Dorg.mozilla:en-GB:official%26biw%3D986%26bih%3D984%26tbs%3Disch:1&um=1&itbs=1&iact=hc&vpx=143&vpy=84&dur=715&hovh=210&hovw=219&tx=79&ty=82&ei=hkj2TLLcFs24hAes6f28BQ&oei=hkj2TLLcFs24hAes6f28BQ&esq=1&page=1&ndsp=21&ved=1t:429,r:0,s:0>
, the master of the familiar-turned-strange. This 1934 work shows the 
resurrection of rubbish from an ordinary household dustbin: all our forgotten 
scraps gloriously risen from the dead. Children hold out a broken teapot and a 
jam jar, and – in the middle of the picture – there's a bedraggled but 
beautifully deep-veined cabbage. For Spencer, this was a painting about the 
things we forget to worship: "All the signs and tokens of home life, such as 
cabbage leaves and teapot, which I have so much loved that I have had them 
resurrected from the dustbin because they are reminders of home life and peace."

I recently visited the cabbage beds at Oxford Botanic Garden 
<http://www.botanic-garden.ox.ac.uk/>, neatly planted in the straight lines and 
stoical distances Tristram could never manage. Rows of sturdy cabbages sat 
proudly, Kale "Nero di Toscana" next to Cabbage "January King". They were regal 
indeed, works of imagination to beat Shakespeare, and yet so stubbornly 
ordinary. Lewis Carroll had it right. How brilliant it was of theWalrus and the 
Carpenter <http://www.jabberwocky.com/carroll/walrus.html> to talk "Of shoes 
and ships and sealing-wax/ Of cabbages and kings".
 