
We all know that the problem with grown-ups is that they think they’re done 
growing. They get stuck: at a certain height, in a certain mindset, in what 
they wear, listen to, and in what they read. In The Girl of Ink & Stars, the 
grown-ups have become stuck in what they think is possible. Isabella’s theories 
about the strange occurrences on her island are discounted because she is a 
child, and a girl. Yet her open-minded approach to the world allows her to see 
the truth, and that makes her the only one who can save her home.


 Young people tend to be the bravest readers. I’ve met many adults who say “I 
don’t read children’s books” as if they are in a foreign language they never 
learnt. But many of them are teaching big, bold lessons disguised as beautiful, 
challenging stories. Here is a small selection of the many incredible books for 
children that adults would also do well to read, learn from, and enjoy. So if 
you like the sound of any of these books, try recommending them to the adult in 
your life. Tell them, “Go on, grown-ups – grow a little.”

10 wild facts about Maurice Sendak's Where The Wild Things Are
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/mar/29/10-wild-facts-about-maurice-sendaks-where-the-wild-things-are>
 1. Where the Wild Things Are 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/where-the-wild-things-are-3.html> by Maurice 
Sendak

 You’ve probably already heard of or read this classic story of Max, the boy 
who sails away from home to frolic with the Wild Things, ends with his dinner 
waiting, “still hot”. You’ll take away an adventure that ends with the comfort 
of home, and if you get your grown-up to read it, they will recognise that the 
frustrations of childhood emotions may become easier to articulate, but they 
never really go away. Told in sparing words and lush pictures with real 
emotional punch, you have to wonder why, as our vocabulary improves, we turn 
from imagery as storytelling.

Malorie Blackman: Developing negatives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/nov/10/malorie-blackman-double-cross-noughts-crosses>
 2. Noughts and Crosses 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/noughts-and-crosses.html> by Malorie Blackman

 Blackman’s book taught me, and many people for whom it was not a daily 
reality, to see racism for the first time, in terms we could understand. 
“Plasters were the colour of us Crosses, not the noughts…” The image of the 
black plaster on white skin has stayed with me as a simple and brilliant way of 
condensing the concept of privilege. Blackman’s novel also gives blistering 
credence to the power of words – as Sephy says, “Whoever came up with the 
saying ‘sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me’ was 
talking out of his or her armpit.” An eye-opening book for any child that 
adults would do well to read, or re-read.

 3. The Wave <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/wave.html> by Morton Rhue

 Have you ever wondered how you would react when faced with evil? Based on Ron 
Jones’ classroom experiment of 1979, The Wave follows Ross, a teacher who 
attempts to explain how Nazi Germany, and the Holocaust, was allowed to happen 
through creating a movement called the Wave. Of course it soon takes on a life 
of its own, with its followers’ actions spiraling out of control. We all 
conform, and this book explores the consequences of that in extremis. Is 
inaction the same as complicity?

The greatest Frances Hardinge quotes ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/27/greatest-frances-hardinge-quotes-costa-book-award>
 4. The Lie Tree 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280959/s/the-lie-tree/>
 by Frances Hardinge

 Aside from the lyrical writing and gripping mystery that sits at its heart, 
this book is an exploration of the fall-out from a major parental lie. Set in 
post-Origin of the Species Victorian Britain, Hardinge’s heroine Faith finds 
herself constricted by being a girl, and by her father’s expectations of her. 
“Listen, Faith. A girl cannot be brave, or clever, or skilled as a boy can. If 
she is not good, she is nothing.” When he turns up dead, Faith must be brave, 
clever, skilled, and most certainly not “good”.

Philip Pullman: 10 magical quotes from his books and the man himself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/09/philip-pullman-10-magical-quotes-his-dark-materials-anniversary>
 5. His Dark Materials 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/his-dark-materials-3.html> by Philip Pullman

 In all honesty, this list could have consisted entirely of genre fiction. 
It’s often easier to be truthful through a skewed lens, and if your adult 
doesn’t want to read a children’s book, this would be a good place to start 
changing their mind. An epic story of light versus dark, and the shadows that 
slink in the gaps, it grapples with complex ideas around innocence, childhood, 
power, and the Authority. It’s also an incredible adventure, with an ending 
that will probably make you cry (unless you don’t have a heart).

Why we need to be honest about OCD and teen mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/02/mental-health-relapse-holly-bourne-am-i-normal-yet>
 6. Am I Normal Yet? 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/317345/s/am-i-normal-yet/>
 By Holly Bourne

 Be honest – how often do you use words like “crazy”, “mental”, or “insane” 
without thinking twice? A brutal and brilliant takedown of how we talk about 
mental illness, feminism, and friendship, this book is a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing. It follows Evie, and her friends Lottie and Amber, as they navigate 
their way through the minefield of school, boys, and periods. If you’ve ever 
felt out of the ordinary, this is for you (ie everyone). It manages to be 
enjoyable without being flippant, incisive without being preachy. My first 
thought having finished it was “I wish I’d read this when I was a teenager”, 
but in all truth I think it’s just as valuable to have read it now. So have a 
read - I guarantee you and your adult will enjoy it. You’re never too old to 
drop some stigma.

Benjamin Zephaniah interview: To me it’s not about black, white, Asian; it’s 
about literature for everybody
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/14/benjamin-zephaniah-interview-terror-kid>
 7. Refugee Boy <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/refugee-boy.html> by Benjamin 
Zephaniah

 This book is 15 years old, and more vital than ever. In a time when our 
government voted against accepting 3,000 unaccompanied refugee children, Alem’s 
story will ring cringingly true. Not all people welcome him, or believe in his 
story. Some just don’t care. Economics are this lack of care disguised as 
practicality – Alem realises people resent being asked to share even a small 
proportion of their wealth. Polemic aside, this is a beautiful telling of a 
desperate story. Phoenix by SF Said tackles similar themes of home and 
displacement in an intergalactic setting.

My hero: Robin Williams by Anne Fine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/16/robin-williams-anne-fine-my-hero>
 8. The Tulip Touch <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tulip-touch.html> by Anne 
Fine

 Another cautionary tale on the consequences of inaction, The Tulip Touch was 
disturbing to me as a child and even more so as an adult. When Natalie 
befriends Tulip, their games soon escalate from the peculiar to the dangerous. 
Natalie’s parents quickly distance themselves and their child from Tulip, 
without wanting to see what is causing Tulip’s behaviour. Natalie is too young 
to recognise the hallmarks of abuse, but her parents are not – yet they do not 
act. Would you be able to recognise and help a girl like Tulip? Would you?

9. Panther <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285648/> 
by David Owen

Derrick’s heard reports of a panther in his neighbourhood, and attaches his 
happiness, and the happiness of his family, on finding it. This is not an 
“easy” book, but depression is not an easy illness. In a time when the leading 
cause of death in males under fifty is suicide, Derrick’s narrative feels like 
essential reading. Patrick Ness’s A Monster Calls is another story worth 
reading for anyone who finds it hard to understand or communicate around such 
themes.

Louise O'Neill: 'I think this book will infuriate a lot of people because it’s 
going to push those buttons'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/02/louise-oneill-asking-for-it-interview>
10. Asking For It 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413208/> by Louise 
O’Neill

As the next grown-ups, it’s down to young people now to make the world a 
better place – and reading this book is a powerful way to start. “They’re good 
boys really. This all just got out of hand.” When terms like “good” and “bad” 
dominate our language, a view of their effects is offered in this harrowing and 
masterful book. When Emma is gang-raped at a party, it is her peers’ and 
adults’ reaction that inflicts the deepest damage. An unflinching dissection of 
rape culture, Asking For It should be required reading for teenagers, all men, 
all women, and anyone in-between.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ftop-10-childrens-and-ya-books-that-adults-can-learn-from%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbbd1007c9f971481a653914cc895ac2c6e635e6%2F0_0_1594_2409%2F1594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20children%E2%80%99s%20and%20YA%20books%20that%20adults%20can%20learn%20from&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ftop-10-childrens-and-ya-books-that-adults-can-learn-from%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20children%E2%80%99s%20and%20YA%20books%20that%20adults%20can%20learn%20from&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ftop-10-childrens-and-ya-books-that-adults-can-learn-from%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbbd1007c9f971481a653914cc895ac2c6e635e6%2F0_0_1594_2409%2F1594.jpg>
The Girl of Ink & Stars by Kiran Millwood Hargrave out now in paperback 
(Chicken House).Buy it at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/397857/>.
 