
Home Grown

Tattooed college students, police officers, farmers and the occasional suited 
businessman occupy the restaurant's wood-panelled booths and chrome bar stools. 
The breakfast and lunch menus appeal for their honest southern cooking, low on 
frills but high on quality. Fans flock for "Comfy Chicken", an open-faced "
biscuit <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biscuit_%28bread%29>" topped with 
boneless fried chicken and a downpour of sausage-cream gravy. Lunch features 
regional fare such as fried pork chops, cornmeal-battered catfish, and a 
pimento cheese sandwich, served with a revolving selection of vegetable sides 
such as fried green tomatoes and lady peas (a tiny and surprisingly delectable 
type of field pea). The custardy grits pie makes for a gently sweet and 
unmistakably southern finale.
• 968 Memorial Drive, +1 404 222 0455, homegrownga.com 
<http://homegrownga.com/>. Open Mon-Fri 7am-3pm, Sat-Sun 8am-2pm, mains from $10

Antico Pizza Napoletana
 Photograph: timnatl/ flickr 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/25744165@N03/9344873621/> 
Atlanta may not be the first city to come to mind as a destination for 
margherita pies but so many serious-minded pizzerias have opened over the past 
few years that the local media dubbed it the "pizza wars". The conqueror among 
them is owned by Giovanni di Palma, a New Jersey transplant who created a 
phenomenon with his puffy-lipped beauties baked in ovens imported from Naples. 
Much of the dining room, all of which is communal seating, extends into the 
restaurant's bustling industrial-style kitchen. Settle in among the crowds for 
the signature San Gennaro pizza, topped with buffalo mozzarella, hunks of 
sausage, spicy-sweet peppers, andcipolline (small onions). Too full for 
dessert? Take one of the Italian pastries - includingsfogliatelle, flaky 
half-shells filled with sweetened ricotta and lemon zest – to go.
• 1093 Hemphill Avenue, +1 404 724 2333, anticoatl.com <http://anticoatl.com/>
. Open Mon-Sat 11.30am-till out of dough, pizzas from $18

Busy Bee Cafe
 Photograph: Alamy 
This south-west Atlanta landmark, near downtown, opened in 1947 and is 
remembered as a gathering place for civil rights leaders in the 1960s. The cafe 
remains a source of pride for locals, with its welcoming staff and a kitchen 
that puts a little extra effort into timeless southern classics. The city's 
best fried chicken always arrives hot and flaunts a crackly crust. It's juicy 
and salty and greasy in all the right ways. Pair it (or the oxtails, their 
luscious meat tumbling off the bones) with a daily changing cycle of side 
dishes: creamy black-eyed peas, for example, on Mondays, Wednesdays and 
Fridays. Happily, the silky collards and a soulful broccoli-cheese casserole 
are available every day.
• 810 Martin Luther King, Jr Drive, +1 404 525 9212, thebusybeecafe.com 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Busy-Bee-Cafe/663981446945819>. Open Mon-Fri 
11am-7pm, Sun midday-7pm, mains from $9.99

Porter Beer Bar

Husband-and-wife owners Nick Rutherford and Molly Gunn tend the city's widest 
selection of beer at their handsomely scruffy bar in Little Five Points, a 
section of the city full of graffiti-covered buildings and counterculture 
throwbacks. The 800-strong list includes nearly 50 beers on draft and a 
magnificent roster of American stouts, Danish lambics, and other wonders of 
brewing that mature gracefully in the bar's ageing room. While the regular menu 
consists of gastropub standards (fish and chips, say, or mussels in beer and 
tomato broth), the list of specials best frames Rutherford's skills as a chef. 
Look for dishes with regional flavour, like ham hock terrine, or compositions 
that reflect the season, like sugar snap pea salad with strawberries, ginger 
and yoghurt.
• 1156 Euclid Avenue, +1 404 233 0393, theporterbeerbar.com 
<http://www.theporterbeerbar.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs 11.30am-midnight, Fri 
11.30am-2.30am, Sat 11am-2.30am, Sun 11am-midnight, mains from $9.75

Community Q BBQ

Chef David Roberts hung up his fine-dining cap in 2009 to focus on pulled 
pork, beef brisket and sausage smoked over hickory embers. His is the finest 
barbecue joint inside Atlanta's beltway, Interstate 285, which unofficially 
demarcates the city from the suburbs. Pork spare ribs exude a campfire aroma 
but the beef short rib, borrowed from Texas's barbecue culture, is a sight to 
behold: a hunk of meat on a bone large enough to be dangerous in a pub brawl. 
Roberts sets himself apart with starters and sides that, for a barbecue 
restaurant, show unusual care. His "kitchen sink" salad showcases a panoply of 
seasonal vegetables, and he crafts complex yet soothing soups like pureed swede 
with spinach, apple and garlic. Roberts' most famous side dish is his macaroni 
and cheese, a caloric wonder of rigatoni baked with cheddar, Monterey Jack, 
Parmesan, and heavy cream.
• 1361 Clairmont Road, Decatur, +1 404 633 2080, communityqbbq.com 
<http://www.communityqbbq.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs 11am-8.30pm, Fri-Sat 
11am-9.30pm, Sun 11am-7pm, plates from $11

The General Muir

The menu takes its cues from a New York-style Jewish deli but encompasses much 
more. For breakfast and weekend brunch, the Maven platter ($18) arrives with 
velvety swaths of lox (cured salmon), nova (smoked salmon), squares of sable 
(delicately smoked black cod), and creamy salmon salad. It comes with just one 
bagel, so order extras – and request them toasted. Lunch means sandwiches such 
as a Reuben (thickly sliced corned beef, sinus-tingling sauerkraut, nutty 
gruyère cheese and rye bread, $11.95) and a pastrami sandwich piled high with 
peppery smoked beef that wins the respect of Manhattanites. Chef Todd Ginsberg 
also makes the city's most decadent burger, crowned with gruyère, caramelised 
onions, Russian dressing, pickles and, subbing for bacon, crisp-fried pastrami.
• 1540 Avenue Place, +1 678 927 9131, thegeneralmuir.com 
<http://thegeneralmuir.com/home>. Open Mon-Fri 7am-10.30am, 11.30am-2.30pm, 
plus Sun-Thurs 5.30pm-9pm, Fri-Sat 5.30pm-10pm, Sat-Sun 8am-3pm, dinner mains 
from $14

Greenwood's on Green Street
 Greenwoods, Atlanta 
Locals and visitors alike trek to the northern suburbs to bask in Bill 
Greenwood's quirky converted bungalow – complete with a 1790's log cabin he 
uprooted and added to the dining room as an expansion – and to feast on his 
Americana comfort foods. His fried chicken is justifiably famous, a massive 
portion of thickly battered, pepper-flecked bird drizzled with both hot pepper 
vinegar and honey. But he's equally deft with seafood specials such as 
pink-hued rainbow trout in a butter-lemon sauce or crab cakes rich with meat 
and piquant spices. Mains come with two sides, including creamy broccoli 
casserole or mashed sweet potatoes.
• 1087 Green Street, Roswell, +1 770 992 5383, greenwoodsongreenstreet.com 
<http://greenwoodsongreenstreet.com>. Open Sun, Wed-Thurs 11.30am-9pm, Fri-Sat 
11.30am-10pm, mains from $13.95

Gu's Bistro

Buford Highway is one of the unique culinary highlights of Atlanta, a corridor 
(rather than a defined neighbourhood) that's home to restaurants serving foods 
from all over the world. On one block, for example, a Mexican sandwich shop 
sits near a Malaysian spot that serves beef rendang and fried noodle dishes, 
and across a car park from a place that excels in Vietnamese tofu specialities. 
But along BuHi (as the locals call it), the city's hardcore food lovers flock 
to chef-owner Yiquan Gu's restaurant for chilli-ignited dishes from China's 
Szechuan province. Spice enthusiasts can deliciously scorch their tastebuds on 
cumin lamb, dumplings flecked with pepper flakes, and fish fillets bathed in 
chilli oil. Those less inclined toward palate arson should steer toward the 
tea-smoked duck, served on the bone or shredded and stir-fried with spring 
onions and ginger.
• 5750 Buford Highway, Doraville, +1 770 451 8118, gusbistro.com 
<http://gusbistro.com>. Open Sun, Tues-Thurs 11am-3.30 pm and 4.30pm-10pm, 
Fri-Sat 11am-3.30pm and 4.30pm-10.30pm, mains from $10.95

Little Tart Bakeshop/Octane Coffee

Two businesses under one roof combine Atlanta's finest bakery with the city's 
most sophisticated coffee makers. First, peer into baking whiz Sarah O'Brien's 
display case: flaky croissants, apple-cheddar turnovers, an unusually light 
creme fraiche quiche, and galettes filled with local fruit, among many 
temptations. Then decide between a coffee pour-over steeped with floral 
Ethiopian beans, a balanced espresso, or a frothy cappuccino. The room is full 
of distracted faces glowing in the light of their laptops but rarely is the 
place so mobbed that you can't find a table. At night, the bakery closes but 
Octane stays open for smart cocktails fuelled by bourbon and gin.
• 437 Memorial Drive, +1 404 348 4797, littletartatl.com 
<http://www.littletartatl.com/>, octanecoffee.com <http://octanecoffee.com/>. 
Little Tart open Mon-Fri 7am-6pm, Sat-Sun 8am-6pm. Octane open Monday 7am-6pm, 
Tues-Thurs 7am-11pm, Fri 7am-midnight, Sat 8am-midnight, Sun 8am-10pm

Sobban
 Sobban, Atlanta 
Korean food is all the rage in Atlanta but chefs Jiyeon Lee and Cody Taylor 
take the boom one step further by merging Korean and southern flavours. They 
first openedHeirloom Market BBQ <http://www.heirloommarketbbq.com>, offering 
cultural collisions like a barbecued pork sandwich capped with a handful of 
kimchi. Lee and Taylor call their second business a "Korean-southern diner" and 
take their explorations further. Its most-winning experiment is pork chop
dontaksu, a breaded cutlet that sidles up to sweet potato-carrot mousse, 
pickled vegetables, and peach hot mustard sauce for dipping. Fried chicken 
wings with a chilli-ginger glaze are downright narcotic. The restaurant 
inhabits a wacky former fast food joint vaguely in the shape of a pioneer 
wagon: it adds surreal fun to the dining experience.
• 1788 Clairmont Road, Decatur, +1 678 705 4233, sobban.com <http://sobban.com>
. Open Tues-Thurs 11.30am-2.30pm and 5pm-9.30pm, Fri-Sat 11.30am-2.30pm and 
5pm-10.30pm, mains from $10

Bill Addison is the restaurant critic and food editor for Atlanta magazine 
<http://www.atlantamagazine.com/dining/> 

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 