
What is it that makes assassination attempts so fascinating to fiction 
writers? I asked myself this as I was researchingHigh Dive 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/catalog/product/view/id/293722/>, 
my novel based aroundthe IRA bombing of the Grand Hotel in Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gallery/2009/oct/13/brighton-bomb-margaret-thatcher>
 in 1984 – an attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher that resulted in the deaths of 
five people and the suffering of many more. In coming up with a list of 10 
assassination plots in fiction, there were so many novels and stories to choose 
from that I’ve had to make some unforgivable omissions.

Where’s Graham Greene’s The Quiet American? John Buchan’s The Thirty-Nine 
Steps? Richard Condon’s The Manchurian Candidate, Joan Didion’s The Last Thing 
He Wanted, James Ellroy’s American Tabloid? Why such a proliferation of 
assassination plots from well-known writers? Perhaps anyone who spends his or 
her days building stories, forming a web of events, deciding who within that 
web may live and may not, is inclined sometimes to try and imagine what it must 
be like to hatch a real-world plot on an awful scale – one that might change 
the course of history. What would it be like to be Lee Harvey Oswald, holding a 
whole nation’s narrative in your hands?

High Dive by Jonathan Lee review – an atmospheric tale of the 80s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/16/high-dive-jonathan-lee-review> 
 In Don DeLillo’s Libra, his novel about the assassination of John F Kennedy, 
he writes that “the purpose of history is to climb out of your own skin”. To my 
mind that’s the purpose of fiction, too. It takes us to uncomfortable places, 
shows us people who are not like us, introduces questions we might rather not 
confront. I love these 10 works of fiction for their ability to push us so 
deeply into the lives of others.

1. A Brief History Of Seven Killings by Marlon James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>

The playfulness of this novel is announced by its title: James’s book is not 
brief, is not a work of history and encompasses many more killings than seven. 
It’s a wonderfully bold blend of experience and imagination, fiction and fact, 
centring onthe attempted assassination of Bob Marley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jul/16/urban.worldmusic> in 1976. James 
focuses on drawing the reader into a mass of ghostly voices surrounding “The 
Singer”: CIA operatives, groupies, journalists. “The dead never stop talking,” 
he writes, “and the living sometimes hear.” The judges of the Man Booker prize 
heard, andmade this a worthy winner last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/13/marlon-james-is-an-uncompromising-and-exhilarating-man-booker-winner>
.

2. Libra by Don DeLillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/24/fiction.dondelillo>

DeLillo gives us various versions of Lee Harvey Oswald: high-school dropout in 
New Orleans, disaffected marine in Japan, administrative employee at the Texas 
School Book Depository in Dallas. At all times Oswald is struggling to overcome 
his severe dyslexia, a battle that foreshadows a CIA archivist’s later attempts 
to make sense of thousands of pages of evidence.

3. The Assassination of Margaret Thatcher by Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/24/the-assassination-of-margaret-thatcher-review-hilary-mantel-collection-short-stories>

I broke out in a cold sweat in 2014 when I saw it announced that Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> was releasing a book with 
this title. I assumed she was writing about the same subject matter I’d been 
labouring away at for years. Instead, the piece that gives Mantel’s story 
collection its title is a fever dream in which a sniper invades a Windsor home 
with the intention of shooting the PM. Thatcher is recovering from eye surgery, 
wearing “big goggle glasses” in an attempt to shade herself from “the trials of 
the afternoon”, but even a world leader wrapped up in her own well-practised 
detachment is not safe, in Mantel’s coolly brilliant prose, from the unsettling 
effects of events.

4. The Lazarus Project by Aleksandar Hemon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/29/lazarus-project-aleksandar-hermon-review>

On a March day in 1908, a young Jewish immigrant named Lazarus Averbuch was 
shot dead by George Shippy, Chicago’s chief of police. It was claimed that 
Averbuch was an anarchist assassin sent to kill him. Hemon boldly pushes 
himself into the many gaps in this official account of events, imagining what 
the reality might have been.

5. HHhH by Laurent Binet, translated by Sam Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/16/hhhh-laurent-binet-review>

A side-benefit of the success of this book was hearing people at London 
publishing parties saying, glasses of tepid white wine in hand, “No no, it’s 
calledhaitch haitch haitch haitch”, and then debating which letter was lower 
case. The novel reimagines Operation Anthropoid, thecode name 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_name> for the plot to assassinate SS-
Obergruppenführer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obergruppenf%C3%BChrer> 
Reinhard Heydrich <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinhard_Heydrich>, through 
the eyes of a writer-narrator who is uneasy about this own “ignominious 
transformation” of history into literature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftop-10-assassination-plots-in-fiction-jonathan-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e56e5de4ede35245058628d2da4367c4fc76b3f%2F45_12_2496_1499%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20assassination%20plots%20%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftop-10-assassination-plots-in-fiction-jonathan-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20assassination%20plots%20%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftop-10-assassination-plots-in-fiction-jonathan-lee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e56e5de4ede35245058628d2da4367c4fc76b3f%2F45_12_2496_1499%2F2496.jpg>
 ‘The impossibility of divorcing ideas from their human repercussions’ .. a 
still from the 1984 film of Cal. Photograph: Alamy 
6. A Case of Exploding Mangoes by Mohammed Hanif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/31/fiction2>

Hanif’s debut novel, published in 2008, bustles with wit and sharp political 
insight. It explores the mysterious death of General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, 
president of Pakistan from 1978 to 1988, in a plane crash that has been 
variously blamed on Zia’s power-hungry colleagues, the CIA, the KGB, Mossad and 
Indian secret agents. In the tradition of all great shaggy-dog stories, Hanif 
throws into the mix a few more potential sources of blame, including a clew of 
tapeworms and a mango-eating bird.

7. The Lowland by Jhumpa Lahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/07/jhumpa-lahiri-the-lowland-review>

Exploring the enduring impact of the Naxalite movement on one family, Lahiri’s 
plot moves between two linked killings: the assassination of a policeman and 
the eventual execution of the man to blame. The threat of extinction is 
everywhere in the book. Even the smallest mammals in the lowland can be found 
“burying themselves in mud, simulating death, waiting for the return of rain”.

8. Cal by Bernard MacLaverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/28/bernard-maclaverty-interview>

MacLaverty’s magnificent story of life during the Troubles has at its heart 
the moment when Cal, a young Catholic caught up with the IRA, assists in the 
assassination of a reserve police officer. He is told by men well-practised in 
violence that it is crucial to “think of the issues, not the people”, but the 
novel is a brilliant demonstration of the impossibility of divorcing ideas from 
their human repercussions.

9. The Feast of the Goat by Mario Vargas Llosa, translated by Edith Grossman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/apr/06/fiction.reviews>

Published in English in 2001, nine years before Vargas Llosa was awarded the 
Nobel prize, the novel dramatises the assassination of former Dominican 
Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo, known by some citizens as “the Goat”. Moving 
between the assassination itself and its effect on the country several decades 
later, The Feast of the Goat, with a narrative structure flexible enough to 
show the links between past and present, exposes a whole system of political 
corruption without ever quite tipping over into didacticism.

10. The Man With the Golden Gun by Ian Fleming 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/man-with-the-golden-gun.html>

No list of assassination plots would be complete without a little 007. The 
writing in The Man With the Golden Gun may not be as compelling as it is in 
some of Fleming’s other novels, but the story is desperately addictive. Bond is 
sent to Jamaica to kill a Cuban assassin called Scaramanga, a character 
apparently named after a hated contemporary of Fleming’s at Eton. With a 
schoolboy’s taste for entertainment, Fleming takes his revenge with a few 
strokes of ink.

 * High Dive by Jonathan Lee is published by William Heinemann, priced £16.99, 
and isavailable from the Guardian bookshop for £13.59 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/catalog/product/view/id/293722/>.  