
The first time I was paid to play live Tori Amos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/toriamos>

I'd been kicked out of the Peabody conservatory in Baltimore at the age of 11 
and lost my scholarship because I wasn't Peabody stock any more. I had real 
issues that they weren't teaching contemporary composers. They said the Beatles 
would be gone and dead within 30 years, and no one would care. It was 1974, I 
was 11, and it was good to be right! My minister father was really distraught. 
He had these dreams of me being a concert pianist and then going into religious 
music. I just looked and him and said: "Dad, this music is just not moving me." 
He said: "Well, if you're going to go into that world, you need to get a job."

At 13, I was ready. I had a repertoire of a couple of hundred songs – things 
you hear on the radio. That's why I'd got in trouble. Instead of playing 
Brahms, I was playing other things. So I got dressed up, put on my sister's 
high heels. My dad wore his clerical collar. We went down to Georgetown, in 
Washington DC, toMr Henry's <http://www.mrhenrysrestaurant.com/> – a gay bar. I 
had to be chaperoned! My dad sat in the corner and drankShirley Temples 
<http://cocktails.about.com/od/s/r/shrly_tmpl_cktl.htm>. I played there for 
tips until I was 15. People were really receptive at Mr Henry's. They requested 
a lot of showtunes, and put me through my paces – they told me how to not look 
like white-trash: "No, you can't go from church to hussy!"

There were church members who complained later when it all became known and 
got written up in the papers. But when they criticised him, my father would 
say: "What safer place is there for a 13-year-old girl than a gay bar?"

The first time I ever set foot on a film set Kelly Macdonald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/nov/08/kelly-macdonald-interview>

Trainspotting <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/67567/trainspotting> was 
an open audition, and they'd been sending out flyers about the part of Diane, 
for which they wanted somebody new. I was waitressing at the time, and didn't 
expect to get the role at all. I just wanted the experience, to build myself up 
to audition for drama school. There were hundreds of girls there.

Growing up in the south side of Glasgow, the idea that people made films for a 
living was an alien concept. Everything was entirely new. I spent most of the 
shoot hiding, skulking around in the toilets or wandering the corridors. The 
first thing I was due to film was the scene inside and outside the nightclub. 
But this wasn't being filmed until the end of the day, so it was a full day of 
just hanging about with these charismatic actors in one tiny caravan – all the 
boys and me! Everyone was drinking, and I got a bit drunk. It was halfway 
through the afternoon when Shirley Henderson, who was being very sensible and 
sitting quietly, said: "You might want to think about not drinking." I just 
didn't know. I had gone along with all the silly boys. I had a hangover by the 
time it came to do my scenes.

Ewan McGregor looked after me. We had that quite intimate scene to do 
together. At every stage of the audition process, they'd told me there was a 
sex scene in the film. "Would you be OK with that?" "Yeah, of course!" But it 
didn't compute. It was only on the day of shooting that scene that I suddenly 
thought, "Oh shit, I've got to do this thing." I didn't want it to be a really 
gruelling, awful day, so I thought if I went for it 100% then I wouldn't have 
to keep doing it. But I was so naive that that was the day I got my mum and my 
brother to visit the set. How nuts is that?

The first time I broadcast to the nation Mark Radcliffe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio2/presenters/mark-radcliffe/>

I wasn't particularly bothered about being a presenter. I'd done some 
presenting on local radio, but that was something that came about out 
of necessity. At Piccadilly Radio, there was no one else who knew the music of 
Manchester. "OK, I'll have a go. How hard can it be?"

When they started the old Radio 5, they wanted a show one night a week from 
different parts of the country. The programme, Hit the North, was a little 
hobby – something you did once a week, like going to play a game of snooker or 
something. Both of us who presented had other jobs. I was a radio producer, and 
Marc Riley was a record plugger. Initially, he was supposed to be doing the 
gossip column – the buzz around Manchester. But it became apparent that there 
weren't many stories like the Stone Roses playing Spike Island. It was more 
like Dermo fromNorthside <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qj-24V1txtQ> 
having been seen having a kebab in Levenshulme.

It wasn't a major career move. It wasn't: "Right, I'm going to be a big-name 
Radio 1 DJ and end up on the breakfast show. This is just the start." We did it 
in a vacuum. In those days, there was no direct contact between us and the 
audience. There was no email. We didn't have phone-ins because there wasn't the 
budget to have people to man the phones. There wasn't even a fax. If people 
responded to something, it would be in a letter that arrived two weeks later. 
It really was a cottage industry. We were running a bacon butty shop in a 
caravan on a lay-by on a main road. We knew there were a lot of people on the 
main road going by, but we were only interested in and absorbed by the people 
who stopped by our little diner.

The first time I DJed live Don Letts <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don_Letts>

It was all by accident. In the mid/late 70s, I used to manage a shop in 
Chelsea called Acme Attractions and played hardcore reggae down there. 
Customers would just hang out, digging the music. Then the whole punk thing 
exploded, and there was nowhere for the bands to play, so a friend of mine, 
Andrew Czezowski, opened the very first punk rock venue –the Roxy 
<http://www.punk77.co.uk/punkhistory/venues_roxy_club.htm>. History has it that 
the Clash opened the Roxy on 1 January 1977, but the club had, in fact, been 
open for about a month before that. Truth be told, it was a right shithole, but 
a classic club in the true sense – basement, low ceiling, dingy lighting …

Because of the reaction I got to the music in the shop, Andrew said: "Don, 
have a go at DJing." Of course, I'd never DJed in my bloody life! I went down 
there with all my vinyl and only one deck worked. I just played the tune and 
there'd be gaps between the records. In those gaps, you could gauge the 
temperature and atmosphere of the room. And this was before equalisers and 
samplers. I had volume, treble and bass, and I had to rock the place with just 
those elements.

This was so early in punk's evolution that there weren't any punk records to 
play – none of the bands had recorded anything yet. So I ended up playing what 
I had and, luckily for me, the punks seemed to like hardcore dub reggae. They 
picked up on the obvious anti-establishment vibe of the tunes, that they were 
about something.Money in My Pocket <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HZ04FPK0S8>,
Chant Down Babylon <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ixGrA0dQKeI>, I Need a Roof 
Over My Head <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XC7CatrXWUs> – these really spoke 
to these white kids. And they didn't mind the weed, either. The barman even 
sold ready-rolled spliffs because the punks couldn't roll their own.

The first time I went into a recording studio Corinne Bailey Rae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/corinne-bailey-rae>

I was probably 16 or 17. Our band, Helen, won a competition at the Duchess of 
York in Leeds, where we used to get a few gigs. The prize was two days in 
a recording studio. We were big fans of Veruca Salt 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jC9AUR-iTo0&ob=av2e> and Hole 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KzepWL73NTg> and Juliana Hatfield 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=siJZXTuwBjA>. Our songs had clean, quietish 
verses, before bursting into big choruses with fuzzy guitars.

The studio – Lion Studios near Leeds train station – was slightly damp and 
smelly. I remember the phone constantly ringing, and the engineer taking calls 
through the whole thing: "Hello, Lion." We did all the takes down in the 
basement, then we'd come back up into the control room. It was like doing a 
little gig downstairs and coming back upstairs for the reaction. But I liked 
that. I find the looking-through-the-glass thing a bit weird, like you're in a 
zoo.

I remember it being an early start – 8am until 8pm. And we made that mistake: 
"We've got two days. Let's record loads of songs!" I think we recorded three. 
Now I'd never attempt to record three songs in two days. I remember drinking in 
everything the engineer was saying, being fascinated by the techniques and the 
endless possibilities of how you could produce things. It's a weird thing when 
you leave the studio with a recording on tape, something you could listen to 
whenever you wanted. It might be the best version you've done of a song, and 
it's just right there.

We used the recordings as a demo to get gigs. They became our calling card. We 
also sent them to labels like Food and Fierce Panda and Roadrunner. Roadrunner 
took us out – we had smoked salmon and champagne, and they told us all about 
the high life. But I was in university by then, and our bass player got 
pregnant. The deal didn't happen.

The first time I wrote a film review Mark Kermode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/markkermode>

I went to university in Manchester and had written some gig reviews 
for a student union paper called the Mancunion, but wanted to do film reviews. 
Then I shipped up at City Life, the local listings magazine. It was a workers' 
co-op with a slightly bolshie stance and an "allcomers welcome" policy. I 
really wanted to write, but they needed other things doing first. The first job 
I had was ad sales, which I was absolutely useless at. Then I drove the van, 
picking up the magazines from the printers and delivering them across 
Manchester. At one point, I trashed the van. I took all four corners off it 
coming off the slip road on to the Mancunian Way. I was probably checking my 
hair in the rear-view mirror and just misjudged it.

One day, they suddenly realised that The Return of the Living Dead 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wylpeAXYcBQ> was playing. "We haven't got a 
review. Somebody needs to do it." I'd seen it and I don't think anyone else 
had. I was there like a shot: "I'll do it!" They figured I could do less damage 
with a typewriter than I could behind the wheel of a van. I sat down, typed it 
straight into the typesetter and it was cut and pasted within half an hour. 
I front-loaded the review with all the nerdy stuff – this is who [director]
Dan O'Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/dec/18/dan-obannon-alien> is, 
this is the film's relationship with theGeorge Romero 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/online/oscars/2010/05/george-romero> Living Dead 
movies – it was almost certainly 180 words of utterly nerdy, genre 
cross-referencing.

And that was it. I'd got into print, after all those years of being a nerdy 
little horror fan readingFangoria <http://www.fangoria.com/> magazine. And once 
you're in print, you're in print. You are now a Film Critic. It was like the 
wardrobe to Narnia, from just hanging around in a magazine office for long 
enough and making a nuisance of myself.

The first time I headlined a full tour Kristin Hersh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kristin-hersh>

Throwing Muses' American tours were like driving away for a weekend, but when 
you do an overseas tour, you have to actually be on the road. That's when you 
get hungry and unwashed. We had supported theCocteau Twins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/26/cocteau-twins-elizabeth-fraser-interview>
 in the UK before but, for this first real tour, we broughtPixies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pixies> as our support.

Every show was packed, which was very moving, but confusing. I didn't 
understand how we could be taken out of our American context and be understood 
at all. In America, they told us in no uncertain terms that we were not a party 
band. We had intellectual audiences who were painters or musicians or writers. 
Some of them would actually take notes at our shows. We used to call it "the 
sea of glasses". Then we got to the UK and it was just a thousand sweaty boys, 
all drunk off their asses and jumping up in the air and screaming! We thought: 
"What the hell is going on? Where are the girls?"

We'd come off stage all sweaty and victorious, and Jez the tour manager would 
scoop me up in one arm and my sister up in the other and jiggle us around. 
"Great show, girls!" "Jez, put us down. We're grownups!" Trying to take care of 
the Muses and the Pixies back then must have been like corralling puppies. We 
were such little tiny babies that we were homesick the whole time. During the 
night drives after the shows, we would actually sing folk songs together about 
being far away from home. My son wasn't with us because of the arduous 
schedule, and that was brutal. It's impossible to leave your child and 
impossible to bring your child. It was like going to war for me.

The first time I directed a feature film  Alan Parker 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000570/>

I had shot a couple of hundred commercials by the time I made Bugsy Malone 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOrgDbldcA4>, so I was quite comfortable on a 
film set. Also, I'd won a Bafta with the BBC film The Evacuees, so I was 
confident directing children. However, nothing prepared me for the sheer 
logistical nightmare of dealing with such a large cast. We had to build an 
entire New York street inside the soundstage so we could do night shooting 
during the day. At night, the child labour laws were so inhibiting we would 
never have got through the work. The cast were ushered on and off set to a very 
complex – and at times frustrating – timetable.

I spent a year casting the film. I had a very early, very heavy reel-to-reel 
video camera that I lugged all round the UK to American air force bases, to 
dancing schools, drama schools, French schools, German schools, boxing schools, 
American schools. After a year, we had seen over 10,000 kids. I found John 
Cassisi, aka Fat Sam, in a school in Brooklyn. I asked the students who the 
naughtiest kid in the class was, and all hands pointed at Cassisi.

The Holiday Inn in Slough became an enormous dormitory for the entire cast. 
Each day we would grimace at news of the previous night's shenanigans as the 
cast broke their strict curfew: chaperones chasing Johnny Cassisi, chasing 
dancers, chasing boys, chasing exhausted assistant directors.Jodie Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jodie-foster> was 12 and had already made 
more films than I had. She just blew us all away with her control and knowledge 
of the proceedings. I always joked that if I had gone sick then Jodie could 
easily have taken over.

We spent a long time developing the splurge guns. I had imagined firing a 
projectile that was like the custard pie of silent movies. We settled on ping 
pong balls and some skilful lobbing of handfuls of synthetic cream – all 
disguised by artful editing. Also, the bike sedans were mostly pushed along by 
the assistant directors and prop men. On some lower shots, you can see that the 
sedans have four wheels and 10 legs.

Bugsy Malone is the kind of film you only make at the beginning of a career 
when you know nothing. The more you know, the less you attempt to do what's 
difficult and maybe impossible. It never occurred to us that we were attempting 
the absurd. It was a labour of love and probably, in its own curious and 
bizarre way, that is why this daft film works, and why it has lasted so long.

The first time I produced a hit record Steve Lillywhite 
<http://www.avclub.com/articles/superproducer-steve-lillywhite,39124/>

In 1978, I was in the studio with Johnny Thunders and one day Nils Stevenson, 
the manager ofSiouxsie and the Banshees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/siouxsieandthebanshees>, came down to hang 
out and listen to the album. We were working on a song calledYou Can't Put Your 
Arms Around a Memory <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TknY89kECq0>, and he loved 
the sound of the drums on this song. He said: "We've just recorded our first 
single and we hate the way it sounds. Would you like to have a go?" In those 
days, when we had three weekly music papers, the buzz on Siouxsie and the 
Banshees was really big. I knew that if they had a half-decent record, it would 
be a hit. I jumped at the chance.

It was pretty intense. These were serious people, but also very innocent. 
Kenny Morris, the drummer, was an art student and not a great drummer. He was a 
little bit insecure. So I got him set up and said: "Look, you don't have to 
play all the drums at the same time. Let's just do the bass drum and the snare 
drum first. Then we'll do the cymbals and the tom-toms later." We were all just 
chancing it. I was a producer who didn't have much of a history of producing. 
We were all young – I was 23 and maybe they were 21. When you're that age and 
you look in the mirror, you're bulletproof. You don't see a grey hair.

It always amazes me about what a great-sounding record Hong Kong Garden 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y6lxuYme-8c> still is. It got to No 7 – I had a 
hit! As a record producer, you only get the hits if you get the work, so how do 
you get the work without having a hit? All of a sudden I realised: "Oh my God, 
I'm there. I'm in the game."

The first time I directed a music video Adam Buxton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-buxton>

We did a thing with Gorky's Zygotic Myncki <http://www.gorkys.com/> on The 
Adam & Joe Show called Vinyl Justice, where we went round to their place 
dressed up as policemen to snoop through their record collection. They then 
asked us to direct avideo for their Sweet Johnny single 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y9FnVL5dUnM>. They had lots of demented ideas. 
I remember them talking about helicopters and explosions – a ludicrous 
conversation. We decided to film something with toys. The whole point in doing 
things with toys on our show was to make something that was manageable without 
getting anyone else involved. So, for Sweet Johnny, we made parodies of various 
music videos using toys, and framed these with the band dressed up as dolls, as 
if they were a manufactured pop group.

They came to London to film it and were really fun and helpful. Gratifyingly, 
they were also determined to come across as quite weird. Euros, the lead 
singer, wanted the makeup lady to make him look like he'd been sunburned while 
wearing sunglasses, as if he'd been on a skiing holiday. And Richard, the bass 
player, wanted to look like his skin was diseased with lesions and pockmarks 
all over it, for no reason that he could explain – "I just think it would be 
funny."

It was our first piece of work for someone else, and made us feel really 
grownup. It gave us the confidence to offer our directing services to Frank 
Black, for whom we made theDog Gone <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ucBVVq_ztDM>
 video, with my Dad in it. Then came video work forRadiohead 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKrsBVFsfIQ>. Sweet Johnny was shown on The 
Chart Show on ITV on a Saturday morning, which was fucking exciting – seeing 
our work in the mainstream. The only response I remember was Dom Joly making a 
disparaging remark in some interview – "Oh, Adam and Joe. Can't they do 
anything else other than play with toys?" I thought that was a bit rich coming 
from the man with the giant phone and the animal costumes.

The first time I photographed an album cover  Anton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/25/anton-corbijn-the-american>

It was 1974, I was 18, and I'd owned a camera for less than a year. I went to 
a concert in Groningen by a Dutch band calledSupersister 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4JxN5yP9SwA>, who later had Elton Dean from 
Soft Machine in their ranks. Because I had no money, I only took a few pictures 
– I was hoping to get them published in a magazine. The band saw them, and 
their saxophone player Charly Mariano wanted to use a blow-up of one of them 
for his solo album. It wasn't a particularly great picture by any stretch of 
the imagination. I had never printed anything as big as a record sleeve and, 
because I didn't have trays that size, I had to use the bath in my parents' 
house to wash the picture.

The record was nothing big, just a very small release on a Dutch jazz label. I 
got 125 gilders for it, including all expenses. I must have easily spent that 
on all the paper I bought to try to get it printed properly. But when I saw it 
in the shops, I was incredibly proud. I was an introvert teenager who spent a 
lot of time in his bedroom playing records and looking at the sleeves. Record 
sleeves were a window into the world. When I  look back at the record, I think
the layout 
<http://www.google.com/imgres?q=charlie+mariano+cascade&um=1&hl=en&client=safari&sa=N&rls=en&biw=1093&bih=1048&tbm=isch&tbnid=SVoZIKayyG4_pM:&imgrefurl=http://www.charliemarianotribute.de/disco1974.html&docid=iP-ooFCraGkZnM&imgurl=http://www.charliemarianotribute.de/Cover/Charlie_Mariano_Cascade_400x400.jpg&w=400&h=400&ei=flIMT-qtFJOFhQeRhbmWBA&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=120&vpy=155&dur=689&hovh=196&hovw=196&tx=116&ty=112&sig=100672438803834941048&page=1&tbnh=160&tbnw=160&start=0&ndsp=25&ved=1t:429,r:0,s:0>
 is terrible, but it didn't matter at the time. It was everything I always 
wanted to do. It took a few years to do another album cover, but I've done 
around 150 sleeves now.

I ended up using a Supersister song in my first film Control – a song called 
She Was Naked <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wufh_ex0p1U>. And the guy who 
wrote the song is now one of my best friends. Back then, of course, I was just 
a guy hanging out near the stage with a camera, looking up at everybody else.
 