
Anne Hathaway’s sci-fi thriller Colossal will receive its world premiere at 
this year’sToronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival>.

Toronto film festival taps into Snowden and keeps it current with Denial and 
The Journey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/26/toronto-film-festival-line-up-snowden-denial-the-journey>
The latest batch of announcements also includes world premieres for the new 
film from directorBen Wheatley <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-wheatley> 
and adocumentary about Amanda Knox.

In Colossal, directed by Nacho Vigalondo, Hathaway stars as a woman who leaves 
her job and boyfriend in New York and discovers a psychic connection to a giant 
creature destroying South Korea. The offbeat drama has already courted 
controversy after Japanese company Toholaunched a lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/godzilla-toho-sues-over-anne-hathaway-rival-movie-colossal>
 alleging similarities with Godzilla. A settlement was reached last October.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ftoronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff68ce982a2339b26b749408bdb208c8bab4103c%2F0_39_4399_2640%2F4399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toronto%20film%20festival%20adds%20Anne%20Hathaway%20monster%20movie%20to%20lineup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ftoronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toronto%20film%20festival%20adds%20Anne%20Hathaway%20monster%20movie%20to%20lineup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ftoronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff68ce982a2339b26b749408bdb208c8bab4103c%2F0_39_4399_2640%2F4399.jpg>
 Set to ignite ... Ben Wheatley’s Free Fire Photograph: PR 
Toronto will also see the first screening of Free Fire, a 1970s-set thriller 
from Wheatley, whose film High Rise received its world premiere at last year’s 
festival. The film stars Brie Larson, Cillian Murphy and Armie Hammer and 
focuses on an arms deal that has gone wrong. It will kick off the Midnight 
Madness strand.

Toronto film festival 2016: full line-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/26/toronto-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
The world premiere of Blair Witch, the 2016 sequel to the 1999 surprise hit, 
will also feature in the same section. It comes from You’re Next director Adam 
Wingard, and stars another set of unknowns heading into the forest to make a 
documentary.

A new documentary, Amanda Knox, promises “unprecedented access” to those 
involved with the controversial case of Meredith Kercher’s murder. 
Actor-turned-director Fisher Stevens will also bring his environmental 
documentary The Turning Point to the festival, which includes interviews 
conducted by Leonardo DiCaprio.

Morgan Spurlock will unveil his new film, Rats, billed as a horror documentary 
focusing on rodents and the “disease, death and psychological trauma” they 
spread across the world.

Other additions include Message from the King, a drama starring Chadwick 
Boseman; My Entire High School Sinking Into the Sea, a comedy starring John 
Cameron Mitchell, Susan Sarandon and Lena Dunham; and The Belko Experiment, a 
horror from Wolf Creek director Greg McLean.

The new set of films join the previously announced lineup, which includes 
world premieres of Oliver Stone’s Snowden and Peter Berg’s fact-based 
disaster-thriller Deepwater Horizon.

 * The Toronto film festival <http://tiff.net/?filter=this-week> runs from 
8-18 September.
 