
The trade minister, Andrew Robb, has rejected calls for an independent 
cost-benefit analysis ofthe Trans-Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/australia-and-the-trans-pacific-partnership-what-we-do-and-dont-know>
 after the World Bank estimated it could lift Australia’s economic outputby 
just 0.7% by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tpp-trade-deal-will-grow-australias-economy-by-less-than-1-world-bank-reveals>
.

Australia and the Trans-Pacific Partnership: what we do and don't know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/australia-and-the-trans-pacific-partnership-what-we-do-and-dont-know>
Robb, who signed the regional trade pact with counterparts from 11 other 
nations inNew Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> on 
Thursday, dismissed opponents of the deal as “the usual suspects” who would not 
be persuaded by a new inquiry.

He also played down the risk of the Australian government being sued under 
controversial investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) clauses, pointing to 
carve-outs for health and environmental measures.


Hundreds of protesters gathered outside the SkyCity building in Auckland to 
object to the signing of the agreement on Thursday.

Opposition within Australia has also been building. Before the meeting, 59 
organisations, including the Australian Fair Trade and Investment Network, 
World Vision, the Public Health Association of Australia and numerous unions,
signed an open letter 
<http://aftinet.org.au/cms/sites/default/files/010216%20%20CSO%20letter%20final%20on%20letterhead%20links%20website%20version.pdf>
 calling on the government to take up the Productivity Commission’s offer to 
assess the costs and benefits.

“In the absence of such independent assessments we consider that the TPP poses 
grave risks to the public interest and ask you to oppose the implementing 
legislation,” they wrote in a letter to Australian MPs.

But Robb flatly rejected the request. “No we won’t, because they’re all the 
usual suspects, I’ve got to say,” he told the ABC.

“Most of the people driving that campaign have been opponents of free trade 
for decades. They’re entitled to that view, but nothing that would come out of 
an inquiry would change their mind.


“There’s nothing that they’ve said that convinces me that they’re genuine 
about this ... I think the community accepts that we’ve got 25 years of 
uninterrupted economic growth in Australia, we’ve got millions of jobs which 
have come off the back of Australia opening up and participating in these sorts 
of major agreements around the world with all of our trading partners.”


The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has described the TPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/turnbull-trans-pacific-partnership-a-foundation-stone-for-future-prosperity>
 as a “gigantic foundation stone for our future prosperity” but recent World 
Bank analysis suggested Australiastood to gain only a modest increase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tpp-trade-deal-will-grow-australias-economy-by-less-than-1-world-bank-reveals>
 in gross domestic product by 2030.

Of the 12 participants, only the US would experience a lower GDP gain, the 
report said. By contrast, Vietnam’s GDP could rise by 10%, and Malaysia’s by 8%.

Robb told Sky News there was “a war by modelling” occurring. He pointed to a 
US Department of Agriculture study that showed Australia’s agriculture sector 
would be the “biggest winner by a country mile”.

“There are so many parts of this agreement that are very difficult to model,” 
the minister said.


Investor-state dispute settlement clauses allow companies to access an 
international tribunal if they believe actions taken by a host government 
breach its investment obligations.

Robb cited the failure of the Philip Morris case against Australia’s plain 
packaging measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/18/australia-wins-international-legal-battle-with-philip-morris-over-plain-packaging>
, which the tobacco giant pursued under a Hong Kong investment treaty.

He said the company had lost that case “using one of the older versions of the 
ISDS, the pre-2000 version [but] it’s got stronger in terms of protecting 
public policy on health and environment since then”.

“I’m very confident that what is in the TPP which protects public policy on 
health and environment will ensure that we are safe,” Robb said.

After Thursday’s signing event, the trade deal will be presented to the 
parliaments of participating nations.

TPP trade deal will expand Australia's economy by less than 1%, World Bank 
reveals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tpp-trade-deal-will-grow-australias-economy-by-less-than-1-world-bank-reveals>
Patricia Ranald, the convener of the Australian Fair Trade and Investment 
Network, accused Robb of “shooting the messenger” and failing to address 
genuine community concerns.

“We are not opposed to trade,” she said. “We are making the point that the TPP 
is not mainly about trade at all. Australia already has free trade agreements 
with nine of the 12 TPP countries, and a World Bank study shows there will be 
minuscule trade gains after 15 years.”

But the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry said the deal had many 
potential benefits for Australia, including reducing costs in global supply 
chains. The chamber’s chief executive, Kate Carnell, said the 2,000-page 
document was “incredibly complex” and small businesses needed support to 
understand the new trade arrangements.




 