
Hi Tracey. You’re about to release a double CD collection of solo recordings 
and collaborations <http://www.traceythorn.com/> from the last three decades. 
What story does the album tell?

Well, I wrote some sleevenotes where I said it’s a bit of a demonstration of 
the term Bedsit Disco Queen(1). It’s got the bedsit songs – the early, 
sitting-on-your-bed-with-an-acoustic-guitar songs. Then there’s the more dance 
stuff from the mid-90s onwards. I suppose it tells the story of me having had a 
foot in both camps for quite a long time.

Was there anything in the archives that made you think, “This should probably 
go on, but it’s terrible”?

There wasn’t actually that much to go through. What’s missing (2) from the 
early days is any sort of demos or live stuff, because I didn’t do any. The 
starting point wasA Distant Shore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/01/tracey-thorn-album-distant-shore>
, which was only eight tracks anyway – I thought I’d recorded demos but the 
label said, “Brilliant, let’s release it as it is.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6psbtzJiq8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6psbtzJiq8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6psbtzJiq8&media=>
You recently watched Mean Girls for the first time. What did you think?

I thought it was funny; my kids thought it was hysterical. They kept going: 
“Oh my God! Yes! That! So much that!’” And I was like, “Really? That’s really 
what you’re all like? That’s horrible!” Terrifying. Amy Poehler’s character is 
the best thing in that film.

Are you a cool mum or a regular mum?

How do I know?! (Guffaws) I’m much more of a regular mum.

How much would you be happy to see your autograph going for on eBay?

To me, an autograph isn’t worth much. I was sitting at the kitchen table 
signing copies of my new album, thinking: “This is madness – why do people want 
it more because I’ve written my name on it?” I will now go and look on eBay to 
see if I have any monetary value.(3)

Taylor Swift says that, for teenage fans, autographs have no currency in the 
age of the selfie.

Well luckily I don’t have any teenage fans! (laughs) So I’m spared! Actually, 
even my fans now do selfies, but we’re all hopeless at it because we’re all 
old. It’s all: “Ooooh! I’ve got the phone round the wrong way! Oh, you take 
it!” And then someone else takes it and it’s not a selfie at all.

You took several years off at the start of the noughties. If you’d made an 
album during that time, what would it have sounded like? Bear in mind Busted 
and Avril Lavigne were big.

I don’t know, in all honesty. You say those people were big then but I just 
wasn’t paying any attention at all. Actually I’ll tell you what it would have 
sounded like — The Wheels on the Bus.

The Wheels on the Bus is a banger, let’s be fair.

It is a banger. I could have done some remixes (4). I really switched off 
though, from music, completely. But I was ready for a break. Having the kids 
didn’t force me to stop; I used them as an excuse to stop.

Protection is on the new album, and you carry a yellow plastic bag in that 
song’s video.

The bit when I’m walking in the corridor?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpgo8ixX6Wo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpgo8ixX6Wo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpgo8ixX6Wo&media=>
Yes. Does it strike you as strange that if you were recording it now, the 
video would have cost an extra 5p to film?

(Guffaws) Yes it would cost 5p more. But perhaps, I think, I’d have been 
carrying a bag-for-life. Because I would have said: “No, I must not be seen 
carrying a polluting carrier bag”.

It is quite a ‘bag for life’ kind of song. 

It is. Maybe we should go back and re-edit the video. Yes.

Massive Attack are off on tour next year. Given how fond you are of performing 
live these days, will you be joining them on stage?

If they asked me, I would say, “Thank you, but no, I don’t do that any more,” 
which is my answer to every request like that I get. Whether that’s the answer 
forever, I don’t know, but it’s the answer at the moment.

How is standing on a stage talking about your books easier than singing a song?

I hear you, completely. I think it’s because it’s not a performance. Nothing 
much is going to happen, so nothing much can go wrong. With singing, for it to 
be worthwhile at all, you need to open yourself up and be vulnerable on stage. 
You’ve got to commit. And if you get stagefright, that’s the point you get 
scared. It’s to do with being exposed.But exposing yourself in your lyrics is 
fine?

Yes! As long as I can stay at home. (Laughs) That’s one of the reasons I loved 
our tracks being remixed. People could be up on their feet on the dancefloor, 
bonding over the music, and I could be at home knitting.

What’s the last thing you knitted?

Well, I’m a really bad knitter. I do knit scarves quite regularly. I can do 
gloves, but they need to be fingerless. These are what I knit people for 
Christmas. I need to start my Christmas knitting soon, actually.

If there was a 2015 version of Red Wedge, would you get involved, and which 
artists would you expect to see either side of you? (5)

Would I get involved? I probably wouldn’t. To be completely honest, I’m not as 
active and engaged as I used to be. And I wouldn’t want to stick my head on the 
line, given the climate on Twitter. That might strike people as cowardly, but 
that’s the truth. As for who else would be up there — well, Charlotte Church 
would probably be theleader of Red Wedge, wouldn’t she?

What’s the most you’ve ever spent on a pair of socks?

I’ve honestly never bought exciting socks. Probably £3.50? I buy my socks from 
Gap. I do buy expensive tights, though. Does that count? Cheap socks, expensive 
tights. There you go.

Foot notes

(1) Bedsit Disco Queen: How I Grew Up and Tried to Be a Pop Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/10/bedsit-disco-queen-thorn-review> 
was Tracey’s first book. It is 384 pages long.

(2) Like the deserts miss the rain.

(3) A signed hardback copy of Tracey’s second book Naked at the Albert Hall is 
£16.99 on eBay, with a regular edition costing £14.29 on Amazon. Tracey’s 
autograph is worth £2.70.

(4) In 2012 Justin Fletcher – AKA Mr Tumble – released a version with subtle 
reggaeton vibes.

(5) Tracey was a member of the 80s Labour-fancying pop collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/22/red-wedge-bringing-labour-party-politics-to-young-music-fans>
, alongside Billy Bragg, Paul Weller and Strawberry Switchblade.
 