
John King, chief executive of Trader Media Group - the company that runs the 
car classifieds brand Auto Trader - has stepped down.

He will be replaced on an interim basis by Zillah Byng-Maddick, the company's 
chief financial officer, until a permanent replacement is found.

Trader Media (TMG) is owned jointly by the Guardian Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup> (GMG) and Apax Partners, 
the private equity group. Last year the two companies explored an initial 
public offering or sale but postponed the plan.

Later in the year, the two companies shared a £100m special dividend from the 
company after a debt refinancing deal.

King's decision to go surprised some industry analysts. He issued a statement 
saying: "I have enjoyed five exciting and successful years working with an 
outstanding team at TMG.

"We have been on an amazing, transformational journey and while I am sorry to 
be leaving, the business needs a leader to commit long term to the next stage 
of the company's development."

One analyst quoted by the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2d52f5e8-027f-11e2-8cf8-00144feabdc0.html#axzz26xkQNHzS>
 said: "At first glance it seems odd... It may represent a difference of 
opinion over what to do next."

In an interview with the FT last year 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/91a88bfe-9dcf-11e0-b30c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz26xkQNHzS>
, Andrew Miller, GMG's chief executive, said that an initial public offering of 
Trader Media was "definitely an option of interest given the scale of asset". 
It is thought to have an estimated valuation of about £1bn.

Under King, the company successfully engineered a transformation from print to 
online. Its latest set of results, for the year to the end of April 2012, 
Trader Media grew digital revenues by 11% to £202m with the average number of 
vehicles listed monthly on its site up 4% to 380,000. Monthly page views on its 
website were running at 1.1bn.

Source: Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2d52f5e8-027f-11e2-8cf8-00144feabdc0.html#axzz26xkQNHzS>
 