
The trade minister, Andrew Robb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-robb>, has decided to retire 
from politics, adding another dimension to Malcolm Turnbull’s forthcoming 
ministerial reshuffle.

The decision comes as the deputy prime minister and Nationals leader, Warren 
Truss, prepares to announcehis own political future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/02/warren-truss-tells-nationals-he-will-reveal-plans-for-his-future-in-march>
, and the prime minister awaits a report on the conduct of the human services 
minister,Stuart Robert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/09/stuart-robert-silent-on-visa-application-for-china-trip>
.

Truss’s possible departure would clear the way for his deputy, Barnaby Joyce, 
to become Nationals leader and the Coalition’s next deputy prime minister.

Queensland MP Michelle Landry said Joyce would be a good choice for the 
Nationals. “Barnaby is someone that a lot of people really admire, he is a 
people person as well ... and I think he will make a great leader of the
National party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party>,” 
she told ABC Radio.

However, Joyce would face some opposition for the role with Michael McCormack 
indicating on Thursday he might contest the leadership ballot.

“I’ve been encouraged by some colleagues to have a go,” said the Riverina MP, 
who noted there had no been a contested ballot for the Nationals leadership 
since 1990.

Robb confirmed on Wednesday that he would bow out of parliament after 12 
“fulfilling and eventful” years as the MP for the Victorian seat of Goldstein, 
but would not force a byelection. His next career would be “in some capacity in 
the private sector”.

“I can confirm today my intention to stand down from federal politics 
effective at the next election,” Robb said in a statement issued late on 
Wednesday.

Robb, who oversaw the free trade agreements with China, South Korea and Japan 
and the signing of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, might not leave the 
frontbench right away.

“It is believed he will stay in the ministry until a later date,” a source 
close to Robb told Guardian Australia.

In a statement, Turnbull praised Robb as “the most successful trade minister 
in our country’s history” and said new ministerial arrangements would be 
announced “in due course”.

The cabinet secretary, Arthur Sinodinos, told Sky News he understood Truss 
would also reveal his intentions on Thursday.

Truss’s office declined to confirm the plans, but it is widely expected he 
will not contest the election due this year.


Sources said Truss was set to announce he would resign as the Nationals leader 
and infrastructure minister on 17 March, which could be the date for a party 
room meeting to decide his successor.

Both the pro-Joyce and anti-Joyce camps think he still has the numbers to 
succeed Truss, but it is believed support forassistant minister McCormack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/28/michael-mccormack-indicates-he-might-run-for-nationals-leadership>
 has increased because some people are annoyed at what they see as Joyce’s 
unseemly haste to replace Truss.

The call for a new deputy leader would be broad, with Luke Hartsuyker, Darren 
Chester and McCormack considered to be among potential contenders.

The Indigenous affairs minister, Nigel Scullion, said Truss would be a “great 
loss” to the party and he would not decide who to support as the next leader 
until the last moment.

“There are going to be some changes,” Scullion told the ABC. “We’re very lucky 
in theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> that 
we’ve got such a depth of talent.”

Turnbull has been waiting until Truss’s decision before embarking on a broader 
ministerial reshuffle. There was upheaval shortly after Christmas whenJamie 
Briggs resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/jamie-briggs-resigns-federal-minister-cities>
 as the minister for cities and the built environment andMal Brough stood aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/mal-brough-steps-aside-as-minister-while-police-investigate-slipper-affair>
 as the special minister of state late in 2015.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said the cabinet was “in chaos” and ministers 
were worried only about their own jobs.

“It’s only a matter of time before Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> stands in his 
courtyard to tell Australians that ‘good government starts today’,” Shorten 
said, referring to Tony Abbott’s response after surviving the first leadership 
spill motion.

“He promised a better government than Tony Abbott’s but, as with everything 
else, he says one thing and does another.”

Robert’s future as the minister for human services and veterans’ affairs hangs 
in the balance afterTurnbull ordered an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/08/malcolm-turnbull-investigation-minister-stuart-robert-china-trip>
 into whether a “private” trip to China in August 2014 breached ministerial 
standards.

The advice from the secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and 
Cabinet, Martin Parkinson, is expected to be completed on Thursday or soon 
afterwards.

Robert said he was confident he had not acted inappropriately, but declined to 
answer specific parliamentary questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/09/stuart-robert-silent-on-visa-application-for-china-trip>
 about his attendance at an event celebrating a mining deal and a meeting with 
a Chinese vice-minister.

The Department of Defence said it was informed about the details of the then 
assistant defence minister’s trip shortly after his return to Australia but was 
unaware of whether he took his official phone with him to China.

The department’s secretary, Dennis Richardson, said Robert’s chief of staff had
written to Tony Abbott’s chief of staff, Peta Credlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/peta-credlin-was-told-about-stuart-roberts-china-travel-plans-committee-hears>
, on 13 August 2014.

“It was a letter, one seeking approval for the minister to travel from Beijing 
to Singapore, to attend the Singapore-Australia joint ministerial committee 
meeting, which was held in Singapore on 21/22 August [2014],” Richardson told a 
Senate estimates committee on Wednesday.
 