
Markets took a rollercoaster ride in London and New York yesterday as nervous 
traders sought to shrug off the news of an American Airlines jet crashing 
shortly after take-off from John F Kennedy airport.

Initial fears that the incident marked the a fresh terrorist onslaught on the 
American mainland two months after the attacks on the World Trade Centre and 
the Pentagon saw stocks heavily marked down in early trading.

The markets were later reasssured when it was reported that the crash was 
probably caused by a mechanical failure rather than resulting from a terrorist 
hijacking in response to the US-led international military action against 
Afghanistan.

In London, where the market closed before the full facts of the latest air 
disaster were known, the FTSE 100 index closed 98 points lower at 5,146.2, 
having at one stage been as low as 5,063.

The Dow Jones industrial average, which at its weakest was 200 points off and 
165 points down when trading ended in London, later clawed back most of its 
losses and by early afternoon in New York was less than 30 points down.

As dealers were confronted with scenes reminiscent of the September 11 attacks 
- billowing smoke on television screens and Manhattan's tunnels and bridges 
sealed - there was a search for safe havens which led to a $2 (Â£1.37) rise in 
the price of gold and prompted demand for UK gilts.

The US bond market was closed as the November 11 Veteran's Day holiday was 
marked a day late, leaving the share markets to suffer an immediate slump after 
news of the crash, before dealers regained their nerve.

"There is a particular reason [for the rebound]. It's because it's appearing 
more and more unlikely that it was a terrorist act," said Uri Landesman, chief 
investment officer with AFA Management Partners. Initially, the news of the 
crash affected investors "very negatively because they feared it was another 
terrorist attack".

However, some analysts said the markets were taking the incident too lightly. 
Dick McCabe, the chief market strategist at Merrill Lynch, said: "Any little 
bit of disturbing news can be used as a catalyst for a selloff."

Mr McCabe had already started to believe that last week's rally was likely to 
run out of steam. The plane crash helped to weaken sentiment. "It all conjures 
up the worse," he said.

Shares in airlines, already battered by the aftershock of the events of 
September 11, were among the worst hit.

The ratings agency, Standard & Poor's, said the outlook for the industry was 
not encouraging. "Evidence of terrorism would obviously substantially worsen 
and prolong the loss of passenger bookings. Investigations into the causes of 
such events normally take a lengthy period of time, sometimes years and and an 
extended period of uncertainly regarding the cause would also depress passenger 
traffic," S&P said.

The ratings agency already had American Airlines and its parent company AMR 
Corporation on credit watch. Shares in AMR sank $2.28 to $15.85.

Hotels and companies linked to the tourist industry were also hit by renewed 
concerns that the news will deter people from travelling.

In Europe the German Dax was down 5% at its worst before mounting a slight 
recovery, while in Paris the CAC 40 index closed down more than 3%.

Market optimism in recent weeks has been fostered by cuts in interest rates, 
particularly by the US Federal Reserve. However, Adolf Rosenstock at Nomura 
International gave warning last night: "There has been a lot of hope pinned on 
a V-shaped recovery next year but when people see such accidents this outlook 
will be subdued if not abandoned altogether."
 