
On Sunday night, HBO concluded its run of the second, and largely dismissed, 
season of True Detective. The finale clocked in at a whopping 90 minutes; yet 
in a mere 30 seconds, the teaser for the network’s highly touted seriesWestworld
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> stole much of that show’s 
thunder.

Anthony Hopkins and Evan Rachel Wood to star in remake of Westworld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/23/westworld-hbo-anthony-hopkins-evan-rachel-wood-remake>
It’s really no wonder: Westworld comes from the powerhouse duo of writer 
Jonathan Nolan (Interstellar, The Dark Knight) and producerJJ Abrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams>, is based on a property created by 
Jurassic Park author Michael Crichton, and boasts one of the starriest 
ensembles ever put to celluloid (Anthony Hopkins, Ed Harris, Evan Rachel Wood, 
James Marsden, Thandie Newton and Jeffrey Wright all star).

Also, it sounds insane.

Like the 1973 Crichton-directed film on which it’s based, Westworld is a 
sci-fi/western hybrid about an American Old West-themed amusement park where 
robots are programmed to act out any fantasy or scenario that visitors desire. 
Of course, this being a Crichton project, something goes wrong in the park, 
causing the robots to revolt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOM8HNuRLIBI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOM8HNuRLIBI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOM8HNuRLIBI&media=>
As seen in the teaser, Wood plays Dolores, a young woman who doesn’t fidget 
when a fly lands in her eye, which leads us to suspect she’s a robot. An eerie 
male voice asks her to “question the nature of her reality”, which gives solid 
indication that Dolores is in for a rude awakening when all is eventually 
revealed to her.

Elsewhere in the rapidly cut promo, Newton sucks on her pinkie finger 
provocatively, Marsden smolders as always, and Hopkins – playing Westworld’s 
creative director Dr Robert Ford – terrifies with the menacing grin he 
perfected as Hannibal Lecter.

Judging by the footage, Nolan wasn’t joking around when he told Entertainment 
Weekly <http://www.ew.com/article/2015/01/23/jonathan-nolan-westworld> in 
January that he intends Westworld to be an “ambitious, subversive and f--ked 
up” series about “things that keep you up at night ... or trouble you”. The 
teaser manages to check off all those boxes in under a minute.

The series will debut in 2016.

 