
Three years and six months after I first went to my GP in Brighton and asked 
to enter the NHS gender reassignment pathway, I'm sitting at my computer, 
staring at a flickering cursor on an empty screen. Writing the closing entry in 
thisTransgender journey series 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/series/transgender-journey>, my first 
thought is to consider a return to normality. I no longer feel constantly aware 
that I have recently had a major operation (as long as I don't have to run for 
a bus, anyway).

Then I remember that much of the time, for me, transsexual living has not been 
extraordinary. It lent no added glamour or intrigue to a trip to the 
launderette. It threw up no complications that most other people would not have 
to face. Only two of its specific flashpoints –coming out 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman> and 
having sex reassignment surgery (SRS) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/30/sex-reassignment-surgery-transgender-journey>
 – caused immediate and significant changes to my relationships with myfamily 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/14/tell-family-transgender>, 
friends,colleagues 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
 and body. While they have long since ceased to need crisis management, all of 
these relations will continue to change, for reasons most likely unrelated to 
my gender.

On reflection, even trying to identify 'normality', physical or mental, in any 
life is absurd. So, far better to ask: was this four-year engagement with the 
medical services (which it will be after my finalGender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/gi/gender-identity-clinic/> appointment) worth it? Did 
I act on mylifelong gender issues 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/02/transgender-journey> in the 
right way? Do I feel more comfortable in myself, or the world around me, as a 
result?

I last analysed this in February 2011 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/feb/23/gender-reassignment-transgender-journey>
, when the slow, subtle effects ofhormone therapy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/12/transgender-health-and-wellbeing>
 were far from irrevocable. I concluded that yes, this was right for me, 
mentioning that many of the (few) documented cases of regret stemmed from poor 
surgical outcomes rather than the decision to undergo it.

So it's proved for me: I'm happy with the aesthetic, physical and sensual 
results of SRS. Just as I never had any serious doubts beforehand (I did have 
concerns, but mainly about how my body would react), I've felt no regret 
afterwards, about any of the process. This is hardly surprising: the gaps 
between clinical appointments allowed ample time to explore any apprehension 
before committing.

Surprisingly, changing my name 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/11/become-a-woman-juliet> came 
to feel like the biggest 'break' in my life. Most other aspects were gradual or 
long-anticipated: this was immediate and confronted me every day, even 
affecting my memories from when I went by something different. Transitioning 
did weird things to my sense of lived time, too: sometimes I felt like a 
teenager, as I found my style and dealt with hormonal changes; at others I felt 
far older than my years, as if I'd lived two lives. After a year or so these 
issues resolved themselves, and I could return my mind to more everyday things.

There were other, more serious psychological difficulties, which it would be 
dishonest to ignore. There's a strange pressure on LGBT people to present their 
lives as overwhelmingly positive: a reaction against past portrayals of us as 
destructive or unhappy. But the level of self-assessment and justification 
needed throughout transition took its toll. So did the strains of worrying 
about how people would respond to my shifting identity and appearance, whether 
or not verbal attacks would lead to physical ones, and the long period of 
living as female before hormone therapy. The aftershocks caught up with me as 
soon as I relaxed, and took a year to process.

These, however, have receded into the past, leaving me with a body that 
finally feels right. I am no longer experiencinggender dysphoria <>. I have 
stopped worrying about the authenticity of my identity, partly because I have 
been lucky enough not to be challenged about it too often.

If anything, it feels more authentic to have realised myself as I wanted to be 
rather than accepting the identity imposed on me. Anyway, I tired of debates 
about who was 'real' in the 90s, as people at school argued over whether Oasis 
were better than Take That because they weren't 'manufactured'. All that 
mattered washow good the music was (or wasn't) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1kaOGsC1S1s>.

Perhaps it helps that I don't care too much about claiming 'womanhood' for 
myself, separating concerns about being 'masculine' or 'feminine' from those 
about my body. (Maybe it's also telling that the first things I wished to buy 
after surgery were a suit and a vibrator.)

Deep down, I feel just as genderqueer after the physical changes as before. I 
believe that there are as many gender identities as there are people; all 
unique, all constantly being explored in conscious and unconscious ways.

But who's going to commission those blogs - or read them?
 