
I'm finally moving towards the second major stage of the gender reassignment 
pathway – surgery.

I asked myself: "Is this still what you want to do?" I'd never regretted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/feb/23/gender-reassignment-transgender-journey>
coming out as transsexual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman> or 
starting hormone therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/12/transgender-health-and-wellbeing>
, but both were reversible (at least to a point). This, less so. Some people 
live full-time in their desired gender without pursuing surgery, but I felt as 
certain as ever that it was the right course for me.

The clinicians at the Gender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/gi/gender-identity-clinic/> agreed, so I awaited a 
consultation date. In the meantime, I focused on other things – where to live, 
where towork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
 and what to write about.

On the appointed day I arrived at the clinic to meet surgeon James Bellringer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/aug/02/socialcare.mentalhealth> and 
Manjit, the clinical nurse specialist.

Dr Bellringer's first query threw me: "Who do you live with?" I've been 
privileged enough to live alone for almost my entire transition, finding it 
helpful to have my own space as I came to terms with my changing body, so I've 
not covered housing in this blog. Associationscannot refuse accommodation 'to a 
transsexual person' 
<http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/advice-and-guidance/your-rights/transgender/transsexual-people-your-rights-relating-to-the-provision-of-goods-facilities-and-services/>
, but it can still be precarious for trans people if anyone around them takes 
exception.

Housing became an issue when I decided to move from Brighton to London. 
Knowing one-person flats anywhere near central London were beyond my means, I'd 
asked around and looked online for shares, fretting about the possibility of 
moving in with strangers. Several trans friends had struggled with abusive 
flatmates, and securing a place that Iknew would be comfortable proved 
surprisingly difficult.

I told Dr Bellringer that, luckily, I'd found a housemate who I'd met before 
through mutual friends, and that we get on perfectly. "Is she close enough to 
look after you for a few weeks following surgery?" I explained that I'd raised 
this before moving in, and that she had kindly agreed to support me if 
necessary.

That covered, he asked how much I drink and smoke, if I have heart problems or 
diabetes, or have had any other operations. I was clear, so he raced through a 
detailed explanation of what they'll actuallydo to my body, covering potential 
outcomes and risks, with the ruthless efficiency of someone who does this 
several times a week.

Suddenly, I felt cold. I'd not read much beyond outlines of the available 
procedures 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_reassignment_surgery#Scope_and_procedures>. 
Certainly, I'd not been directly confronted with their physical realities in 
the way that Dr Bellringer put them to me. (If you want or need to know more 
about these – although I'm sure you're not reading this for voyeuristic reasons 
– he provides more information on what he offershere 
<http://www.bellringers.pwp.blueyonder.co.uk/grs.htm>.)

"Any questions?"

Slightly stunned, I regrouped. As I'm temping, with no annual leave or sick 
pay, I expressed my fears about surgery's after-effects making it impossible to 
work for weeks or even months – something I'd not anticipated when I entered 
the pathway nearly three years ago. Rightly, Dr Bellringer said that the clinic 
cannot help this. "You'll be on benefits. It won't be much."

I asked when surgery is likely to take place. I won't get confirmation just 
yet, but it should be in about six months' time. Having grown so frustrated 
aboutthe waiting times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/09/transgender-journey>, and 
spent the last year anxious about when and how surgery (and convalescence) 
might interfere with my other life plans, this seemed dauntingly soon.

I had no more questions. As I left, they gave me documentation on the 
operation and how to prepare for my pre-admission appointment and my eight-day 
hospital stay. I headed out with plenty to consider about how I will handle the 
practical and physical ramifications, but with my conviction about my path 
unshaken.
 