
These cows are in no hurry. Each just meanders to the dairy, all rolling 
hindquarters, swishing tails and loping heads, the blue-black and tan Rorschach 
ink-blot patching of their hides vivid against the washed-out Australian summer 
light. They stop as they please along the way. Chew cud. Moo. Drop pats. Moo 
again. They nudge the soft earth or a companion before snorting and continuing 
on up through the paddocks to the shed.


 It’s milking time – just as it’s always milking time in this dairy for about 
360 Friesians at Camden, where the outer orbit of Sydney gives way to the 
gentle rise that becomes the southern highlands. These cows are not held to the 
human clock and milked according to the dairy farmer’s traditionally antisocial 
(for both people and cows) timetable, at the crack of dawn and again at dusk. 
And they don’t have to line up for hours, either, cramped in a race, their 
udders bursting, in order for a dairy worker to quickly wash their teats, apply 
the suction cups, extract their milk, disinfect and send them on their way.

 Induced to wander to the dairy only by the irresistible promise of fresh 
pasture beyond, these animals are milked according to a pattern that largely 
meets their rhythm of grazing, watering, resting and lactating.

 They are not herded or cajoled in any way to head for the shed. There are no 
dogs snapping at stragglers’ fetlocks. It’s rare for people to bother them at 
all. Indeed, there’s scarcely a person in sight on this dairy farm, situated in 
the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries Elizabeth Macarthur 
Agricultural Institute.

 There are no people about because, once the cows reach the shed, they 
effectively milk themselves in what is the world’s first robotic rotary milking 
dairy. The result of a collaboration between the Swedish dairy equipment 
producer DeLaval, Dairy Australia and the University of Sydney’s faculty of 
veterinary science, the Camden property is host to the research-and-development 
prototype FutureDairy, which can automatically milk up to 90 cows an hour.
 Life on a FutureDairy farm in Tasmania. 
 Two commercial models of FutureDairy have been operating since 2012 on 
large-scale Australian dairy farms, one in Tasmania and the other in Victoria. 
About 36 other commercial farms in Australia employ the smaller-scale robotic 
technologies of other innovators to do what has hitherto been the backbreaking 
manual and, later, semi-automated, work of dairy farmers for well over two 
centuries.

 While the name FutureDairy is freighted with prescience for an era yet to be 
reached, it is, in fact, already arriving and transforming the economies and 
lifestyles of the early adopters. Its positive implications for dairy 
production are no less profound for animal welfare and, of course, for the 
wellbeing of the dairy farmer – a person who, almost invariably, endures the 
unforgiving rigidities and relentless physical work of milking cows by virtue 
of birth rather than choice.

Dairy price drop: Nationals and Labor grapple with farmer crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/dairy-price-drop-nationals-and-labor-grapple-with-farmer-crisis>
 No less acute or obvious are the potential ramifications for the dairy farm 
labourer. On a conventional Australian dairy farm the rule of thumb is one 
human for about 100 cattle. So, a farm with 400 cows would probably employ four 
people, nearly three-quarters of whose time is spent milking (the rest would be 
dedicated to feeding, feed production and animal welfare).

 But at FutureDairy each of the cows, once in the dairy yard, moves on to one 
of 16 milking points on the rotary platform. As the platform gently turns, 
robotic arms wash the teats and attach the cups. The milk is extracted, the 
teats disinfected and the cups flushed. About eight minutes later the cow steps 
off the revolving platform and into a yard, where it receives a feed reward 
before being allowed into fresh pasture. Each cow is identified by a dongle 
around its neck that electronically records and transmits the time and volume 
of its last milking.

 Sensors on the drafting gates that separate the dairy yards from the pasture 
automatically read each cow’s data. Those who’ve been milked too recently are 
sent back to pasture instead of on to the robotic milker.

 The farmer can control all this remotely: checking yields and production 
mechanics on an iPad and needing to attend the dairy only in case of a 
malfunction, after an automated phone call or text.

 Not a single person needs to touch a cow during any 24-hour milking cycle.

 In Australian agriculture you don’t need to imagine the future to be able to 
see a part of it.

 In a decade or two more of the cows than not on big dairy farms will probably 
milk themselves thanks to systems such as FutureDairy. Roving surface-based 
machines and drones, with their capacity to efficiently survey and even herd 
animals from above, will threaten the livelihood of that already dwindling 
breed, the stockman. Not to mention the kelpie.

 Global Positioning Systems technology is already the norm on many farms. 
Applied to traditional farming equipment such as tractors, harvesters, ploughs 
and sprayers, it has enhanced labour efficiency and helped curb costly waste by 
enabling large-scale crop farmers to harvest and spray fields with pesticide 
and herbicide with centimetre accuracy.

Robots that can plant, fertilise, spray, weed, monitor, harvest, pack and 
transport crops will inhabit the countryside

Such traditional, driven machines – even those adapted with GPS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gps> – are, however, already threatened 
with obsolescence. Big, driverless machines, including tractors, will be a 
reality on some Australian farms this decade. While they will represent an 
obvious next phase in the evolution of that titan of rural production, the 
tractor, first commercially introduced to Australia by AH McDonald in 1908, 
people-less vehicles will not representthe cutting edge of agricultural 
technology and production.

That will most likely be left to the robots. Robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/robots> that can plant, fertilise, 
spray, weed, monitor and, ultimately, harvest, pack and transport crops will 
inhabit the countryside. While the drones hum overhead other remotely 
controlled intelligent surface robots will be able to inspect and herd farm 
animals (the prototype of one, “the Shrimp”, has already been tested with the 
FutureDairy herd at Camden).

 Australia’s 2013 national food plan outlined a commonwealth ambition to 
increase by 45% the value of this country’s agricultural and food-related 
exports by 2025 – a figure that can be achieved only with the continual advent 
of technologies such as robots. In 2010–11 the Australian Bureau of Statistics 
estimated that in just one year the area covered by farming in Australia had 
increased by 3% to 409.7m hectares, while the land mass dedicated to cropping 
went up 24% to 32m hectares. About 53% of the continent’s total land mass is 
used for agriculture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70cca3fc2d55c12f9dfcbfb894dcdd348a3360d5%2F0_0_3000_2015%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70cca3fc2d55c12f9dfcbfb894dcdd348a3360d5%2F0_0_3000_2015%2F3000.jpg>
 Roving machines and drones will threaten the livelihood of that already 
dwindling breed, the stockman. Photograph: Quinn Rooney/Getty Images 
 Inverse to the significant rise in agricultural production, more and more 
Australians are leaving rural and remote areas for the big cities and urban 
centres. Almost 89% of us live in major cities and inner regional areas.

 Despite Australians’ sentimental and cultural attachment to those vast 
expanses of uninhabited outback, stock runs, russet fields and verdant crop 
lines that we romantically generalise as “the bush”, Australians have always 
predominantly been most comfortable dwelling and working on the coastal, urban 
plains where most big cities and centres are. While most Australians lived 
outside the cities at federation in 1901, by 1908 only four in 10 people lived 
rurally. By 2001, just 14% of Australians lived outside “urban” areas, which 
the ABS defines as a “population cluster” of 1,000 people.

Non-Indigenous Australia’s emotional nexus with the land is stretched with the 
emergence of each new urban generation

 Despite Australia’s agricultural output as a proportion of the economy being 
among the highest in the OECD, the number of farmers has been in steady decline 
since the 1960s as more and more small family operators sold out to large-scale 
businesses.

 According to ABS yearbooks, the proportion of workers employed in Australian 
agriculture fell from 30.2% in 1911 to 4.3% in 1996. The World Bank recorded a 
further significant 25% drop to 3.3% in the decade and a half to 2009. During 
the three decades to 2011 the number of Australian farmers declined by 106,200 
or 40%. This translated, in more starkly human terms, to an average of 294 
farmers leaving their properties each month.

 The human implication of all of this is clear: despite Australia’s reliance 
on locally produced food and its economic dependence on agricultural exports, 
the number of small- and medium-sized farmers living off the land is dwindling 
rapidly. Rural communities all across Australia are shrinking, along with the 
ancillary businesses and services – main-street shops, doctors’ surgeries, 
schools, car dealerships, places of worship, community centres and sporting 
clubs – that have traditionally served them.

Scorched earth: at the epicentre of the Queensland drought, a family sells the 
last of their cattle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/27/scorched-earth-at-the-epicentre-of-the-queensland-drought-a-family-sells-the-last-of-its-cattle>
 Yes, while it produces most of Australia’s food needs, contributes handsomely 
to gross domestic product and export earnings, the bush is being progressively 
hollowed out of its people. By the time, in a future this side of the horizon, 
that the cows are milking themselves – when commercial applications of the 
Shrimp are herding the sheep and cattle, when few tractors carry drivers, and 
when robots are tending fields and harvesting apple and pear orchards devoid of 
people – what will remain of this country’s supposed connection to the land?

 The next question, of course, is will Australians in the cities still be 
willing to spend their taxes on supporting services, including roads and 
hospitals, the maintenance of the national broadband network, telephone systems 
and publicly funded transport?

 Will the bush be reduced to a vast mechanised place of scant human habitation 
beyond those specialists who service the robots – a place that exists primarily 
to service the cities and the export markets?

 Non-Indigenous Australia’s emotional nexus with the land – with its roots in 
masculine pioneering stories and blinkered notions of benign settlement, and 
for all its subsequent embodiment in the over-mythologised, stylised story of 
Anzac – is already stretched with the emergence of each new urban generation.

 Robots could well see it broken and “the bush” largely reduced to a state of 
imagination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a6ced09692cd739d732e106e97005dfb812f016%2F0_282_5285_3687%2F5285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a6ced09692cd739d732e106e97005dfb812f016%2F0_282_5285_3687%2F5285.jpg>
 A wheat farmer checks his crop at Warracknabeal, in Victoria’s Wimmera region. 
‘For each generation, two farms would combine into one and this trend continues 
today,’ says farmer Phil Koschitzke. Photograph: Peter Walton Photography/Getty 
Images 
 In the late 1980s Phil Koschitzke left the family wheat farm at Warracknabeal 
in Victoria’s Wimmera district to study at university in Melbourne. He returned 
in 1997 with a doctorate in aeronautical engineering to become the fifth 
generation of his family to grow wheat on land that his original settler 
forebears began working in the 1870s. “I suppose I was a farmer who went and 
got an education – not a doctor who went farming,” he says.

Ever since the original settlement … the size of farm holdings has 
continuously expanded
Phil Koschitzke, wheat farmer 
 He explains succinctly the constant exodus of farmers from, and the continual 
amalgamation of, properties in the Wimmera, in the context of the evolution of 
automation, beginning with the tractor and combine harvester in newly federated 
Australia. “When this area was settled each farmer was allowed to select 320 
acres only,” he says.

“Ever since the original settlement, as farming practices became more 
automated, the size of farm holdings has continuously expanded about every 
score [20 years]. For each generation, two farms would combine into one and 
this trend continues today. My local area had 60 children enrolled at the 
primary school in my grandfather’s time. Now it’s about a handful of kids in 
total.”

 Institutions adapt accordingly, he says. Or shrink and eventually die.

 Sport, including various football codes, women’s basketball and netball 
competitions – with their legend-forging long historical inter-town rivalries – 
has traditionally been a community and social glue in the bush. But it’s 
getting increasingly difficult to field teams, as evidenced by the abandonment 
at the end of the 2015 season of the Mallee football netball league. This led 
to the merger of old rivals Walpeup-Underbool and Ouyen United, and the entry 
of the new club, the Ouyen United “Kangas”, into the Wimmera league. As if to 
reinforce Koschitzke’s point that a doubling of the size of properties each 
generation has a corresponding negative impact on social infrastructure, the 
Mallee league formed in 1997 with the merger of the Northern Mallee and 
Southern Mallee football leagues.

 He says his local Warracknabeal football league is finding it increasingly 
difficult to field teams, as skilled labourers – especially tradesman, such as 
electricians and carpenters – are lured to the cities and regional centres by 
the prospect of steady work and higher pay. “Skilled workers are in demand, but 
there is a shortage of them because they are all leaving,” he says. “There’s a 
corresponding dwindling demand for unskilled manual labour, partly as a result 
of automation.”

Life after the exodus: Nhulunbuy picks up the pieces of its worst year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/06/life-after-the-exodus-nhulunbuy-picks-up-the-pieces-of-its-worst-year>
 Koschitzke uses GPS equipment on his heavy machinery. It has dramatically 
minimised his fatigue (and, therefore, the risk of an accident), increased his 
efficiency and lowered costs – especially those associated with spraying. This 
is due to the capacity of global positioning to minimise duplication or double 
spraying.

 Not surprisingly, Koschitzke does not use robotics, which are largely at the 
research-and-development stage for broad-acre farming in Australia. But, he 
says, farmers of all types are becoming increasingly engaged with the emergence 
of a new generation of smart automated machinery and its potential to further 
enhance production and efficiencies.

 In a report published in June 2015 by the committee for economic development 
of Australia on the future of the Australian workforce, a research team led by 
the University of Sydney’s Hugh Durrant-Whyte wrote: “In the next decade, most 
mines will operate with less than a third of current workforces, with a 
significant number of these engaging remotely. The same levels of automation 
are likely to occur in related industries where routine operation is the norm, 
such as in agriculture.”

 A standout example of automating mineral production is Rio Tinto’s giant 
Pilbara iron ore operations, a world leader in the use of remote-control mining 
technology. The operations of Rio’s 15 mines, four ports, 1,700km of rail, 180 
locomotives, 11,000 ore cars and 361 other giant vehicles in the Pilbara have 
consistently evolved with increasing automation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a282da92862d8152537cd249752db841e3d30a%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a282da92862d8152537cd249752db841e3d30a%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Autonomous haul trucks drive through a pit at a Rio Tinto iron ore mine in 
Western Australia’s Pilbara region. Rio is a world leader in the use of 
remote-control mining technology. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
 Automation began with train ore dumpers, stackers and, in 1994, robotic 
product analysis, and now includes autonomous haulage and drilling systems. 
Since June 2010 the management of individual production components was 
centralised to Perth, some 1,500km away. “The operations centre produces 
better, smarter, faster decisions at every level monitoring and controlling the 
mining, rail and port activities remotely from a single location,” Rio’s 
managing director of Pilbara Mines, Michael Gollschewski, wrote in his 
contribution to the committee for economic development’s workforce report.

 Of course, mining is not farming. But the research, development and 
implementation of automated and robotic mine equipment in Australia is 
distinctly linked to the world-leading contemporary Australian R&D for similar 
machines intended for this country’s agricultural sector.

 Which leads us back to the cows at Camden and the Shrimp – a collaboration 
between the University of Sydney’s Australian Centre for Field Robotics and the 
faculty of veterinary science’s dairy science group.

After the robot revolution, what will be left for our children to do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/may/11/robot-jobs-automated-work> 
The director of the field robotics centre, Prof Salah Sukkarieh, consulted on 
Rio’s Pilbara automation. He is now at the vanguard of making robots to work on 
farms. “In terms of field robotics – robots that can actually work outdoors – 
we are becoming international leaders, and the reason why is that so many other 
industries have been using it,” he says. “In mining, in infrastructure 
monitoring, in aerospace – we have been able to translate a lot of that 
knowledge across from Australian industry that already has these systems in 
place … into the agricultural industry. So we are leading the world, and we are 
doing some pretty cool stuff in that space.”

 In a field close to the Shrimp, you might soon find “the Ladybird”, a ground 
robot designed for broad-acre vegetable farming. The solar-powered machine is 
equipped with sensors for measuring vegetable growth, and for the detection of 
animal and plant pests. It has a robotic arm that can remove weeds and 
potentially harvest vegetables.

Asked if the Rio experiment was a potential template for the automation of 
larger-scale farm production, Sukkarieh says: “Yes, well that’s what we were 
thinking. I mean, it’s a while away because the difference is thatRio Tinto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rio-tinto> is a large corporation and so 
can invest heavily in the capital infrastructure … while in agriculture you 
still predominantly are dealing with individual players.

Every single country has some sort of automation program going on in 
agriculture
Salah Sukkarieh, Australian Centre for Field Robotics 
“But what you can imagine is … a farmer who has … a robot out there doing its 
task and relaying its information back to the desktop. It might be weeding or 
it might be fertilising or it might be seeding.”

 Will the farms of the near future be characterised by driverless tractors and 
harvesters, and an array of robots carrying out various tasks instead of 
humans? “I think so, yes,” he says. “You might be just looking at it from an 
Australian perspective but we are seeing that all around the world. Every 
single country has some sort of automation program going on in agriculture. So 
it won’t be long before we start to see an autonomous farm or a partly 
autonomous farm operating in some way.”

 While the automation of agricultural production and the phasing in of 
robotics would cost some jobs, it was also a response to shortages of reliable 
rural labour, he says.

“When you had the mining industry taking all the people it became a lot more 
expensive to get labour on to the farm and, hence, you are relying a lot more 
on contractors. Contractors will end up going where the dollars are and so you 
could have workers on your farm today but not tomorrow. So there is a labour 
variability that farmers are concerned about and there are labour costs that 
farmers worry about in those situations.

“When you don’t have a productive mining industry and you end up with greater 
access to affordable labour, then farmers aren’t really interested in 
automation any more. And so you kind of go through those cyclic patterns. 
That’s usually expected in any automation world – it kind of goes up and down 
but generally the trend over the longer term is that things end up being more 
automated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2163b9606082528bf5b5ceaa6aac58ae92188a3a%2F0_0_4333_2600%2F4333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2163b9606082528bf5b5ceaa6aac58ae92188a3a%2F0_0_4333_2600%2F4333.jpg>
 Crops on the Darling Downs of southern Queensland. Despite Australia’s 
reliance on locally produced food, the number of small- and medium-sized 
farmers living off the land is shrinking rapidly. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
 “Now, what that means is that the type of people who work on farms are 
different because they have to be more technology-ready and versed, and that 
has an implication for the rural region as a whole – you know, the town centre 
and what happens there. I think we are still trying to understand all that and 
I think that fits under the broader topic of social licence and what bringing 
in automation to an area does to that region as a whole, which we don’t quite 
know yet.”

Could carbon farming be the answer for a 'clapped-out' Australia?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/28/could-carbon-farming-be-the-answer-for-a-clapped-out-australia>
 When the economist Stephen Koukoulas contemplates automation and robotics in 
a liberal market economy, he describes an ideal model where those left behind 
because of attachment to an old workforce re-skill and advance, too. “From an 
economist’s perspective automation, technology – robots if you like – help with 
cost reduction and efficiency,” the Guardian Australia columnist says. “And all 
of that is good and desirable. Every business, government and even household 
uses things akin to robots: a vacuum versus a broom; the dishwashing machine 
versus a tub of hot water and a brush; a press-button heater versus gathering 
wood for a fire; the drill versus the screwdriver.

 “Automation in the production process yields efficiency and productivity 
benefits for each economic unit. Inevitably it means higher output with less 
labour. Or time saving. It is a critical driver of economic growth and with 
that comes higher living standards for the population, including even for the 
workers displaced by technological advancement who, in a strong economy, will 
find alternative employment. Redundant broom makers might become baristas, for 
example.

 “In the cities, where bank tellers are made redundant by computers, Eftpos 
and internet banking, there are alternative avenues for work in the hundreds of 
other potential occupations within a short radius of where they live. Perhaps 
it is in information technology, by driving an Uber car, as a gym instructor or 
working in the cafe industry. But in rural communities, where technological 
advancement has been just as rapid as in other industries, the displaced labour 
from mass production and huge, remotely operated, machinery and other 
technologies … have few options but to leave. There are few alternative 
occupations.”

Jobs lost in the bush to robots may not, ultimately, reappear in another guise 
in the towns, regional centres and cities

 The ideal public policy response to such rural labour market change is to 
bolster education, skills and training to maximise new opportunities for 
displaced workers in the bush. To soften the impact of the exodus of farming 
families from the land, federal and state governments have, since the 1980s, 
been decentralising the labour-intensive functions of some public service 
departments to regional cities. But in an age when algorithms can trade on 
global stock markets or write a newspaper story, aspects of commonwealth and 
state service delivery that were once labour-intensive – for example, the 
collation of taxation and social security data – are now computerised and 
automated.

 Jobs lost in the bush to robots may not, ultimately, reappear in another 
guise in the towns, regional centres and cities. The bush will be left without 
the jobs or the people who once did them.

 The combination of agricultural robots and the remodelling of crop and tree 
architecture will have clear consequences for a dwindling pool of itinerant 
labourers. Not to mention foreign backpackers. But as Salah Sukkarieh says: “ 
[Farmers] ultimately don’t care what the German backpacker is thinking. 
Eventually the technology will be a lot cheaper than a backpacker. A farmer 
who’s trying to run a business will look at it from that perspective.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c7f312418755de567fefe173be6608ce4a35f3%2F0_100_3334_1680%2F3334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c7f312418755de567fefe173be6608ce4a35f3%2F0_100_3334_1680%2F3334.jpg>
 Robotic milking at FutureDairy. ‘When you take people out of the system it 
becomes very predictable for cows because they don’t have to try to predict who 
is milking today, what mood they’re going to be in,’ says project leader Kendra 
Kerrisk. Photograph: FutureDairy 
 I had imagined the world’s first robotic rotary milking dairy at Camden to be 
a clinical, mechanical affair, antithetical to the steamy breath, soft 
underbellies and leisurely bovine sensibilities of the cattle it deals with. 
This robot-produced milk connoted for me a battery hen-style operation, 
insensitive and inhumane.

 It was, in reality, the opposite. The aroma – ammonia and shit – tells you 
right away that you’re in a dairy. And while there’s plenty of metal, including 
the robotic arms that wash the teats, attach and remove the cups, the animals 
are remarkably calm.

I am standing by the milking robot with Kendra Kerrisk, FutureDairy’s New 
Zealand-born project leader and senior researcher. She smiles and says, “Happy 
cows. Very happy.”Cattle <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cattles>, she 
says, are creatures of habit that “really like predictability and routine”.

 “And when you take people out of the system it becomes very predictable for 
cows because they don’t have to try to predict who is milking today, what mood 
they’re going to be in – you know, are they going to be in a rush because it’s 
Friday night and they want to get to the pub, or are they going to have low 
tolerance because it’s Sunday morning and they’re going to have a hangover?”

The reality is it’s just a gorgeous way to farm. And I would love to get that 
message out
Kendra Kerrisk, FutureDairy 
 For at least a decade robotic milking has been a strong feature of the 
European dairy industry, where small herds of up to 200 cows are housed in 
barns and milked by small robot systems that service single or several cows at 
a time. The take-up in Australia has been slower because, for the most part, 
Australian herds are much bigger and the cattle live in pasture.

 A bigger machine and an associated, food incentive-based cow-management 
system had to be designed. The 38 Australian dairy farmers who use some sort of 
robotic system have done so with different aims, Kerrisk says. Some want to 
increase their herds and production. Others want to maintain – or even downsize 
– the number of cows and consequently reduce labour or reallocate it to other 
farming priorities such as pasture management and animal welfare.

 Since the introduction of semi-automated milking in Australia, herd sizes 
have increased. The close, personal attention to the welfare of individual 
animals has gradually eroded. Once, the farmer of the small herd would have 
been familiar with the quirks of individual animals. He might even have named 
them.

 It seems ironic that, as Kerrisk explains it, robotic systems such as 
FutureDairy will liberate the farmer to pay more attention to individual 
animals. “I’m very mindful that consumers or the general public would hear 
something about robotic farming and would think, ‘That’s awful – it’s metal on 
flesh, it’s industrialised, now all of a sudden the farmer can’t even be 
bothered to milk the cows.’ But the reality is it’s just a gorgeous way to 
farm. And I would love to get that message out to the general public because I 
think if they could see it and understand it, it is just so far removed from 
factory farming.”

 Kerrisk believes that while some dairy farmers will definitely use robotics 
to shed jobs and cut labour costs, ultimately the impact on employment in the 
Australian dairy industry could be negligible. “Some have done it [adopted 
robotics] in order to attract the next generation back on to the farm, some 
have done it as a retirement plan – they think, ‘Well, we don’t want to quit 
farming just yet but we are getting too old to be doing it as intensively as we 
are so let’s put robots on and take a step back to reduce the number of labour 
units.’

We are talking about using swarms of lightweight, low-cost machines to do a 
multitude of tasks
Campbell Newman, SwarmFarm 
“I don’t think it’s going to cost jobs. I think if anything it’s going to help 
us attract people into the industry. The reality is that we just don’t have 
enough people out there to milk the cows at the moment and farmers are finding 
it tougher and tougher to find good staff … It does require a different skill 
set which means that our farms’ staff will need different levels of training.”

 She says that unless you’re born into dairy farming “it’s quite hard to 
develop a passion for it”. “But if you grow up with it then you know you could 
get shat on by a cow and you know you have to milk in the wee hours of the 
morning and you have to do it again in the afternoon and you can’t go off to 
sports after school because it’s milking time. If you’ve not grown up with it 
it’s really quite hard to sell it to someone. But when you take away that 
drudgery of having to milk cows or having to be there at set milking times 
twice a day then all of a sudden it becomes a lot more appealing.”

 Even though it is probably not far away, you will need to imagine this: a 
swarm of small, lightweight intelligent machines with various sensors, that 
will plant crops and then wander through them, monitoring and accurately 
predicting the yield, removing weeds, killing parasites and harvesting the 
fruit, vegetables or grain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc8e0c19a0373ca253b4a1d993c6115b014104c%2F40_24_2198_1319%2F2198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transforming%20the%20bush%3A%20robots%2C%20drones%20and%20cows%20that%20milk%20themselves%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftransforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc8e0c19a0373ca253b4a1d993c6115b014104c%2F40_24_2198_1319%2F2198.jpg>
 A SwarmFarm robot. The company believes its ‘Swarmbots’ – cheaper and more 
agile than traditional heavy farming equipment – will make it easier to work 
land that is now unviable. Photograph: SwamFarm 
 This is the aim of SwarmFarm, a company that grew from the desire of Andrew 
and Jocie Bate, grain growers from central Queensland, and the agronomist and 
horticulturalist Neville Crook to use latest technology to enhance farming 
productivity. SwarmFarm has also collaborated with Sukkarieh’s centre for field 
robotics and with researchers from the Queensland University of Technology.

 Three prototype robots – “SwarmBots” – have been tested on the Bate family 
property near Emerald and, by mid-2017, will be available to farmers in other 
parts of Australia on a fee-for-service basis. This year the company will begin 
offering a weed control service in broad acreage grain and cotton farms, 
orchards and vineyards in the Emerald district. Ultimately the company aims to 
significantly expand into new national and potentially international markets.

Welcome to the robot-based workforce: will your job become automated too?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/19/robot-based-economy-san-francisco>
 The SwarmFarm system comprises “the Swarm” (multiple robots working 
together); the SwarmHive (the replenishment station for herbicide, fuel, 
fertiliser, insecticide or seed); and the SwarmView (the app used to monitor 
the robots in the field). None of this works without a farmer. He or she is the 
“SwarmKeeper”.

 It’s an idea that challenges not only the orthodoxies of traditional farming, 
but also the Australian and multinational producers of agricultural equipment, 
such as John Deere and Case IH, whose heavy machinery has long dominated 
Australia’s rural landscapes.

SwarmFarm’s company chairman, the former Queensland premier Campbell Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/campbell-newman>, says: “Our 
philosophy is this – farming now is about very big machines, expensive 
machines, heavy machines, and we’ve hit the productivity plateau. But we are 
talking about using swarms of lightweight, low-cost machines to do a multitude 
of tasks. One of these robots will actually be able to do, we believe very 
easily, not just weed control but also insect control, fertiliser application 
and planting.

“The only other part of the cycle in, say, grain cropping is harvesting. So 
one machine with appropriately designed applications or detachable equipment 
will eventually be able to do all of those things.”

Will the people who once worked in the dairies stay in the bush and learn how 
to write code?

 The principals of SwarmFarm believe the robots, cheaper and more agile than 
traditional heavy equipment, will make it easier to work land that is now 
unviable. Efficiencies in spraying and fertiliser applications will also have 
environmental benefits. But will the robots and the SwarmKeeper cost rural jobs?

“There’s a lot of talk about job losses and changes to the workforce due to 
robotics,” says Newman. “I think there are far greater ramifications for other 
industries than there are in agriculture.Agriculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/agriculture> has already seen … the 
deployment of a lot of capital, you know very big machines, expensive machines 
and huge productivity gains and there isn’t a lot of labour out there now.

“So we don’t see that there will be significant disruptions in that regard 
because of the labour-saving side of it. What we see is that there will be 
probably technological jobs created in rural Australia … jobs that didn’t exist 
before – people who can write code, people who can repair robotics systems and 
develop things for farmers’ new applications.”

 That, of course, is the next great challenge to rural economic adjustment. 
Will the people who once worked in the dairies stay in the bush and learn how 
to write code? And will the labourers, who come in at picking time, teach 
themselves how to repair robotic systems? Or will they just walk away and 
abandon the bush to the robots – and to the cows that milk themselves?

• This essay appears in Griffith Review 52: Imagining the Future 
<https://griffithreview.com/editions/imagining-the-future/>, edited by Julianne 
Schultz and Brendan Gleeson (Text).
 