
Take me there: Rota Vicentina, Portugal


With its vast, empty beaches washed by Atlantic breakers, sun-bleached 
villages and forests of cork and eucalyptus, the Alentejo offers a glimpse of 
what the Algarve looked like before mass tourism. A new 340km walking route, 
the Rota Vicentina (rotavicentina.com/en <http://rotavicentina.com/en/>), is 
opening up this overlooked corner of south-west Portugal. Hotel packages from 
tour operator Sunvil (sunvil.co.uk <http://www.sunvil.co.uk/>) will allow 
walkers to take on bite-sized chunks of the route with taxi transfers to return 
them to their hotel. A week's B&B at the Herdade do Touril, a manor house with 
pool in the Costa Vicentina National Park, costs from £522pp including flights 
and car hire.

It's a good time to… get kids into the kitchen

 A young baker with home-made muffins. Photograph: Sebastian Pfuetze/Corbis 
With the horse-meat scandal still galloping along, there's surely never been a 
better time to teach our children about good food and its provenance. Take your 
little Nigels and Nigellas along to Brighton's Children's Food Festival this 
Easter for blindfolded tastings, free hands-on cookery classes and a noodle 
workshop with Wagamama (29-30 March,brightonfoodfestival.com 
<http://www.brightonfoodfestival.com/>.)

Farm visits and kitchen garden tours are included in Augill Castle's popular 
cookery courses for children, as well as the chance to learn to cook in a 
castle in the Lake District (£65 for a half-day,stayinacastle.com 
<http://stayinacastle.com/>). This year the hotel is offering family cookery 
days giving parents and children the chance to plan, prepare and cook a 
three-course meal before sitting down to eat it together.

Food Safari, which specialises in behind-the-scenes tours of artisan producers 
in Suffolk, will be targeting young foodies with sausage-making workshops at 
Ipswich's Rose House Butchery. Children can create their own sausage filling, 
mixing meat, rusk and flavourings, before learning to link sausages to take 
home. The courses will run in the school holidays for children aged between six 
and 12. The next dates are 11 April and 30 May (£35,foodsafari.co.uk 
<http://www.foodsafari.co.uk/>).

Give me a break: the week's best deals


Easter in the Lakes Children under 15 stay free at the Castle Inn Hotel near 
Keswick this Easter. Family rooms start at £220 per night, based on two adults 
and one child sharing. Additional children in the room stay for free and pay 
for breakfast. The hotel, which has a pool, gym and tennis court, will be 
laying on activities such as crafts and Easter egg hunts over the four-day 
period (castleinncumbria.co.uk <http://castleinncumbria.co.uk/>)

Continental camping The camping and mobile-home operator Venue Holidays is 
offering savings of 25% on peak- season holidays to the Vendée and Côte d'Azur 
in France, and the Venetian Riviera in Italy. A seven-night holiday in a 
three-bedroom mobile home at St Hilaire with return ferry crossings from Dover 
to Calais costs from £703 for a family of up to six, departing on 26 July (
venueholidays.co.uk <http://venueholidays.co.uk/>)
 