
“Nur die harten kommen in den garten” (only tough guys get into the garden). 
With this Teutonic exhortation our guide, Richard Oberkalmsteiner, leads us – a 
group of “soft Scottish mens” – up into the mountains of the South Tirol for a 
week-long trek around the Sarntal (or Sarentino) Valley.

There are six of us: three Daves, an Alastair, an Alex and a Ruaridh. Our 
collective mountaineering level amounts, approximately, to the endurance 
required to huff and puff up a few munros. But we have previously undertaken 
one Alpine trek together. That was six years ago in the North Tirol – on the 
Austrian side of the border – when our average age was 40 and we took to the 
hills to shake off a collective midlife crisis.

Now we’re back, this time on the south side, technically in Italy, but still 
noticeably Austrian in its mountain culture. National distinctions are only a 
part of the complexity. The Tirol is a mosaic of valleys, self-enclosed with 
their individual dialects; worlds unto themselves.

Richard is clearly more wiener schnitzel than cappuccino. Lean muscle with a 
weathered exterior, he has walked or skied the Tirol his whole life. From the 
age of 10 he was hauling 30kg hay bales up vertiginous slopes to summer grazing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432727849808%2Fe2a251cf-7b76-4f02-b092-e1836bc06a22-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20in%20the%20South%20Tirol%3A%20the%20walk%20of%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20in%20the%20South%20Tirol%3A%20the%20walk%20of%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432727849808%2Fe2a251cf-7b76-4f02-b092-e1836bc06a22-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘The average age of our group is now nearer 50 and midlife issues remain 
unresolved’: the group in front of the Dolomites. Photograph: Richard 
Oberkalmsteiner 
He walks “the walk” – the modest stride, the unhurried pace, the serenity that 
requires no destination. To walk in this zen-like state (if you can achieve it) 
is to be impervious to the differences between ascent and descent. Seemingly 
ageless, Richard is definitely one of “die harten”.

Where he glides, we creak and moan. The average age of our group is now nearer 
50 and midlife issues remain unresolved. One of the Daves, an internet 
entrepreneur, has only just made it on time, having been delayed in Edinburgh 
by what he describes as a “sex injury”. (In fact, he fell into a borrow pit on 
a construction site after partying too hard with his fiancée and spent the 
night in A&E; group therapy sessions will evidently need to be more rigorous 
this time.)

From the bus ride out of Verona into the hotel in Sarentino village, most of 
our first day is spent preening and faffing over kit. Almost all of us have 
forgotten things, apart from Alastair, an actor, who looks fabulous. After a 
first night of pampering in the delightful Hotel Höllrigl – delicious meal, our 
final taste of individual rooms – the staff wave us off in the morning with 
gifts of penknives. Richard leads us away from such trifling luxuries. It has 
been the wettest, coldest summer in living memory, he says.

Day two: a 1,742m ascent. It rains heavily. We do not walk “the walk”.

On our way through mountain meadows we pass picture-book Alpine cattle, still 
and silent. To compensate for their bovine silence, Online Dave finds a 
“cowbells app” on his smartphone, which ring-a-ding-dings as we ascend one side 
of the Sarntal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432728040010%2Fca476e79-76ff-49d6-883c-627fb92534d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20in%20the%20South%20Tirol%3A%20the%20walk%20of%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20in%20the%20South%20Tirol%3A%20the%20walk%20of%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432728040010%2Fca476e79-76ff-49d6-883c-627fb92534d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 You tak’ the high road: Online Dave out in front. Photograph: David Mackenzie 
Somewhere on the edge of a forest, the rain and cosmopolitan chatter 
eventually subside; Richard leads us through the mist into an improbably 
romantic hut. (To picture this, imagine a cultural space somewhere betweenThe 
Lord of the Rings and The Sound of Music.) There, the farmer Goasl and his wife 
Rosi cook us dumplings of nettle, wild boar and cheese, served in steinpilz and 
pfifferlinge sauces.

The cuisine gives a hint of Italian influence: more subtle and inventive than 
the sauerkraut north.

Having fed us, Goasl cracks his whip in farewell – literally. The whip is 
several metres long and requires a wildly graceful flourish of his body from 
side to side. It retorts loudly, like rifle-fire, echoing around the valley.

What kind of holiday is this? A bunch of emotionally bruised men slogging from 
hut to hut, across peaks, the luxuries decreasing the further they go. At the 
first overnight hut we drown our sorrows in kaiserschmarrn pancakes and 
weissbier. Next day we suffer the pains of middle age in body and mind. Online 
Dave’s shoulder hurts, but he sweats it out.

We agree a formula for suffering: there are existential anxieties, about which 
you can do nothing, then there are “hole in the ground” struggles: practical 
problems with engineering solutions. Hills and human bodies are problems to be 
surmounted. Actor Alastair gets a smartphone message telling him that his 
decision to be here has cost him a crucial audition. It’s not clear which 
category of angst this fits.

The Tirolean Alps are young mountains – a mere 160 million years old – which 
is why their peaks are high. They are pimply adolescents next to the Grampians 
of Scotland, which are geologically ancient at 470m years old, worn down by 
eons of deep time. Scotland is on our collective mind as we walk, as this is 
last September (the best time to walk here), and the referendum is just days 
away.

Day three: the aches subside. The walking falls into a rhythm. We begin to 
disappear into ourselves. The landscape shifts from green pastoral to grey 
waste. We leave the Alpenrosen Hof at 2,214m, traversing a glacial bowl of 
scree and frostbitten geological debris, until we arrive at the fabulously 
bleak Flaggerschartenhütte at 2,481m. Despite its isolation, it is full; we are 
grateful for our crammed dormitory space and the warmth of smelly bodies.

We squeeze ourselves next to the fire in an eating area packed with steaming 
Gore-Tex-clad hikers. By some biblical catering trick, the proprietor supplies 
each guest with wine and beer and a surprisingly interesting stew. The bread is 
home-baked. A guitar appears.

In a scene that would be a cultural cringe anywhere else, we sing Robert Burns 
songs. The Austrian speakers in the room – who experience no such thing as 
embarrassment – join in the choruses. When they reply with their own folk 
classics, Richard yodels sweetly. Climactically, the entire crowd inside the 
cold grey stone of the Flaggerschartenhütte sings the German-language version 
of “Auld Lang Syne”.

Day four: hungover but happy, oddly limber and free, time slows, clouds lift, 
the sun breaks through. The beauty of the Tirol is flabbergasting. There is no 
feeling of effort. We begin to walk the “walk”. Flattening out at 2,200m, we 
find ourselves in a vast grassy meadow. Alastair the actor wanders off to 
whisper to grazing horses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432728225498%2Ff8099800-47ad-46d8-9463-a925a8eaa1dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20in%20the%20South%20Tirol%3A%20the%20walk%20of%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20in%20the%20South%20Tirol%3A%20the%20walk%20of%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F31%2Fwalking-south-tirol-italy-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432728225498%2Ff8099800-47ad-46d8-9463-a925a8eaa1dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mountain high: a friendly greeting at Alpenrosen Hof. Photograph: David 
Mackenzie 
We eat ham rolls and apples in blazing sunshine. We are in the garden. “Nur 
die harten kommen in den garten,” Richard sighs. “All my life, that saying has 
depressed me.”

We laugh.

That afternoon comes the culmination of our South Tirolean trek, as we inch 
round a shoulder of the Penser Joch Pass and reach Rifugio Santa Croce Di 
Lazfons, a mountain hut whose small chapel was built in 1860 on the ruins of a 
16th-century pilgrim church. To our left, we look out on what must be one of 
the most impressive geographical sights in Europe: the Dolomites, rising like 
the spikes of a grey geological eruption from green surrounding hills.

We drink beer at the rifugio. From there, we climb to 2,600m and revel in the 
splendour of the views. All of us, that is, except for Online Dave, who takes 
to his bunk with a mysterious fever. The three-day walk back down to Bolzano is 
mere pleasure by comparison, eating and drinking and laughing and arguing all 
the way down. We walk the walk and talk the talk. No other form of “exercise” 
releases your body like this, or gets you close to this kind of communion. 
There is no better way to be with friends.

We did not need to be hard get into the garden. We walked to be together and 
to climb out of a midlife hole – and we did. But when Online Dave got back for 
a check-up, his doctor told him he had walked the entire trip, back-pack and 
all, with a broken shoulder. As it happens, one of us really was a tough guy.

Essentials


For information, go to suedtirol.info <http://www.suedtirol.info/en/>. British 
Airways, EasyJet and Monarch fly to Verona. Book accommodation first by calling 
the huts directly. Rooms start from €20 a night. Guides can be booked via
bergfuehrer-suedtirol.it <http://bergfuehrer-suedtirol.it/> and cost from €200 
a day
 