
Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> has 
confirmed that it is considering launching a new national newspaper.

It has not disputed a Press Gazette report 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/mirror-team-led-alison-phillips-working-new-cut-price-national-newspaper>
, citing “well-placed sources”, that a team of its journalists is working on a 
new title, which will have a cheap cover price or, just possibly, be 
distributed for free.

The team is being led by the Daily Mirror’s weekend editor, Alison Phillips, 
who also writes a weekly column, as she did this Wednesday.

Officially, all the company will say is that it is “exploring several 
alternative revenue streams.”

But it has pointedly not denied the reports that it is contemplating a paper 
similar in approach toi <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i>, the title which 
has enjoyed sales success since it was launched by the Independent’s publisher 
in 2010 (initially selling for 20p, now 40p on weekdays).

In the latest set of print circulation figures produced by ABC, i sold 274,000 
copies a day, almost 3% fewer than a year ago. The Mirror, which has a weekday 
price of 60p, sold 826,000, down more than 10% over the 12 months.

Over the past couple of years, Trinity Mirror’s chief executive, Simon Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simon-fox>, has concentrated resources on 
expanding the company’s digital portfolio.

Although it gains its largest revenue stream, as with all national newspaper 
publishers, through its newsprint publications, it was prepared to accept a 
relatively slow, if inexorable, decline in print sales while seeking an online 
future.

However, it would appear that Trinity has rethought its strategy after being 
spooked by the sales increase of the rivalDaily Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailystar> following the decision by its 
owner, Richard Desmond’s Northern and Shell, to slash its cover price, now down 
to just 20p.

The rate of the Mirror’s decline subsequently increased while ABC’s statistics 
reveal that the Star has enjoyed a sales hike. In November 2015, the last 
available figures, the Star sold more than 450,000 a day, up by most 50,000 
copies since its price cut and almost 3% year on year.

Desmond has also cut the Daily Express’s Saturday issue to 45p, compared to 
the Mirror’s 90p Saturday price (and even cheaper than the Express’s weekday 
55p).

Extra sales gained through price cuts do not result in additional profits, of 
course. At the time Desmond launched his price war, the Guardian reported a 
senior newspaper executive as saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/02/sun-and-mirror-zero-chance-of-deep-price-cuts-as-retailers-dump-star>
 that a 10% to 20% uplift in sales for the Star could cost the publisher as 
much as £400,000 a week.

Desmond’s decisions, and the possibility of Fox’s newspaper launch, should be 
seen in the context of an apparent breakdown in relationship between the two 
men over potential takeover negotiations.

In late November last year, in an interview with the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/business/industries/media/article4626016.ece>, 
Fox spoke about the advantages of adding the Express titles to his Trinity 
stable.

A merger, he suggested, would provide plenty of cost-cutting opportunities. He 
was quoted as saying: “There are many duplicated functions, and scale does 
matter. National advertisers need scale.”

A couple of days later, in an interview with Campaign 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/desmond-accuses-mirror-talking-express-takeover-boost-its-own-share-price/1375222>
, Desmond launched a fierce attack on Fox, accusing him of talking up the 
prospect of a takeover of the Express group as a way of shoring up Trinity’s 
share price. Desmond even said he wanted his rival to “Fox off”.

He confirmed that Trinity Mirror had made an approach to his company’s bankers 
about the possibility of acquisition, but said: “I personally never had a 
conversation and never heard of any proposal that seemed to relate to the real 
world.

“Meanwhile, during the same period we tried through a major global investment 
house to arrange a meeting so that we ourselves could buy the Mirror group.

“Whilst their chairman, David Grigson, was interested, I understand Mr Fox 
blocked the meeting so it did not happen.”

And now comes a new front in the battle between the pair. Could this turn out 
to be a precursor to a takeover by one or the other?
 