
How do you like your contemporary art? A quick hit of juicy mischief, a larky 
take on mortality, binful of bluebottles, pocketful of glitter, everything you 
never wanted to know and more about the artist's entrails? Right then, give
Anselm Kiefer <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer> a very 
wide berth - because, as the show about to open at White Cube, London, will 
confirm, he doesn't do droll, he does the big embarrassing stuff, the stuff 
that matters: the epic slaughters of the world, the incineration of the planet, 
apocalypse then, apocalypse often; the fragile endurance of the sacred amid the 
cauterised ruins of the earth.

But lately, the undertaker of history has turned gardener. From deep beneath 
the loam of memory heaped over the canvas, Kiefer's vast, rutted wastelands 
have germinated brilliant resurrections: pastel blooms, spikes of verdure 
sprouting irrepressibly through the skin of a hard-baked earth-rind; or 
peachy-pink poppies trembling atop spindly black stalks that climb gawkily from 
bituminous slag. So, notwithstanding the massacre du jour served up with the 
cornflakes in our daily newsprint, for Kiefer in his current redemptive temper, 
hope really does spring eternal.

He must be the most un-hip artist ever shown by White Cube, the very Sanhedrin 
of cool; barely a contemporary painter-sculptor at all, if the range framing 
the contemporary goes from coyly self-effacing minimalism to gaudy showboating. 
What's more, Kiefer does earthspace, not cyberspace. No Luddite, he none the 
less has let it be known that what he dislikes most about computers is the 
indiscriminate quality of their memory, a universe of data held simultaneously, 
accessible at the click of a mouse, permanently available and impervious to 
either natural attrition or poetic distortion. Since nothing may be digitally 
forgotten, nothing may be truly recalled.

Much of Kiefer's art represents a resistance to this inhuman virtualisation of 
memory; its lazy democracy of significance, its translation into weightless 
impressions. The opposing pole from that alt/delete disposability is to make 
history obstinately material, laid down in dense, sedimentary deposits that 
demand patient, rugged excavation. Kiefer's work burrows away at time, and what 
it exposes also makes visible the painful toil of the dig, skinned knuckles, 
barked shins and all.

For a German born amid the slaughterhouses of 1945, booting up could never be 
glibly electronic. Kiefer became famous in the 1970s and 80s for his frontal 
engagements with the totems of German history: blood- spattered trails 
befouling the deep Teutonic woods (his name means fir tree) from which the 
national culture had been proverbially rough-hewn; torch-lit timbered pantheons 
within which heroes and anti-heroes lay provisionally interred.

By the lights of the transatlantic avant garde, Kiefer did absolutely 
everything wrong. The choices were clear.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> either had to be hard-edged in 
its irreducibly angular minimalism, like Donald Judd's stacked boxes, which 
drew their ominous power from being nothing other than what they were; or else 
it had to be ecstatically collapsed into the raw and rowdy universe of signs: 
op'n'pop, flags and soup tins, one long cackle at art's valetudinarian pretence 
to hold the moral high ground. To grab our attention amid the modern clamour, 
art needed to drop the churchiness (especially abstract churchiness), and get 
out from under all those centuries of pompous sententiousness and obscure 
story- telling. All painting could be was flat-out play (with the emphasis on 
flat).

Wrestling with his Teutonic demons - and keeping close company with the likes 
of Gr√ºnewald, Altdorfer and Caspar David Friedrich - Kiefer could scarcely 
comprehend, much less identify with, the case for painterly amnesia, nor with 
the posturing for lightness and shallowness (he has never been much of a 
tease). Stubbornly, his art was always hewed to spatial depth and moral weight, 
so his landscapes take anti-flatness about as far as it can possibly go, 
opening immense vistas behind the picture, carved furrows on the surface 
stretching away to remote distance.

He does not do this innocently, of course. The practice of perspective, 
invented to imagine a bucolic world where pastoral fancies were enacted in a 
neverland of happy radiance, is recycled in Kiefer's landscapes to exterminate 
the fantasy. Kiefer's skies are often black, streaked with the phosphoric licks 
of a descending firestorm, and what vanishes at the vanishing point are the 
balmy consolations of rusticity. Bye-bye Hay Wain, hello the Somme.

Kiefer also needs immensity in order to frame the ancestral epics of life and 
death which for him remain art's proper quarry, and which sometimes extend 
beyond that far horizon into the infinite metaphysical space of the beckoning 
cosmos, where they interrupt the emptiness with mapped constellations. Events - 
scriptural, mythic, poetic, historic - are transfigured into written words on 
the painting, because, for Kiefer, words sanctify the events and figures to 
which they refer, rather than demystify them.

His seriousness about words, as weighty as the lead from which he forges his 
books, also puts him at odds with the ironic mode of quotation that has long 
defined modern art. Instead of mimicking the industrially reproduced comic 
signage of the mass market, Kiefer marks his pictures with the spidery 
inscriptions of his own hand, the moving finger quoting, inter alia: Isaiah, 
Paul Celan, Aeschylus. Mirabile dictu. Wordiness for Kiefer is painterliness. 
The library and the gallery, the book and the frame inseparable, even 
interchangeable, in his monumental archive of human memory. Not since Picasso's 
Guernica have pictures demanded so urgently that we studiously reflect and 
recollect in their presence.

Which may make Kiefer's new work sound like homework (to be severely marked by 
the forbidding Herr Professor Uber-Bombast). Nah, thanks all the same, you're 
thinking, would rather do a day with Damien and Trace. But advance preparation 
in the Iliad, the Kabbalah, not to mention higher scriptural exegesis, is 
really not the price of admission. For visual drama that (I guarantee) will 
haunt your dreams, there's no one alive to beat Anselm Kiefer. This is because, 
along with being a philosopher-poet, he also happens to be a craftsman of 
phenomenal power and versatility.

For some time, he has been experimenting with work that crosses the boundaries 
separating not just art and literature but painting and sculpture. Sometimes 
(as in the breathtaking Merkaba), a gesamtkunstwerk (total artwork) brings 
together free-standing sculptural elements in stone or lead in continuum with a 
vertical painted surface, the one acting as a terrestrial transport to the 
celestial apparition of the other. Some of the paintings on display at White 
Cube sustain this working method by setting a clump of thorn bushes before an 
ashy grey winterscape that speaks (much less ponderously than this makes it 
sound) of chill death and resurrection. But other paintings - especially in the 
triptych of confounding masterpieces that, alas, will be travelling to the 
Gallery of New South Wales in Sydney - have incorporated into the grittily 
loaded texture of the canvas itself a seething bed of organic (and occasionally 
inorganic) matter, so that the surface becomes akin to a yeasty humus; alive 
with golden flecks of straw and hay, twigs, whole branches which poke through 
the impasto. Another denial of the modernist dogma that authentic paint should 
never dare to present as anything other than itself.

Kiefer's paint is forthrightly the crusty medium of generation - the baked 
clay that develops the cracks and fissures from which vegetable life burgeons 
forth. Even when the paint is, in fact, just that, it is made to clot and 
coagulate, puddle and pond, or rise in frozen crests as if it were the volcanic 
material of primordial genesis.

Kiefer's painting, then, is not a representation of some feature of creation 
so much as a re-enactment of it. And if this sounds a mite up itself, well 
indeed it is, and none the worse for it. Even if you care not a toss for the 
esoterica, the richness of classical allusion (such as the catastrophic 
landscape of the fall of Troy, scarred with explosions of carbon and cobalt, 
and transmitted via a telephonic connection from Greek peak to peak in mimicry 
of Agamemnon's beacon signals to faithless Clytemnestra), you can still happily 
envelop yourself in the blanket of colour and line that fill every centimetre 
of Kiefer's pictures.

Dazzling, nostalgically psychedelic shots of colour. Beneath the verse from 
Isaiah that speaks of heavenly mercy, "Rorate coeli desuper et nubes pluant" 
(Drop down ye dew and let the clouds rain upon the just), Kiefer has planted a 
field of blazing, flamingo-tinted poppies. But the mercy is not unqualified; 
the flowers are marshalled along perspectival lines all the way to a horizon 
that is built from raised skeins of greenish-black paint, the corrupted hues of 
chemical pollution. (Evidently we're not in Monet's picnic country of Les 
Coquelicots.) Kiefer's poppies with their black faces can be read 
interchangeably as columns of warriors or the floral memorials of their fiery 
entombment. And the petals of the middle distance suggest the flares of combat 
as much as a field of flowers.

The most startlingly florid of the pictures travels from a paradise garden at 
its base, with the caked terracotta blossoming in arabesques of brilliant 
violet, pink and vermilion splashes that coil through the more furrowed 
landscape. Above it are more verses from Isaiah that open the Palm Sunday 
liturgy: "Aperiat terra et germinat Salvatorem" (Let the earth open and bring 
forth a Saviour). But Kiefer being Kiefer, there needs be trouble in paradise, 
so that along the serpentine line of beauty lurks the form of a skeletal snake, 
its vertebra constructed from a string of terracotta beads suspended on spinal 
wire poking from the picture surface. Good and evil, vitality and mortality, 
thus literally hang sinuously in the balance, it being deliberately unclear 
whether the serpent is safely fossilised within the sprouting clay, or has shed 
its casing the better to writhe into freshly devilish incarnation.

This dialogue between martyrdom and resurrection continues into the deeply 
stirring Palm Sunday installation: 18 glazed cabinets that house vertically 
mounted branches of vegetation (mangroves, sunflower pods and dracenae as well 
as palms themselves). Stacked atop each other, the cabinets seem not so much 
vitrines from some botanical museum as the opened pages of a herbiary, Kiefer 
the tree-man knowingly playing with the conceit of a super-folio, interleaved 
with sacred revelations. The branches are coated with a thin skin of plaster or 
white paint so that, at first sight, they seem bleached of life, sapless and 
forlornly skeletal. But the newly (if tentatively) optimistic Kiefer wants us 
to register Palm Sunday as a true triumph; the entry to Jerusalem inaugurating 
the events that lead not just to the Passion but to the Resurrection. Kiefer 
also knows that, in both pagan and early Christian iconography, the palm with 
its sword-like branches was known as an immortal tree, which never actually 
perished but constantly regenerated, a new sheath of fronds budding from the 
site of a fallen limb. The very earliest representations of the cross in the 
Coptic church thus took the form of the living palm. Kiefer has also contrived 
to display another palm as if it were the feathers of some avian or even 
angelic wing; a doubly miraculous apparition which, as outsize quill, writes 
its own revelatory gospel behind the veiling glass.

Like the dirty fields of death sewn with floral brilliance, Kiefer's phantom 
tree limbs enact a parable of the intertwined fate of nature and humanity. For 
the erect branches lie or stand against flesh-coloured beds of sand, that in 
their gracefully voluptuous swirls are unmistakeably feminine and invitingly 
sexual. In one of the most beautiful of the cases, Hosianna, the vegetable 
matter is arranged as a luxuriant pubic tangle; the prima mater from which life 
itself issues. Kiefer has managed somehow (perhaps by treating the case as a 
kind of bath) to run streams of graphite across the sand and then wash them out 
to form delicate rills that suggest the ferns and lichens of the first green 
life to appear on the living planet. Gustave Courbet's lavishly devotional hymn 
to the pudenda, The Origin of the World, is by contrast all frisky slickness. 
Instead of the erotic quiver, Kiefer gives us a heart-stopping moment, as we 
suddenly read those marks as simultaneously biological and cosmological, micro 
and macro; a vision of deltaic capillaries, the pulsing veins and branches of 
an estuary as seen from an orbiting camera, or up close, the fronds waving 
gently through a transparent wash of nourishing water.

This is as good, I think, as art ever gets: mystery and matter delivered in a 
rush of poetic illumination. That Kiefer's work happens to engage with almost 
everything that weighs upon us in our tortured age - the fate of the earth, the 
closeness of calamity, the desperate possibility of regeneration amid the 
charred and blasted ruins - and that it does so without the hobnailed tread of 
pedestrian polemics, is just one of the many marvels for which we have to 
thank, yet again, this most indefatigable of modern magi.

¬∑ Anselm Kiefer: Aperiatur Terra is at White Cube, London SW1, from January 26 
to March 17. Details: 020-7930 5373
 