
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on Wednesday 
described the threat posed by Syrian refugees as not “only a matter of 
terrorism, but also a matter of quality of life”.

The statement marked a new escalation of Trump’s rhetoric warning of the 
danger of admitting into the US Syrian refugees, whom he has repeatedly 
compared to the Trojan horse.

Trump’s remarks came at a rally in Toledo, Ohio, where the Republican nominee 
once again addressed the issue of terrorism in the aftermath of thebombing 
attacks in New York and New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey>
 in the past week.

Trump laments that New York bombing suspect will get 'amazing' treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/trump-ahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-bombing-immigration>
He linked the attack to the admission of immigrants and refugees from 
overseas. “We’ve admitted tens of thousands with no effective screening plan,” 
Trump claimed, adding: “We have no idea who we are letting in. You’ve seen what 
happened.”

The US has an extensive refugee screening program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/donald-trump-syria-refugees-us-immigration-security-terrorism>
 for those entering from Syria that takes up to two years. The accused New York 
bomber, Ahmad Khan Rahami, entered the US as a child and is a naturalized 
citizen.

The Republican nominee expanded his argument, bringing in concerns about 
“quality of life”.

Trump claimed: “Altogether, the Hillary Clinton plan would bring in 620,000 
refugees in the first term. Her plan would cost $400bn in terms of lifetime 
welfare and entitlement costs – think of that.”

Both of these figures have been proven false 
<http://www.factcheck.org/2016/08/trumps-terrorism-speech/> by independent 
fact-checkers.

Trump continued: “Not only the danger of it all – this isn’t only a matter of 
terrorism, but also a matter of quality of life. We want to make sure we’re 
only admitting those into our country who support our values and love – and I 
mean love – our people.”

Trump’s claim that refugees hurt “quality of life” marked the latest 
controversial statement from his campaign this week about those fleeing from 
the civil war and humanitarian crisis in the Middle East. On Monday night, his 
son, Donald Jr,wrote a tweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/donald-trump-jr-skittles-tweet-hunting>
 comparing refugees to poisoned skittles. The statement sparked an immediate 
backlash and prompted a spokesperson for Wrigley, the owner of Skittles, to 
issue a statement saying: “Skittles are candy, refugees are people.”

Donald Trump Jr compares Syrian refugees to poisoned Skittles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/donald-trump-jnr-compares-refugees-poisoned-skittles-twitter-reacted>
The Republican nominee was preceded onstage again by Don King, the boxing 
promoter and convicted felon. King, who was convicted in 1966 of stomping a man 
to death,raised eyebrows earlier in the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/21/don-king-donald-trump-cleveland-rally>
 when he used the N-word in introducing Trump at an event in Cleveland. In 
Toledo, King told the crowd, “You must recognize that Trump is a spirit,” and 
compared the Republican nominee to John the Baptist.
 