
Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is widely viewed as a “good” 
or “great” potential president by voters from his party despite his perceived 
lack of religiousness, a new survey has found.

The study <http://www.pewforum.org/2016/01/27/faith-and-the-2016-campaign/>, 
conducted by the Pew Research Center earlier this month, found that being an 
atheist continues to be one of the biggest perceived shortcomings of a 
candidate running for president, with 51% of adults saying they would be less 
likely to vote for a candidate who does not believe in God.

But few Republican voters think Trump is a particularly religious person, when 
compared with other leading candidates like Ben Carson, Ted Cruz and Marco 
Rubio. Of theRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
surveyed by Pew, 44% said Trump is either “very religious” or “somewhat 
religious”, while 47% said the candidate is either “not too religious” or “not 
at all religious”.


In contrast, the majority of Republican voters see Carson, Cruz and Rubio as 
religious people. About 80% of Republican voters see Carson as religious, 76% 
see Cruz as religious and 70% see Rubio as religious.


The findings are the latest of Pew’s research on the impact of religion on 
presidential campaigns.

American voters tend to see Republican candidates as more religious than 
Democratic ones. While the majority of American voters view Carson, Cruz and 
Rubio as at least somewhat religious, only about half say the same about 
Democratic candidateHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, and just 40% of voters 
view Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders as a religious person.

“Being seen as a religious person is generally an asset for candidates; people 
who think a candidate is a religious person tend to be more likely to see that 
candidate as a potentially good president,” the study authors wrote. “But many 
Republicans think Trump would be a good president despite his perceived lack of 
religiousness.”

Of the 56% of Republican voters who see Trump as a potentially good or great 
president, 17% say they think he is not religious. Republican voters surveyed 
exhibited a very different pattern when asked about the other leading 
presidential candidates.


Virtually all Republican voters who think Carson, Cruz and Rubio would be good 
or great presidents said they view those candidates as at least somewhat 
religious. Only 2% of Republicans said Rubio would be a good president and that 
he is not particularly religious; just 1% said the same about Carson and Cruz.


The poll also reflected that having a president who “shares their religious 
beliefs” is important to Americans, a view commonplace among Republicans. About 
two-thirds of Republicans say it is “somewhat important” that their president 
share their religious beliefs.


For voters, a president being an atheist is a bigger drawback than one who’s 
had an extramarital affair, financial troubles or one who’s used marijuana. But 
the survey found that the share of Americans who would hesitate to vote for an 
atheist presidential candidate has been declining over time.

“As recently as 2007, more than six-in-10 Americans said they would be less 
likely to support an atheist presidential candidate, while just 51% express 
this view today,” the study authors wrote. “Over this period, the share who say 
a candidate’s lack of belief would not be a factor in how they vote has been 
growing.”


When it comes to religiousness and the Democratic candidates, about two-thirds 
of Democratic voters said Clinton is at least somewhat religious. About half of 
Democratic voters said the same about Sanders.


For Clinton, views about her perceived religiousness is linked to whether 
voters think she would be a successful president. About 69% of voters see 
Clinton as religious, and said she would be a good or great president. A 
similar link was not found for Sanders.


The survey found differences among major religious groups in views toward 
Clinton and Sanders, with more religiously affiliated voters who saw Clinton as 
a good president.


The majority of Democratic Catholics (69%) and Protestants (66%) view Clinton 
as a good or great president. Among Democratic Catholics, 46% said Sanders 
would make a good president, and 43% of Democratic Protestants agreed.


But among religiously unaffiliated Democratic voters, 65% said Sanders would 
be a good president, while just 57% said the same about Clinton.
 