
The US telecoms giant AT&T has agreed to buy Time Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/att-buy-time-warner-donald-trump>
, the owner of the Harry Potter and Batman film franchises as well as HBO, CNN 
and Cartoon Network, for $85.4bn (£70bn), creating a new media behemoth that 
will control both content and its distribution.


AT&T agrees to buy Time Warner for $85bn as Trump slams deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/att-buy-time-warner-donald-trump>
The deal has prompted political concern. On Saturday, the Republican 
presidential nominee,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, promised to block it because 
it would “destroy democracy”. On Sunday, Hillary Clinton’s running mate, Tim 
Kaine, said he was “pro-competition”.

The companies’ bosses announced late on Saturday night that they had signed a 
deal – the biggest corporate takeover of the year – which was a “perfect match” 
of firms to “bring a fresh approach to how the media and communications 
industry works”.

The deal, unanimously approved by both companies’ boards, values Time Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-warner> at $107.50 a share – a 20% 
premium on its closing price on Friday. It unites a historic phone company that 
traces its roots back more than 130 years to Alexander Graham Bell, the 
inventor of the telephone, with the producer of some of the world’s most 
popular movies and TV shows, including Veep and Game of Thrones.

AT&T and Time Warner would have combined market value of more than $310bn. If 
the deal goes through and the companies aren’t forced to sell assets, it would 
have AT&T’s assets of more than 130 million mobile phone customers and 25 
million pay-TV subscribers through DirecTV, which AT&T bought for $50bn in 
2015, as well as Time Warner’s extensive collection of Hollywood movies and TV 
channels and productions. Time Warner owns Warner Brothers (Harry Potter and 
Batman) as well as HBO, CNN and DC Comics. It also holds a 10% stake in the 
streaming service Hulu.


Randall Stephenson, AT&T’s chief executive, who will lead the combined 
company, said the corporate tie-up would transform consumers’ experience of 
watching media on their phones at a time when many young people are giving up 
on pay TV.

“We believe premium content is always going to win,” he said, on a late night 
conference call announcing the deal. “That’s been true on the big screen, the 
TV screen and we believe it is true on the mobile screen.

“When we combine Time Warner content with our scale and distribution … we’re 
going to have something really special.”

The deal faces the prospect of a tough battle with politicians and regulators 
fearful that such a tie-up could lead to less consumer choice, higher prices 
and a possible threat to media plurality.


Trump has vowed to block the deal if he wins next month’s election. In a 
speech in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/donald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton>
, on Saturday, he said it would give the combined company “too much 
concentration of power”.


Speaking about his continuing battle with the “dishonest mainstream media”, 
Trump said: “They’re trying desperately to suppress my vote and the voice of 
the American people.

“As an example of the power structure I’m fighting, AT&T is buying Time Warner 
and thus CNN, a deal we will not approve in my administration because it’s too 
much concentration of power in the hands of too few.”

Trump said he would also consider “breaking” up the last big media deal, 
Comcast’sacquisition of NBC Universal in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/13/comcast-general-electric-nbc-universal-rockefeller-plaza?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+theguardian%2Fmedia%2Frss+%28Media%29>
. “Deals like this destroy democracy,” he said.

On Sunday, Peter Navarro, a senior adviser to Trump, said the deal was 
evidence of the “monopoly power of media conglomerates”. “AT&T, the original 
and abusive “Ma Bell” telephone monopoly, is now trying to buy Time Warner and 
thus the wildly anti-Trump CNN,” Navarro said. “Donald Trump would never 
approve such a deal because it concentrates too much power in the hands of the 
too and powerful few.”

Hillary Clinton did not immediately comment but she has promised to bring in 
tougher scrutiny on big corporations. Earlier this month she vowed to 
“strengthen anti-trust enforcement and really scrutinise mergers and 
acquisitions, so the big don’t keep getting bigger and bigger”.

Kaine told NBC’s Meet the Press on Sunday: “I’m pro-competition. Less 
concentration, I think, is generally helpful, especially in the media.”

Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon later told reporters there were “a number of 
questions and concerns” about the deal but said that more needed to be known 
“before any conclusions should be reached.”

Al Franken, a Democratic senator for Minnesota and regular critic of other 
cable and media tie-ups, said: “I’m skeptical of huge media mergers because 
they can lead to higher costs, fewer choices and even worse service for 
consumers.”

Senators Mike Lee and Amy Klobuchar, the Republican chair and ranking Democrat 
on the Senate subcommittee on antitrust, said in a joint statement: “An 
acquisition of Time Warner by AT&T would potentially raise significant 
antitrust issues, which the subcommittee would carefully examine.”

A spokesman for Lee later said a hearing would be held sometime this year.

The US Department of Justice and the Federal Communications Commission are 
also likely to review the deal, which comes shortly after cable providerComcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/comcast> took full control of NBC Universal. 
It is expected that the combined AT&T/Time Warner group will have to promise to 
provide competitor content the same access to its customers as its own content.

Disney executives have called for “very close regulatory scrutiny” of the deal.

Stephenson, who said he hoped the deal would be completed next year, said he 
did not expect any significant challenge from regulators as AT&T is not buying 
up a direct competitor but adding to its business by purchasing a supplier.

“This is not a horizontal deal. This is vertical merger,” he said. “You would 
be hard-pressed to find examples where vertical mergers have been blocked.”

Craig Aaron <http://www.freepress.net/person/21/craig-aaron>, president of the 
consumer watchdog Free Press, said the deal would concentrate a “huge amount of 
media power under one corporate umbrella” and would likely lead to less 
customer choice and higher prices.

“We’ll hear lots in the months ahead about supposed benefits, but history 
shows that mega-deals like this lead to higher prices, fewer choices and too 
much power in too few hands,” he told the Guardian.

“Wall Street pushes these deals for short-term gains but they’re ultimately 
bad for business, larger economic growth and especially content creators and 
consumers. This deal will be a huge test about whether the next president is 
serious about antitrust. If they are, they’ll move to block this deal.”

Richard Greenfield <https://twitter.com/richbtig>, a media and technology at 
research firm BTIG, said the deal showed that Time Warner believes “the entire 
legacy media world is headed [for] secular decline”.

He said Jeff Bewkes, Time Warner’s chairman and chief executive, would end up 
being remembered as “the smartest CEO in sector – knowing when to sell and not 
overstaying his welcome to maximize value for shareholders”.

Time Warner buys 10% stake in Hulu
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/03/time-warner-buys-stake-hulu>
Bewkes, who turned down an $85-a-share takeover approach from 21st Century Fox 
two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jul/24/rupert-murdoch-time-warner>
, said he would stay with the company for a handover period before stepping 
down. He said he also expects all of his company’s creative and business 
executives to stay on “for a number of years”.

The deal comes as telecoms companies are desperately trying to buy up 
entertainment content to differentiate themselves from competitors and prevent 
themselves from becoming just “dumb pipes”, providing content from other 
companies. AT&T’s biggest rival, Verizon, isin negotiations to buy Yahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/can-verizons-bid-for-yahoo-survive>
 and has already bought AOL, owner of the Huffington Post.

The AT&T-Time Warner deal is on another level, and Stephenson said the company 
would become the first US mobile phone company to directly compete with cable 
TV companies by providing a bundle of online video content similar to a pay-TV 
package.

In their announcement of the deal, the two companies said: “It will disrupt 
the traditional entertainment model and push the boundaries on mobile content 
availability for the benefit of customers.”

The world’s biggest media companies

Comcast <https://www.theguardian.com/media/comcast>

The world’s biggest media conglomerate, according to the 2016 Forbes Global 
2000 list, has annual revenue of $74.5bn, a market value of $153bn and more 
than 150,000 employees. The Philadelphia-based company supplies cable to 40 
states and DC and also owns NBC Universal, owner of one of the US’s “big three” 
TV networks and Universal Studios and its theme parks.

Walt Disney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walt-disney-company>

Founded by Walter Elias “Walt” Disney in 1923, the company most famous for 
Mickey Mouse has become a conglomerate covering TV, movies and theme parks. It 
has a market value of $150bn and annual sales of $54bn. As well as Walt Disney 
Studios, it owns the broadcast TV network ABC and several cable networks, 
including Disney Channel, ESPN and A+E Networks.

21st Century Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox>

The Murdoch family company, formed when the news assets and entertainment 
assets of News Corp were split in 2013, has a market value of $48bn. Its assets 
include the 20th Century Fox film studio, the Fox television network, the Asian 
pay-TV channel STAR TV and a 39.14% stake in Sky TV.

CBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/cbs>

Formerly known as Columbia Broadcasting System, CBS is worth $26bn and makes 
annual revenue of $13.9bn. Another of the big three US TV networks, it also 
owns Showtime and The Movie Channel andCBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/cbs> Radio.

Viacom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/viacom>

Spun out of CBS in 2005, Viacom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/viacom> has 
a market value of $15bn and owns Paramount Pictures, Nickelodeon, MTV and VH1, 
Comedy Central and Channel 5 in the UK.
 