
In the mid-1990s, as bombs exploded in Paris and senior extremists began 
arriving in the UK, the only people who predicted that this was the beginning 
of successive cycles of Islamic militant violence were the militants 
themselves. Twenty years on, the violence is intensifying rather than fading 
away.

What can be done about the new threat posed by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>? The answer is, of course, almost as 
complicated as the phenomenon of contemporary Islamic militancy itself. There 
is no magic bullet. Instead, there are dozens of different measures that could 
each potentially have a minor impact, and collectively a major one. Many, such 
as diplomacy, the resolution of conflicts across the region, and humanitarian 
aid to Syrians inside and outside the country, have been discussed at great 
length in recent days. So, too, have the advantages and disadvantages of 
various types of military action. And though it is right and proper that the 
details of David Cameron’s plan to launch British airpower against Isis in 
Syria are obsessively picked over, other ideas have received less, or indeed 
no, attention in the debate. Here are eight of them.

1 Kill the caliph
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77f95a59b3403a32bfae9dc8ea651bf5ecc5dfc1%2F0_30_1668_1000%2F1668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77f95a59b3403a32bfae9dc8ea651bf5ecc5dfc1%2F0_30_1668_1000%2F1668.jpg>
 Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in a video posted in July last year. Photograph: 
Uncredited/AP 
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi> 
(above), who declared himself “caliph” in Mosul after its capture by Isis last 
June, is a priority target for western and other regional forces. He has been 
reported as injured several times, and may well have been badly hurt in one or 
other of the strikes against him. A bombing campaign does not necessarily help 
this effort. It has been drones – and the occasional special forces raid – that 
gutted the high command of al-Qaida, rather than massive use of airpower.

Some argue that Baghdadi could be replaced. This is true, in a sense, and 
though the workings of Isis leadership is extremely opaque, it is just about 
possible that another candidate could be found who could end up as caliph in 
the same way his predecessor did. But the death of Baghdadi would cause immense 
damage to the organisation anyway. It would remove a key focus of loyalty. It 
could well lead to a succession battle and the fragmentation of the group.

At the very least, it would seriously slow their momentum. Of course, 
followers might see such trials simply as further evidence that the Isis 
project is a divinely inspired one. But potential recruits might think twice 
about the more ambitious claims of the group to effective infallibility.

One problem, of course, is that assassinations have unpredictable 
consequences. You never know what is going to fill the vacuum a corpse can 
create. Osama bin Laden’s death was once widely hailed as a nail in the coffin 
of al-Qaida, and thus the threat from Islamic militancy to the west. Not any 
longer.

2 Cut down territory, rather than cutting off cash

Much of the current focus – of policymakers and bombing runs over Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> – is on impeding the ability of Isis 
to earn money through the sale of oil. Though this generates welcome cash for 
the organisation – up to a million dollars at day at an earlier stage of the 
conflict, by some estimates – it is far from their main source of revenue. Nor 
is the trafficking of antiquities or the ransom of hostages, though both can 
generate substantial sums. Donations from wealthy Gulf supporters died away 
long ago, western officials say.


The biggest earner for Isis, as for most countries outside the Gulf, is tax. 
This is tax of the “I’ll make you an offer you cannot refuse” variety, but it 
is tax nonetheless. Imposed on businesses and smuggling, it raises vast sums. 
Bombing this is much harder – indeed, well-nigh impossible. This needs to be 
recognised, and expectations in this area reduced, if an effective broader 
strategy is to evolve.

What is clear is that the new caliphate depends on continued expansion for its 
existence. Expansion needs money, but also brings money. However, a virtuous 
cycle, from the point of view of Isis, could easily become a vicious one. 
Advance could rapidly become retreat, then, quite quickly perhaps, rout.

3 Counter the propaganda

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb670b18e2493adb8b377b90f7fc79efd14e21962%2F0_0_1875_1125%2F1875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb670b18e2493adb8b377b90f7fc79efd14e21962%2F0_0_1875_1125%2F1875.jpg>
 Isis fighters marching in Raqqa, Syria. Photograph: AP 
Isis propaganda is going to keep coming and there is no way we can shut it 
out. The clips are slick – and made to be watched on a phone by a group of 
friends on a street corner, or in a cafe, or in a teenager’s bedroom. They are 
three or four minutes long, full of explicit action, require no thought 
whatsoever, are sophisticated in their production values and crude in every 
other way. The differences with other clips cluttering the average western 
adolescent male’s phone memory – music videos, porn, greatest goals – is clear. 
But so too are the similarities.

What is less well understood is why their message should appeal. This is often 
missed by those talking about “counter-propaganda”. Saying that you are likely 
to get killed in Syria rather than live an Islamic ideal, as recent social 
media messaging from the US and others have pointed out, may be objectively 
true, but is about as likely to resonate with a 17-year-old as a health warning 
on a packet of cigarettes. The Isis propaganda’s millenarian message may not 
appeal to many westerners – but their promise of adventure, comradeship and 
status does. Why? In part because of the lives these teenagers lead. But also 
because of the clever appeal to half-understood ideas about the Muslim faith 
and also, crucially, about Muslim history.

If one British militant bought himself Islam for Dummies before heading off to 
Syria, many others have preferred mythologised biographies of great generals of 
Islam from earlier ages. This is key. There has been a belated recognition of 
the importance of religious knowledge as armour against radicalisation, but 
other areas have been ignored.

The idea of recreating a caliphate – the fundamental project of Isis – is that 
it will restore to Muslims the power and glory and wealth lost over centuries 
of supposed conflict with the west. Yet relations between “Christianity” and 
the Muslim world were, as they still are, enormously complex. If there has been 
violence and war, there has been rich cultural and commercial interchange. 
There have been alliances as well as enmity. However, little of this context is 
taught in schools anywhere in Europe. As the mother of one 19-year-old Belgian 
killed earlier this year said last week: “It’s easy to write on a blank page.”

4 More cash and people for the spooks, but not necessarily more powers

Who are these 70,000 Syrian fighters David Cameron is relying on?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/30/70000-syrian-fighters-david-cameron-islamic-state-airstrikes>
The failings of the European counter-terrorism establishment have been rudely 
exposed in recent weeks. Greater powers of surveillance are not necessarily the 
answer. The primary problem that led to the Paris attacks was not an inability 
to identify who might be a threat – all the key members of the Paris plot were 
known to security services – but a failure to keep tabs on potential attackers 
as they moved about Europe, as well as to and from Syria. European internal 
borders may have come down, but the walls between insular security services 
never did. This has to change.

Security services also need more resources. The key Belgian counter-terrorism 
service has a staff of 600, it was revealed last week. Keeping 24-hour 
surveillance on a single individual takes 30 to 40 people. The result has been 
an intense focus on a very small number of people and savage prioritisation, 
often largely arbitrary, to decide who was under the lens. Services across 
Europe will now get more people and more kit, as well as more powers. But 
recruitment takes time. The French intelligence services have still yet to fill 
new posts that were funded after the Paris attacks in January.

A key factor has also been a failure to stop people travelling to Syria when 
they are clearly a threat. One mother in Brussels recounted how, although she 
had alerted the local police “counter-radicalisation” cell in Molenbeek, her 
18-year-old still left the country. As an adult, he could not be stopped from 
leaving Belgium.

Radicalisation is a process, not an event. Massive investment in understanding 
what is happening to European teenagers has had little impact in the public 
arena, where many still think the problem is extremist clerics brainwashing 
people on the internet, but it is paying off elsewhere.Oxford University 
research released last week 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/what-makes-people-join-isis-expert-says-foreign-fighters-are-almost-never-recruited-at-mosque-a6748251.html>
 has shown that radicalisation by anonymous recruiters and strangers is 
extremely rare, with the overwhelming majority of cases involving friends or 
family. New America, a nonpartisan thinktank in the US, found that more than a 
quarter of western fighters in Syria have a familial connection to extremists. 
Another recent study, at Pennsylvania State University, which examined the 
interactions of 120 supposed “lone wolf” terrorists from all ideological and 
faith backgrounds, found that in an astonishing 64% of cases, family and 
friends were aware of the individual’s intentions because the offender verbally 
told them.

This has meant better attempts to “deradicalise”, or prevent people turning to 
extremism. There has been one successful Danish experiment using techniques 
learned from gang exit strategies. It has been controversial, but often 
effective. This is not surprising. One 18-year-old in Molenbeek last week 
described Isis as “the biggest, most violent street gang in the world”.

5 Strengthen local governments

This is simple in concept, if rarely in execution. It has two parts: narrow 
and broad. The narrow strategy focuses on building the counter-terrorist, or 
indeed counter-insurgency, capabilities of countries engaged in fighting 
Islamic extremists on their territory – or strengthening local coalitions of de 
facto allies in what is, after all, a global campaign.


This indirect strategy has serious limitations – the government in Syria has 
killed at least 200,000 of its own people, far more than Isis has done – and 
has failed spectacularly on previous occasions. It also brings harsh choices 
about the kind of government that is going to receive aid. If the Assad regime 
is beyond the pale, many others are predatory, repressive, undemocratic or 
simply incompetent. From Bangladesh to Nigeria, it is hard not to feel 
underwhelmed by the quality of the leaders and, particularly, counter-terrorist 
actors who would become recipients of aid.

The broader strategy recognises that governance is key. Spread a map covering 
the swath of land from western Africa to the Pacific Rim and it is fairly clear 
that the places where Islamic militancy thrives are places where government is 
weak and/or predatory, repressive etc, or simply non-existent. Libya, Nigeria, 
Somalia, Afghanistan, the Sinai, Syria and Iraq, Yemen, parts of Pakistan, bits 
of Bangladesh. If a short-term strategy focuses on fighting now, then anything 
long-term has to address this fundamental truth.

6 Better integration of immigrant communities
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaee42acdcff48b7b1256a1e6229ecef1ba361d0%2F0_94_3528_2117%2F3528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaee42acdcff48b7b1256a1e6229ecef1ba361d0%2F0_94_3528_2117%2F3528.jpg>
 Security checks at a vigil for the Paris attacks in Molenbeek, Belgium. 
Photograph: Emmanuel Dunand/AFP/Getty Images 
This is a no-brainer. MI5 talks of a “cognitive opening” that makes an 
individual vulnerable to a new narrative. Very often, for a young Briton, 
German or Italian of immigrant background, that is an incident of explicit, or 
even suspected, discrimination. The job that goes to the candidate with the 
more easily spelled name. The humiliatingcontrôle, or stop and search, by the 
police. The invasion of Iraq, which played into the historical myth of a 
permanent western conspiracy to divide, humiliate and dominate the Islamic 
world. The general sense, as expressed by one teenager in Molenbeek to his 
Moroccan-born parents before his departure to Syria, of “being seen as from 
over there when I am here and from over here when I am over there”.

The problem is how you do it. Supple British pragmatism (or weak-kneed fudge)? 
Rigorous French republican model? Neither? Both? A mix? All anyone knows right 
now is that since Europe invited large numbers of immigrant workers into the 
continent to help rebuild its shattered cities, infrastructure and economies in 
the 1950s and 1960s, a clear answer has not been found.

Once it was believed that the problems were always found among 
“second-generation” immigrants on the basis that the first tried to forget 
their roots and the third had acquired new ones. This now looks optimistic.

7 Boost employment – but not because there is any link between poverty and 
violence
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048cf23426ad56f77364779ec8e94aa6fcb52db7%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048cf23426ad56f77364779ec8e94aa6fcb52db7%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Brussels bar run by the Abdesalam brothers. Photograph: Eric Vidal/Reuters 
The Paris attacks seem to have been planned and run from Brussels by a core of 
men who lived and grew up within a few hundred yards of each other, in solid 
brick houses on two narrow streets in the heart of the neighbourhood of 
Molenbeek. Although this is one of the poorer parts of the Belgian capital, 
there are much worse places in Belgium, and France, and the UK for that matter. 
The Frenchcités have produced many violent extremists in the past – men such as 
Amedy Coulibaly, who killed four and wounded seven in Paris in January in a 
series of attacks culminating in a hostage-taking at a Jewish supermarket.

But neither Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the operational commander of the Paris 
attacks, nor the two Abdelsalam brothers, who played key roles, were poor. The 
Abdelsalams ran a bar that was closed down for drug trafficking. Abaaoud’s 
father bought him a shop to run. “They weren’t poor. They had cash. They ate in 
cafes or pizza bars all the time, not at home,” says a researcher who lives in 
the neighbourhood and counsels returning Belgian veterans of the fighting in 
Syria.

Many other Islamic militants from the west have been poor, of course, but many 
have been wealthy. Most of the al-Qaida high command were also highly educated 
and one – Bin Laden – extremely rich. More recently, there have been private 
schoolboys and dropouts, petty criminals and highly qualified doctors. The 
predominant social and economic origins of militants has evolved over the 
decades, and varies from country to country in Europe, but most security 
services agree that there is no one profile.

However, there are some clues as to what might help prevent people in these 
areas being radicalised. Youth unemployment levels are very high in Molenbeek, 
possibly about 40%, and a key element noted by one educator there last week was 
that very few of those who had left for Syria from the neighbourhood, and 
certainly none of those who returned to cause violence, had financial 
responsibilities to others. Things might have been different had they felt 
unable to run from their obligations, whether simply out of a grudging sense of 
duty or, perhaps, because the act of providing for others through their own 
labour gave them a role and a stature that protected them against 
radicalisation.

8 Plan for more attacks – and be able to withstand them
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81eb290a182a93e5c688d57dc673b1efbc859a83%2F0_207_3619_2170%2F3619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Truth%20bombs%3A%20eight%20alternatives%20to%20airstrikes%20on%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Feight-alternatives-airstrike-isis-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81eb290a182a93e5c688d57dc673b1efbc859a83%2F0_207_3619_2170%2F3619.jpg>
 A police operation in Molenbeek. Photograph: Olivier Hoslet/EPA 
The concept of “resilience” has begun to edge its way into the 
counter-terrorist debate to describe measures taken to lessen the potential 
impact of an attack on a society, nation and community. Much of this has been 
technical and involved training, better tactics and considerable amounts of 
cash spent on equipment.

But resilience, as some of the more perceptive policymakers realised, meant 
something deeper: the ability of those who are subject to attack to 
collectively resist the power of the violence to cause irrational fear. That 
is, after all, what terrorism sets out to do: prompt anxiety that is 
disproportionate to the actual risk run by an individual in their daily lives 
in order to change their behaviour. As that anxiety contaminates an entire 
society, it creates new circumstances that make the terrorists’ goals easier to 
reach.

So a very important part of beating Isis is accepting that further terrorist 
operations are inevitable, and so are the deaths of more innocent people, and 
more horrific scenes in our newspapers and on our various screens. The images 
of bomb-carrying jets taking off from aircraft carriers on their way to destroy 
Isis targets in Raqqa or Deir Ezzor may temporarily obscure this dispiriting 
prospect. However, judging by previous cycles of terrorist violence that have 
tended to last for 10 to 20 years with a peak about a third of the way through, 
it will remain for several years to come the background against which planes, 
civilian or military, will fly – and we will all live.
 