Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgv2u7l8rKrQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgv2u7l8rKrQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgv2u7l8rKrQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Undercover investigators have exposed the ease with which high-powered guns 
can be bought in the US, purchasing the same type of pistol used in theTucson 
massacre <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/arizona-shooting> just two weeks 
later in a neighbouring city – with no questions asked.

New York's mayor, Michael Bloomberg, sent a team of undercover agents to the 
Crossroads of the West gun show <http://www.crossroadsgunshows.com/> in 
Phoenix, Arizona, just 120 miles away from the scene of the Tucson shooting. 
There, on 23 January, they bought a Glock 9mm pistol of the kind wielded by 
Jared Loughner when he killed six people and wounded 13, including the US 
congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, at a public meeting in Tucson.

The agents filmed the gun sales using hidden cameras.

They bought a Glock 17 gun for $480 (£299) and three $40 extended magazines 
each holding 33 bullets. Loughner had a 33-round extended magazine attached to 
his Glock 19, allowing him to wreak carnage in Tucson by shooting multiple 
times.

The New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> investigators 
bought the gun with no questions asked other than the requirement of an ID card.

Under current federal law, that sale was legal because of the so-called "gun 
show loophole" that allows occasional gun sellers to trade weapons without 
carrying out a background check to ensure that the purchaser is not mentally 
ill, a criminal, or a drug abuser. Such "private" sales are responsible for 40% 
of all gun sales in the US.

Of less certain legality was the purchase that the New York investigators went 
on to make of a SIG-Sauer SIG Pro 9mm pistol for $500, and a Smith & Wesson for 
$450. In both cases, the undercover agent admitted to the seller that they 
"probably couldn't pass a background check".

Under federal law even private sellers are not permitted to sell guns to any 
individual they "know", or have "reason to believe", is not eligible to own a 
gun.

The video footage of the sale of the SIG-Sauer gun shows the investigator 
saying he wants to buy a weapon with "stopping power ... that's concealable. 
You know what I mean?"

The seller appears to be complicit in the idea of disguising the purchase when 
he replies: "The good thing is, if you don't like it, you can just sell it 
later and it's not in your name."

The seller demands only the production of an ID card to go ahead with the 
purchase, and the investigator then says: "So, no background check?"

The seller replies: "No."

Investigator: "That's good because I probably couldn't pass one, you know what 
I mean?"

The seller says nothing, and the sale goes ahead.

Bloomberg released the video on Monday, saying: "We have demonstrated how easy 
it is for anyone to buy a semi-automatic handgun and a high capacity magazine, 
no questions asked."

The undercover operation was a repeat of a sting that New York carried out on 
gun shows in Nevada, Tennessee and Ohio in 2009. That exercise found that 63% 
of the gun sellers approached were in breach of federal law by willingly 
selling guns to people who admitted they probably wouldn't pass a background 
check.

In the case of the Tucson shooting, Loughner did pass background check before 
he bought the Glock 19. However, he only managed to do so because the US army, 
which rejected him because of his history of drug abuse, failed to pass on that 
information to the FBI's national database.
 