
Two years ago Patricia Maisch gained first-hand experience of America's 
epidemic of gun violence. She was attending a street rally called by Tucson 
politician Gabby Giffords when shooting erupted, and she helped disarm the 
gunman by grabbing his second magazine thus preventing him from reloading.

Unharmed in the incident that killed six people and left Giffords with a brain 
injury, Maisch has grown increasingly angry over the past two years as calls 
for tougher gun controls have been systematically stymied by the gun lobby. On 
Wednesday, having listened to President Obama vow to introduce real change, she 
has an uncompromising message for that gun lobby, and for the members of 
Congress who she believes are held in its sway.

"The NRA, the gun manufacturers, and most legislators are saturated in the 
blood of innocent children. It's unforgivable that they have refused to take 
action," she said.

Maisch said she was greatly heartened by measures outlined by Obama that would 
help prevent guns falling into the hands of mentally unstable people. Jared Lee 
Loughner, who is serving life in prison with no chance of parole for the Tucson 
killings, had been suspended from college for bizarre and erratic behaviour and 
was deemed unfit for military service but was still able to buy a 9mm Glock 
pistol at a gun store.

Maisch was also glad to see the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> promise an extension 
of FBI background checks to all gun sales, a subject she has testified on to 
the US Senate. The reform would require congressional approval, which is why 
she is so exercised about the resistance to change coming from, in her 
estimation, most members of Congress.

Shortly after the Tucson shooting on 8 January 2011, Obama wrote an op-ed 
article in the Arizona Daily Star 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/03/13/op-ed-president-obama-arizona-daily-star-we-must-seek-agreement-gun-refo>
 in which he promised that this would this to at least be "the beginning of a 
new discussion on how we can keep America safe for all our people â€¦ None of us 
should be willing to remain passive in the face of violence or resigned to 
watching helplessly as another rampage unfolds on television."

The survivors of the Tucson tragedy took that as a sign of hope. "We were 
hoping to hold his feet to the fire, and we have approached him about keeping 
his promise," Maisch said.

But time passed and Obama's promised change didn't happen. "There were times 
when I found myself thinking what was it going to take to get things done. If 
the death of a little child in Tucson wasn't enough, or a three-month-old baby 
in a cinema in Aurora, then what would be?

"Unfortunately, what it took was 20 innocent children killed in a school. 
That's a terrible shame, that it had to wait for that. But if we can prevent 
even one more child's life, then now is the time to act."
 