
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has recalled its ambassador 
from Berlin after German MPs approved a motion describing the massacre of 
Armenians by Ottoman forces a century ago as genocide – a decision that the 
Turkish president said would “seriously affect” relations between the two 
countries.

The five-page paper, co-written by parliamentarians from the Christian 
Democrats, Social Democrats and Green party, calls for a “commemoration of the 
genocide of Armenian and other Christian minorities in the years 1915 and 
1916”. It passed with support from all the parties in parliament. In a show of 
hands, there was one abstention and one vote against.

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, had voted in favour of the 
resolution during a test vote at a party meeting on Tuesday, but was absent 
from the actual vote on Thursday, as were the deputy chancellor, Sigmar 
Gabriel, and the minister for foreign affairs, Frank-Walter Steinmeier. Gregor 
Gysi of the Left party described Merkel’s absence as “not very brave”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgermany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1998853923ebfb24e68eae0ba136878a3b7decb7%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%20recalls%20ambassador%20after%20German%20MPs'%20Armenian%20genocide%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgermany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%20recalls%20ambassador%20after%20German%20MPs%27%20Armenian%20genocide%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgermany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1998853923ebfb24e68eae0ba136878a3b7decb7%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Angela Merkel was absent from Thursday’s vote. Photograph: Michael Kappeler/EPA
Turkish governments have always rejected the use of the term genocide to 
describe the massacre and expulsion of an estimated 1.5 million Armenians and 
members of Christian minorities in the Ottoman empire.

The Turkish government, bitterly opposed to labelling the 1915 mass killings 
of Armenians by Ottoman forces as genocide, has said the German parliament’s 
approval of theArmenian genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide> bill was “null and void”.

Speaking on a visit to Kenya, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, said the German vote 
would “seriously affect” ties between the two countries, and confirmed that 
Ankara has recalled its ambassador to Germany for consultations. Ankara also 
summoned Germany’s charge d’affaires to the foreign ministry.

Earlier, in the first official reaction to the vote, the deputy prime 
minister, Numan Kurtulmuş, said: “Turkey will give the necessary response to
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. We consider this decision 
null and void. This is not a decision that should be made by politicians or 
parliaments; it is a decision that has to be made by historians.” On Twitter 
Kurtulmuş called the decision a “historic mistake”.


The Turkish prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, harshly condemned the decision as 
“irrational” and said it would put the friendship between the two countries to 
a serious test.


The foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, currently in Africa with Erdoğan, 
tweeted: “The way to close one’s own dark pages of history is not by maligning 
another country’s history.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgermany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ecd81865808f2dc5a68d24a1ddd27d8590d6355%2F0_181_4396_2639%2F4396.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%20recalls%20ambassador%20after%20German%20MPs'%20Armenian%20genocide%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgermany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%20recalls%20ambassador%20after%20German%20MPs%27%20Armenian%20genocide%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgermany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ecd81865808f2dc5a68d24a1ddd27d8590d6355%2F0_181_4396_2639%2F4396.jpg>
 Armenian embassy members hold posters reading ‘Recognition now – thank you’ 
during the meeting in Berlin. Photograph: Michael Sohn/AP 
Turkish media reported that the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) was 
preparing a written rebuke in parliament. In a statement, members of the 
Turkish parliament’s foreign relations commission said they “strongly condemn 
and reject this bill falsifying historical facts about 1915 events”, arguing it 
was “contrary to international and European case-law”.

“It is utterly unacceptable that the events, which took place under the 
special conditions of WWI 101 years ago and caused heartbreaking suffering for 
both Turks and Armenians, be introduced as ‘genocide’ based on biased, 
distorted and various subjective political motives,” said the statement.

A spokesman for Erdoğan later said: “Having committed the largest genocide in 
modern history, Germany resorts to lies about Ottoman Armenians to relieve 
itself of guilt.

“In recent years, Armenia and supporters of the genocide claims failed to 
accept the president’s repeated offers to establish a joint commission to study 
the 1915 events based on archival materials.

“Nor have they joined Turkey’s efforts to promote lasting peace in the region 
by sharing the pain of Ottoman Armenians.”

The agreement to return migrants arriving on the Greek islands to Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-strikes-deal-with-turkey-to-send-back-refugees-from-greece>
 has in recent months reduced the number of refugees arriving in central 
Europe, easing pressure on Merkel. But Erdoğan has since repeatedly questioned 
the conditions of the deal, with members of his party threatening to cancel the 
agreement altogether.


Opening Thursday’s debate, Germany parliament speaker Norbert Lammert 
acknowledged that addressing historical events can be painful. “But we have 
also seen that an honest and self-critical appraisal of the past does not 
endanger relations with other countries,” he said. “In fact, it is a 
precondition for understanding, reconciliation and cooperation.”

He said Turkey’s current government is not responsible for what happened 100 
years ago, “but it shares responsibility for what happens with it in the 
future”.

Some historians have argued that Germany, a close ally of the Ottoman empire 
during the first world war, was aware of the massacre at the time and supported 
it politically. The Bundestag’s resolution contains a passage acknowledging 
“the German Reich’s complicity in the events”, as well as six references to the 
Holocaust.

Over the course of the one-hour debate, the German Green party’s 
Turkish-German co-chair, Cem Özdemir, argued that the resolution was “not about 
pointing fingers or claiming the moral high ground”, but came from “a historic 
duty to encourage Turkish-Armenian reconciliation in friendship”.

Both members of the Turkish and the Armenian embassy in Germany were present 
during the vote, with the latter group holding up signs reading “Recognition 
now – thank you” at the end of the session.

Twenty governments, including those of France, Italy and Russia, have in the 
past described the mass killings of Armenians as a genocide, and Pope Francis 
referred to the killings as “the first genocide of the 20th century” in 2015. 
The German president, Joachim Gauck, also used the phrase in a speech in April 
last year.

Thursday’s vote was originally scheduled for last year, but was put on ice due 
to pressure from Germany’s governing coalition, reportedly for fear of 
destabilising Turkish-German relations.
 