
The EU refugee deal with Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-deal-turkey-migrants-refugees-q-and-a>
 championed by Angela Merkel will be put under further strain on Thursday as 
the German parliament votes on a symbolic resolution on the Armenian genocide.

The five-page resolution, co-written by parliamentarians from the Christian 
Democrats, Social Democrats and Green party, calls for a “commemoration of the 
genocide of Armenian and other Christian minorities in the years 1915 and 1916”.

Turkish governments have always rejected the use of the term genocide to 
describe the massacre and expulsion of an estimated 1.5 million Armenians and 
members of Christian minorities in the Ottoman empire.

The UN defines genocide 
<http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/pdf/osapg_analysis_framework.pdf> 
as any act “with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, 
racial or religious group, as such”.

Diana Markosian's best photograph: the 105-year-old Armenian who escaped 
genocide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/30/diana-markosian-best-photograph-movses-haneshyan-interview>
Turkey’s prime minister described the ballot as “a real test of the 
friendship” between his country andGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. “Some nations that we consider 
friends, when they are experiencing trouble in domestic policy, attempt to 
divert attention from it,” Binali Yıldırım said at a meeting of his Justice and 
Development party on Thursday. “This resolution is an example of that.”

On Wednesday he had gone further, saying the ballot was “ridiculous” and 
arguing that the killings were an “ordinary” wartime event. Yıldırım repeated 
the warning from the Turkish president,Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, that bilateral ties 
would be damaged by Germany’s decision to call the massacre of Armenians by 
Ottoman forces a genocide.

“It’s a ridiculous vote,” Yıldırım said. “[This] was one of many ordinary 
events that can happen in any country, in any society under the conditions of 
world war one. We know that those who wantTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> to pay the bill for it do not have 
good intentions.”

He said historians, not politicians, should be the judges of what happened in 
1915. He also underlined that the vote would upset the large Turkish community 
in Germany: “The 3.5 million Turks living in Germany are the biggest asset to 
our bilateral ties. I hope that the German parliament and decision-makers will 
not close their ears to the voices of 3.5 million voters.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgerman-mps-armenian-genocide-vote-threatens-eu-turkey-refugee-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07fa21f9f1daea1dc7f92d66f62612a92b36b2ef%2F210_355_2102_1261%2F2102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkish%20anger%20as%20German%20MPs%20prepare%20to%20vote%20on%20Armenian%20genocide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgerman-mps-armenian-genocide-vote-threatens-eu-turkey-refugee-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkish%20anger%20as%20German%20MPs%20prepare%20to%20vote%20on%20Armenian%20genocide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fgerman-mps-armenian-genocide-vote-threatens-eu-turkey-refugee-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07fa21f9f1daea1dc7f92d66f62612a92b36b2ef%2F210_355_2102_1261%2F2102.jpg>
 The Turkish prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, said ties between his country and 
Germany could be damaged by the vote. Photograph: Katia Christodoulou/EPA 
However, he added that a positive vote would not necessarily influence the 
EU-Turkey deal. “We are loyal to the agreements we have made. The EU should 
stand by its word in the same way. We are not a tribal state, we are the 
Turkish republic, a country with a deeply rooted tradition.”

On Tuesday, Erdoğan had warned German MPs that “if Germany is to be deceived 
by this, then bilateral diplomatic, economic, trade, political, and military 
ties – we are both Nato countries – will be damaged”.

An agreement between Turkey and the EU to return migrants arriving on the 
Greek islands to Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-strikes-deal-with-turkey-to-send-back-refugees-from-greece>
 has in recent months reduced the number of refugees arriving in central 
Europe, easing pressure on Merkel, the German chancellor. But Erdoğan has since 
repeatedly questioned the conditions of the deal, with members of his party 
threatening to cancel the agreement altogether.

A letter, signed by more than 500 Turkish associations in Germany and sent to 
German lawmakers, argued that “over 90% of the Turkish population rightly 
rejects the accusation of genocide and considers it defamatory”, warning that 
passing the resolution would be “poison for the peaceful coexistence between 
Turks and Germans in this country, as well as in Turkey”.

Some historians argue that Germany, a close ally of the Ottoman empire during 
the first world war, was aware of the massacre at the time and supported it 
politically. The Bundestag’s resolution contains a passage acknowledging “the 
German Reich’s complicity in the events”, as well as six references to the 
Holocaust.

Pope Francis calls Armenian slaughter 'genocide'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/12/pope-francis-armenian-slaughter-first-genocide-20th-century>
Twenty governments, including those of France, Italy and Russia, have in the 
past described the mass killings of Armenians as a genocide, and Pope Francis 
referred to the killings as “the first genocide of the 20th century” in 2015. 
The German president, Joachim Gauck, also used the phrase in a speech in April 
last year.

Thursday’s vote was originally scheduled for last year, but was put on ice due 
to pressure from Germany’s governing coalition, reportedly for fear of 
destabilising Turkish-German relations. A revised draft of the resolution has 
been brought back to the Bundestag largely due to the efforts of the Green 
party’s Turkish-German co-chair Cem Özdemir.

Merkel will not be in the Bundestag for the vote because of other commitments, 
including a meeting with the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg.
 