
Turkey has been accused of belittling the imminent centenary of the Armenian 
genocide <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide> by advancing its 
Gallipoli commemorations to the same day.


The anniversary of the 1915 military operations on the Gallipoli peninsula has 
always been marked on 25 April, the day after commemorations of the massacre of 
more than 1 million Armenians in the Ottoman empire. This year, however, 
PresidentRecep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan> has invited state 
leaders to join him in Gallipoli on 24 April.

“This is a very indecent political manoeuvre,” said Ohannes Kılıçdağı, a 
researcher and writer for Agos, an Armenian weekly. “It’s cheap politics to try 
to dissolve the pressure onTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> in 
the year of the centennial by organising this event.

“Everybody knows that the two memorials around Gallipoli have been held on 18 
March and 25 April every year.”

The Armenian genocide – the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/16/the-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing>
Prince Charles, Prince Harry, Tony Abbott, the Australian prime minister, and 
John Key, New Zealand’s prime minister, have confirmed they will attend events 
at Gallipoli. As part of the programme on 24 April, services will be held at 
several military cemeteries. A Foreign Office spokesman said annual Gallipoli 
commemorations had taken place on both 24 and 25 April “for a number of years”.

At the same time, hundreds will gather on Istanbul’s Taksim Square, where a 
commemoration of the Armenian genocide has been held since 2010. Another rally 
will be held in the eastern city of Diyarbakır, an important centre from where 
the state governor oversaw the mass killings in 1915. The main event will be 
held in Yerevan, capital ofArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, 
with a number of foreign dignitaries from Russia, France, the UK and elsewhere.


The Turkish government’s efforts to divert international attention from the 
commemoration of the massacre have been called “disgraceful” by Armenians.

“It’s not just Gallipoli,” said Nazar Büyüm, an Armenian columnist and writer. 
“Someone also had the audacity to suggest the organisation of a Gallipoli 
memorial concert in an Armenian church in Istanbul for 24 April. The government 
does everything to overshadow the centennial of the genocide this year.”

Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/turkey> refuses to accept 
responsibility for the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Armenians in the 
Ottoman empire. In recent days, senior officials have lashed out at the pope 
and the EU for labelling the events of 1915 a genocide.

The plot thickened on Thursday when it was announced that a senior Turkish 
government adviser, Etyen Mahçupyan, had stepped down just months after he took 
on the job – and days after he too used the word “genocide”. Officials said he 
had retired because he had turned 65.

There are as many as 100,000 Armenians living in Turkey today, but many are 
too wary of local hostilities to openly project their ethnicity, still less 
confess their Christian faith.

Professor Ayhan Aktar of Bilgi University in Istanbul, who has long researched 
the denial of the Armenian genocide in Turkey, was not surprised by the 
government’s decision to move the date of the Gallipoli events.

“Turkey has been putting forward the Turks dying on world war one battlefields 
for 97 years, arguing that, yes, Armenians might have died, but so did our 
ancestors,” he said. “This move just continues this line of defence. It’s 
indecent, and a disgrace.”

While the Armenian state leader and many Armenians abroad expressed outrage at 
Turkey’s diplomatic gamble, the reaction in Turkey has been rather mute. Part 
of the reason, Kılıçdağı says, is the persistent fear of violence against the 
Armenian community in Turkey.

“Even though the situation has somewhat improved, and even though solidarity 
with the Armenian community has increased, many have learned to live with the 
constant fear,” he said. “It has become almost a reflex. Armenians are still a 
vulnerable group in Turkey.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fturkey-armenia-1915-centenary-gallipoli-massacre-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429192472796%2Fa4de357d-9bd6-4fb2-957b-57b97f7d1681-654x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%20eclipses%20centenary%20of%20Armenian%20massacre%20by%20moving%20Gallipoli%20memorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fturkey-armenia-1915-centenary-gallipoli-massacre-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%20eclipses%20centenary%20of%20Armenian%20massacre%20by%20moving%20Gallipoli%20memorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fturkey-armenia-1915-centenary-gallipoli-massacre-genocide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429192472796%2Fa4de357d-9bd6-4fb2-957b-57b97f7d1681-654x1020.jpeg>
 An Armenian boy suffering from starvation in 1915. Photograph: ISF/Gomidas 
Institute Archive 
The first world war operations in Gallipoli – Çanakkale in Turkish – began on 
18 March 1915 with the British naval bombardment of the peninsula. Turks have 
used that date to celebrate their victory against the Allied attack and mourn 
the soldiers who died in battle. The naval landings on the shores of Gallipoli 
ended in devastating defeat and are remembered by Australians and New 
Zealanders on 25 April, known as Anzac Day.

After Ankara’s announcement to shift all official commemorations of Gallipoli 
to 24 April, critics were quick to point out that no significant military event 
took place at Gallipoli that day and that Armenians had greater claim to it 
because 24 April 1915 was when Ottoman authorities started to arrest Armenian 
intellectuals in Istanbul.

Hopes of an Armenian-Turkish thaw were raised last year, when Erdogan extended 
condolences to the grandchildren of all killed Armenians. But this year’s 
actions have alienated the 100,000-strong Armenian community in Turkey.

“After Erdoğan’s words last year, this was a big disappointment,” said Nayat 
Karaköse, programme coordinator at the Hrant Dink Foundation, an Istanbul 
organisation named after an Armenian-Turkish journalist murdered in 2007, which 
promotes Turkish-Armenian reconciliation, research and culture.

“We expected a more positive step than to try and shift the international 
focus away from Armenia’s effort to raise awareness about the genocide.”

Orhan Kemal Cengiz, a Turkish journalist and human rights activist, said the 
forthcoming parliamentary elections made any meaningful concessions by the 
ruling Justice and Development party impossible.

“They are trying to rally more nationalist votes. Erdoğan is a very pragmatic 
politician, who is very conscious of political advantages he can gain by any 
move he makes,” Cengiz said. “But the Armenian issue is a matter of conscience 
and of morality, which is why Erdoğan is not the leader who will solve it.”

 * This article inadvertently referred to 2015 as the year when the arrests of 
Armenian intellectuals began. This has now been amended to 1915.  