
Malcolm Turnbull has taken a notably tougher line than his defence industry 
minister, Christopher Pyne, about embarrassing data leaks relating to the 
Scorpene submarine, flagging Australia’s concerns with the French president, 
François Hollande, in two separate encounters at theG20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20>.

The prime minister telegraphed publicly the concerns he was in the process of 
expressing to Hollande on the sidelines of the G20 meeting in Hangzhou on 
Monday, telling Australian-travelling reporters the leaks were “very very 
regrettable”.

But earlier in the morning, back in Australia, Pyne was playing down the 
significance ofthe leaked material 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/french-submarine-contractor-leak-wont-affect-australias-program-government-says>
.

Pyne told the ABC “they were not top-secret documents, which would obviously 
be very serious, but the Scorpene class of submarine built by DCNS is their 
export model of submarines, it’s the same submarine bought by several different 
countries around the world, it bears no relation at all to the Barracuda 
submarine which will be built for Australia which is a unique submarine”.

French submarine contractor leak won't affect Australia's program, government 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/french-submarine-contractor-leak-wont-affect-australias-program-government-says>
The defence industry minister said the material was “old” and he’d taken all 
the steps necessary “to satisfy myself as to the protections that we have in 
place – and they are second to none”.

A huge trove of documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/french-submarine-contractor-leak-wont-affect-australias-program-government-says>
 were leaked late last month from French shipbuilder DCNS detailing the ­secret 
combat capability of the six Scorpene-class submarines it has designed for the 
Indian navy.

In April DCNS won the $50bn contract to build and maintain Barracuda-class 
submarines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
 to Australian specifications in South Australia – seeing off rival bidders 
from Germany and Japan.

Turnbull, speaking to reporters in Hangzhou, said he had raised his concerns 
abut the leak with Hollande during one informal meeting at the G20 – and the 
prime minister said he would be discussing the issue with the president in more 
detail during a formal bilateral at the summit later on Monday.

“Maintaining absolute maximum security, total security, on information of this 
kind is critical,” Turnbull said.

“The leaks of the material relating to the Scorpene submarine are very, very 
regrettable. There’s a thorough investigation going on on the French side to 
see how that happened.

“Of course it’s a different submarine to the one that we are going to build in 
collaboration with the French but it is absolutely critical to maintain the 
highest level of security.”

Turnbull also said he had raised Australia’s decision to go with the French 
submarine bid rather than the German offering from Thyssenkrupp Marine Systems 
during a bilateral meeting at the G20 with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel.

Turnbull lavished praise on Merkel, characterising her as “one of the great 
leaders of our times”.

“It was a discussion between friends and as you’d expect, very open,” Turnbull 
said. “We’re both very frank people. So I thanked her for the German bid, which 
was of a very high quality.

“And I explained to her, as we have done previously to her officials, that the 
advice we had was absolutely unequivocal that the French bid was the one that 
best met our very unique requirements, and of course, that did not reflect at 
all, in any way, on the quality of the other two bids.”

Australia to seal early trade deal with Britain after Brexit, says Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/05/australia-to-seal-early-trade-deal-with-britain-after-brexit-predicts-turnbull>
In other developments at the G20 on Monday:

 * Turnbull said Australian government was on track to strike one of the first 
post-Brexit trade deals with Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/05/australia-to-seal-early-trade-deal-with-britain-after-brexit-predicts-turnbull>
 after a meeting with British prime minister, Theresa May;

 * Before a conversation with the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan late 
on Monday, Turnbull said finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis 
remained a pressing concern, and he said Australia was “committed to the 
destruction of Isil or Daesh in the field”;

 * And before the release of the G20 communique, which will address the global 
steel glut, the Australian prime minister said an adjustment in the global 
steelmaking industry would require careful management, especially in the G20 
host country China, which is often blamed for the current level of 
overproduction. Turnbull noted “these adjustments have political consequences 
here, just as they do in other countries”.

Turnbull was also asked about Australia’s foreign policy relationship with 
China given the variousrecent flashpoints over investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/malcolm-turnbull-calls-for-tax-crackdown-and-lauds-free-trade-after-xi-meeting>
 in Australian farmland and critical infrastructure, and geopolitical tensions 
over China’s aggressive posture in the South China Sea.

The Chinese president, Xi Jinping raised investment with Turnbull during their 
one-on-one at the Hangzhou summit.

The prime minister told reporters his meeting with Xi during the G20 was “very 
cordial”. He said Australia welcomed and embraced China’s rise, and the 
friction between Canberra and Beijing was “modest relative to the scale of the 
relationship”.
 