
When it comes to predicting the winner of the Turner prize, I have appalling 
form. One year I was convinced thatPhil Collins's brilliantly sardonic TV 
project about Turkish reality shows 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/turnerprize/2006/philcollins.htm> was going to 
win (it didn't). In 2008,I quite fancied Cathy Wilkes's chances 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/turnerprize/turnerprize2008/artists/wilkes.shtm>
 (Mark Leckey went on to win). So when I tell you that my favourite for this 
year's award is Angela de la Cruz, who makes awkward, funny sculptures that 
don't quite do what they're meant to, my advice is: don't listen to anything I 
say.

The betting is, of course, hardly the point. And some would argue that, when 
the shortlist includes work as different as painting, film, sculpture and 
sound, choosing a winner at all doesn't make much sense. But that's prizes for 
you, and – like it or not – a winner will be chosen later this evening, in the 
full glare of the world's press, atTate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain>.

A reminder about who's in the running. There's Dexter Dalwood, who paints 
scenes that many of us have imagined (the death of Dr David Kelly, Jimi 
Hendrix's basement, wartime Iraq) but never seen. Dalwood has his fans –you lot 
said he should win 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/poll/2010/oct/07/turner-prize-art> – but 
Britain's newspaper critics aren't among them: Richard Dorment of the Telegraph 
called his work "cack-handed paintings of imaginary landscapes and interiors", 
while our ownJonathan Jones said back in 2000 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2000/nov/08/art.artsfeatures1> that "if 
this is what they mean by painting, I hope it goes away soon". Then there'sThe 
Otolith Group, Anjalika Sagar and Kodwo Eshun 
<http://homepage.mac.com/dubmorphology/otolith/>, who make erudite, 
multi-strand work drawing on the history of cinema and social movements 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P3Btba88cxU>. Their room in the Turner prize 
exhibition contains a 45-minute film made of fragments of other films, a row of 
TV sets playing an obscure documentary about Ancient Greece, and a densely 
packed book. Easy to digest it certainly isn't; maybe that's the point.

The next room in the show is de la Cruz's, and contains a number of new 
paintings that have been torn apart or otherwise subjected to violence. They're 
called things likeDeflated and Clutter, and squat anxiously in the gallery as 
if they're embarrassed to be there 
<http://www.lissongallery.com/#/artists/angela-de-la-cruz/>. I love her work – 
the wit as well as the sadness of it – but there's a feeling that perhaps this 
isn't her year. I guess we'll find out. The fourth artist to be shortlisted 
this year is GlaswegianSusan Philipsz 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/glasgow_and_west/8659706.stm>, whose 
contribution to the show you hear long before you see it. Actually there isn't 
anything to see, just three loudspeakers and a bench; it is a piece of sound 
art, recordings of the artist singing slightly different versions of a Scottish 
medieval ballad. Mysterious and enticing, sorrowful and enigmatic, these songs 
overlap and intermingle, echoing around the room and out into the gallery 
beyond. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/oct/04/turner-prize-2010> 
The bookies tell us that Philipsz is the favourite to win – a good result, if 
only because it will be the first time that sound art has received this kind of 
recognition (and if you want to find out more about what she does,we ran a 
video interview with her last Friday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/video/2010/dec/03/susan-philipsz-london-city-installation>
).

The judges are meeting this afternoon to decide, and the waiting will be over 
for the rest of us at about 7.50pm when the ceremony is broadcast onChannel 4 
News. <http://www.channel4.com/news/> Both Charlotte Higgins and I will be 
tweeting snippets live (follow us attwitter.com/andydickson 
<http://twitter.com/andydickson> and twitter.com/chiggi 
<http://twitter.com/chigg>; we'll use the #TP2010 hashtag). We'll have news and 
reaction as soon as we can, pictures as soon as we get them, and tomorrow 
morning we'll have a video digest of the night's events. In the meantime, you 
couldwatch Adrian Searle's video tour around the exhibition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/video/2010/oct/07/turner-prize-2010-adrian-searle-video>
,read Laura Cumming's astute review 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/oct/10/turner-prize-2010-review>, 
or test your witswith our Turner prize quiz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/quiz/2010/dec/06/turner-prize-2010-quiz>
. And of course we want to know what you think. Have you seen the show? Did it 
pass muster? Who do you reckon should win?

Oh, one final thing: you haven't seen any of the artwork and still feel like 
posting that it's a load of old nonsense, I'm afraidTwitter's IanVisits has 
already got there <http://www.twitter.com/ianvisits>: he suggests using 
#YouCallThatArt, #MyKidCouldDoBetter, #ItsRubbish or #WhatAWasteOfTime as tags. 
Enough said.
 