
I have a confession to make â€“ I wake up with John Humphrys most mornings: he 
really turns me on. But when Thought for the Day begins, the morning's ardour 
is dampened and it's time to hit the snooze button. I love how the Today 
programme challenges conventional thinking, but why do they cling onto this 
slot that absolutely doesn't?

I'm a humanist celebrant. For two years I was the media officer of the 
Humanist Society of Scotland <http://www.humanism-scotland.org.uk> and as such 
I often called the BBC to suggest they invite secular thinkers onto TFTD and 
after a while I swear I could hear the sound of their eyes rolling. Eventually 
I got bored of being ignored and decided to create a secular alternative in 
podcast form calledThought for the World <http://www.thoughtfortheworld.org>. I 
wrote to lots of people I didn't know and I was amazed and delighted when they 
wanted to get involved. TFTW went live on Darwin Day 2007 with a brilliant 
piece byAC Grayling 
<http://www.thoughtfortheworld.org/p.php?file=2007-02-09_acgrayling.mp3> on the 
tolerance of intolerance. He was followed by an eclectic bunch that included 
Arthur Smith, Stewart Lee, Julian Baggini and Christopher Brookmyre. They were 
a turn on, not a turn off.

The BBC argues that TFTD should remain devoutly religious because the rest of 
the programme is profoundly secular. I think they're missing a trick.

If the UN special rapporteur on religion and belief is to be believed 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/faith/article3412734.ece>, two thirds 
of the UK population have no religious belief. Why should they look to 
religious leaders for moral guidance? If the Daily Mail is to be believed, 
there's a huge moral vacuum in our society. For once, I agree, but let's fill 
it with philosophers, thinkers and comedians whose conclusions are reached by 
reason and compassion rather than divine revelation.

I'm delighted that the Guardian is running the podcasts this year here on 
Comment is free, over the next two weeks. I'm also pleased to have the support 
of theBritish Humanist Association (BHA) <http://www.humanism.org.uk> and I'm 
thrilled we have so many female contributors. The BBC is a publicly funded body 
that should provide for and represent its full audience. That audience is 
becoming increasingly secular. Like many lovable aged relations, Auntie is in 
danger of losing touch.

But why don't you be the judge? If you like what you hear, sign our petition. 
AsAriane Sherine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising>'s 
Atheist Bus <http://www.atheistbus.org.uk/> campaign showed, Britain's sizable 
secular population wants its voice heard. Let's challenge Thought for the Day 
with free thinking until the BBC sees the light. Now, that would be a miracle!
 