
The Culture Show <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006t6c5>
7pm, BBC2

Another week, another eclectic collection of reports from the arts show, which 
this week visits Glasgow. Top of the bill is host Andrew Graham-Dixon 
interviewingGrayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry>, who's lately curated 
an installation of new works mixed up with objects drawn from the British 
Museum collection. Mark Kermode discusses We Need To Talk About Kevin with its 
director Lynne Ramsay, Simon Armitage celebrates National Poetry Day, and 
critic Michael Collins considers representations of working-class characters in 
the theatre. Plus, choreographer Akram Khan and the work of artist Gerhard 
Richter. Jonathan Wright

Rostropovich – The Genius Of The Cello 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b015j8g5>
7.30pm, BBC4

The cello is the closest orchestral instrument to the human voice in its range 
of expression. It has achieved a pre-eminence in the classical repertoire, 
growing throughout the 20th century. Much of this is to do with the tireless 
brilliance of the late Russian cellist Mstislav Rostropovich. This profile, 
rich with footage, depicts a man whose energy and lust for life, as well its 
joys and sadnesses, informed his playing, and whose excessiveness broke the 
banks of mere virtuosity.David Stubbs

Autumnwatch 2011 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/nature/uk/>
8.30pm, BBC2

Once a week for eight weeks, Autumnwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch> will be hoping something 
happens. Presenters Chris Packham, Martin Hughes-Games and Michaela Strachan 
will be travelling the country to try to catch wildlife in action. The live 
locations include the wetlands at Slimbridge reserve in Gloucestershire, where 
kingfishers, otters and 35,000 wildfowl are all potential stars, and the 
National Arboretum at Westonbirt, which will probably be worth a visit for the 
stunning seasonal colours alone.Martin Skegg

Chris Addison: My Funniest Year 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/my-funniest-year/episode-guide/series-1/episode-2>
11.10pm, Channel 4

Addison takes to the stage of the Hackney Empire to deliver a live clip show 
based around his favourite year. His comedy odyssey takes us back to 2001, 
when Bush Jr came to power and ITV's Popstars gave us Hear'Say. News footage 
shows the year to be not that funny at all, with the twin towers falling and 
mass culling of foot and mouth-infected livestock, but this just gives Addison 
a chance to deploy the stockpile of gags he's had a decade to gather.Phelim 
O'Neill

Criminal Minds
9pm, Sky Living

A show based around the FBI's behavioural analysis unit, which psychologically 
profiles killers. For this seventh season, Criminal Minds departs forensic 
reality for a slightly far-fetched fantasy. Last series, it seemed that team 
member Emily Prentiss was a goner – stabbed in the abdomen by her arms-dealer 
former lover. How straightforward that would have been. In fact, Prentiss is 
alive, and hiding out in Paris until she finds an opportune moment to rejoin 
the unit. Fun stuff – and look out for Mad Men's Duck Phillips (Mark Moses) 
guest-starring as a member of a senate committee.John Robinson

A League Of Their Own <http://sky1.sky.com/sky1hd-shows/a-league-of-their-own>
10pm, Sky1

While its antecedent, They Think It's All Over, managed to show the 
surprisingly sharp side of sporting figures such as David Gower and Steve 
Davis, A League Of Their Own merely plays down to expectations. Team captains 
Andrew Flintoff and Jamie Redknapp, though likable enough, aren't terribly 
interesting, leaving the burden of entertainment onJames Corden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden> and his interchangeable 
support staff of panel-show comics, which, for this fourth series, includes 
Jack Whitehall, Jason Manford and Lee Mack.Gwilym Mumford
 