
ITV1's Ray Winstone drama Compulsion had nearly 5 million viewers, not enough 
to beat BBC1'sAshes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> last night, Monday 4 
May.

Compulsion, which also starred ER's Parminder Nagra, attracted 4.7 million 
viewers and a 22% share of the audience between 9pm and 11pm.

The third episode of Ashes to Ashes averaged 5.6 million, a 23% share, between 
9pm and 10pm on BBC1, down from 5.9 million last week and 7 million for the 
second series opener.

On Channel 4, the all-star apartheid drama Endgame, starring William Hurt, 
Jonny Lee Miller and Mark Strong alongside Clarke Peters as Nelson Mandela, 
averaged 800,000 viewers, a 4% share, between 9pm and 11.05pm. Another 64,000 
viewers saw Endgame on Channel 4 +1.

Endgame was neck and neck with another showing for the Kevin Bacon movie 
Hollow Man on Channel Five, which also brought in 800,000 viewers.

John Higgins's comprehensive 18-9 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/may/04/john-higgins-world-snooker-championship-shaun-murphy2>
 over Shaun Murphy in the final of the Snooker World Championship meant there 
was no late night snooker marathon for BBC2.

Coverage of the snooker final averaged 3 million viewers, a 12% share of the 
audience, between 8pm and 9pm.

BBC2's snooker coverage beat Five's Gadget Show, which managed 1.1 million 
viewers between 8pm and 9pm, and a repeat of Bear Grylls: Mission Everest on 
Channel 4, which was watched by 800,000 between 7.30pm and 9pm. The Bear Grylls 
documentary had another 67,000 viewers on Channel 4 +1.

Monday night's regular double helping of Coronation Street on ITV1 delivered 
9.6 million and 9.5 million viewers at 7.30pm and 8.30pm, respectively.

The soap beat BBC1's Watchdog, at 7.30pm, with 4 million viewers, and a 
Panorama investigation into the Baby P scandal, with 2.2 million viewers at 
8.30pm.

BBC1's EastEnders attracted 8.9 million viewers at 8pm, beating ITV1's Airline 
repeat, with 4.2 million viewers.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 