
The season finale of BBC1 time-travel cop series Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> comfortably won its 
slot with more than 6 million viewers last night, Monday 8 June.

Ashes to Ashes ended its second run with 6.4 million viewers and a 29% share 
in the 9pm hour, according to unofficial overnights. The BBC confirmed 
yesterday that the show, which stars Philip Glenister and Keeley Hawes, will be 
returning for a third series.

ITV1's 9pm show, documentary My Child Won't Sleep, attracted 2.9 million 
viewers and a 13% share.

Over on BBC2 in the 9pm hour, the final episode of Richard Bilton's 
survellience documentary series Who's Watching You? had 1.7 million viewers and 
an 8% share; while over on Channel Five Extraordinary People: Real Wolf Kids 
drew 1.1 million and 5%.

Channel 4 launched The World's Greatest Musical Prodigies from 9pm to 10pm, 
attracting 1 million viewers. A further 62,000 watched an hour later on digital 
catchup service Channel 4 +1.

Over on Sky1 in the 9pm hour, new documentary series Ross Kemp in Search Of 
Pirates launched with 628,000 viewers, the most-watched multichannel show in 
its slot.

The next most popular multichannel offering from 9pm was ITV2's I'm A 
Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here! USA, co-hosted by Myleene Klass, with 517,000 
viewers over two hours.

Big Brother, switching to its regular 10pm weekday slot after last Thursday's 
launch, drew 1.8 million viewers and an 11% share over 70 minutes. A further 
164,000 watched on Channel 4 +1.

BBC1's 10pm news dominated the slot, as usual, on another busy day for 
political stories with Gordon Brown in a crucial meeting with Labour MPs and 
the fallout from the BNP winning two European parliament seats.

The BBC1 bulletin drew 5.8 million viewers and a 29% share over 25 minutes. 
ITV1's News At Ten attracted 2.4 million and 12% over half an hour from 10pm.

Springwatch continued on BBC2 in the 8pm hour with 3.2 million viewers and a 
15% share, while Channel 4's Dispatches: Crash Gordon, on the prime minister's 
handling of the credit crunch, drew 800,000 and 3%. Another 65,000 watched on 
Channel 4 +1.

On BBC1, EastEnders pulled in 8.4 million viewers and a 38% share in the half 
hour from 8pm. Panorama then followed on BBC1 with 2 million and 9% in the 
second half of the hour.

ITV1's Cornershop Crunch Time: Tonight – Part One drew 3.1 million viewers and 
a 14% share against EastEnders.

Then Coronation Street comfortably won the 8.30pm to 9pm slot with 8.2 million 
viewers and a 36% share.

A new series of Fifth Gear launched on Five in the 8pm hour with 800,000 
viewers and a 3% share.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 