
ITV1's Hell's Kitchen finished its fourth run with more than 5 million 
viewers, but this was not enough to beat BBC1'sAshes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> last night, Monday 27 
April.

The Hell's Kitchen final, won by the former Dynasty star Linda Evans, averaged 
5.2 million viewers, a 21% share of the audience between 9pm and 10pm, 
according to unofficial overnight figures.

The time-travelling cop drama Ashes to Ashes had 5.9 million viewers and a 24% 
share. The BBC1 drama was 1.1 million and five share points down on its second 
series debut last Monday.

The Hell's Kitchen final was down on the 5.6 million viewers who saw the third 
series final in 2007 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/sep/18/tvratings>, 
when Marco Pierre White took charge for the first time.

But it was up on the finale of the second series, when it was hosted by Jean 
Christophe Novelli and Gary Rhodes, which averaged 4.8 million.

The most popular Hell's Kitchen final was the first, in 2004, when it was 
fronted by Gordon Ramsay and averaged 7.4 million viewers, 34% of the audience.

An earlier 30-minute edition of Hell's Kitchen at 8pm averaged 3.4 million 
viewers, a 15% share. It was well beaten by BBC1's EastEnders, which attracted 
8.1 million viewers, 36% of the audience.

Channel 4's Henry VIII: Mind of a Tyrant, finished its four-part run with 1.7 
million viewers, a 7% share at 9pm. This was 500,000 down on the 2.2 million 
who saw its debut three weeks ago.

A further 129,000 watched the Channel 4 documentary last night on Channel 4 +1.

David Starkey's documentary series still did enough to beat BBC2's US import 
Heroes, which brought in 1.1 million viewers, a 5% share of the audience.

Heroes was neck and neck with Extreme Fishing with Robson Green on Channel 
Five, also seen by 1.1 million.

The second part of Channel 4's recession-themed Dispatches - How Long Will It 
Last, with Will Hutton, averaged 1.3 million viewers, 6% of the audience, 
between 8pm and 9pm. Another 102,000 watched Dispatches on Channel 4 +1.

Dispatches narrowly beat Five's Gadget Show's Big Experiment, with 1.2 million 
viewers.

But both were beaten by BBC2's Wainwright Walks repeat, which gathered 2.1 
million viewers at 8pm, and another repeat, Nigella's Express, with 1.9 million 
viewers at 8.30pm.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 