
ITV1's primetime documentary about the Karen Matthews case was watched by 4.5 
million viewers, but lost out to BBC1'sAshes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> last night, Monday 18 
May.

Tears, Lies and Videotape, which analysed techniques used to tell when people 
are lying, had a 20% share of the audience between 9pm and 10pm, according to 
unofficial overnight figures.

The fifth episode in the second eight-part run of Ashes to Ashes averaged 5.6 
million viewers, 25% of the audience, in the same slot on BBC1.

Channel 4's two-part historical re-enactment 1066: the Battle for Middle 
Earth, began with 1.5 million viewers between 9pm and 10.35pm, a 7% share. 
Another 103,000 people saw it on Channel 4 +1.

The Channel 4 show, narrated by Ian Holm, was up against BBC2's Sophie Raworth 
and Justin Rowlatt documentary, The Trouble with Working Women, which attracted 
1.3 million viewers between 9pm and 10pm, 6% of the audience.

Both shows beat another showing for Kevin Costner movie Message In A Bottle on 
Channel Five, which averaged 1 million viewers between 9pm and 11.35pm.

Earlier, ITV1's new gameshow Divided, hosted by the GMTV presenter Andrew 
Castle, began with 1.4 million viewers, an 11% share, between 5pm and 6pm.

Divided lost out to both The Paul O'Grady Show on Channel 4, with 1.9 million 
viewers and a 15% share, and BBC1's Weakest Link, which averaged 2 million 
viewers. Another 95,000 people watched O'Grady on Channel 4 +1.

But Divided, in which three contestants work together to answer up to 15 
questions, splitting the prize money between them, beat BBC2's Celebrity Cash 
In The Attic, featuring sports presenter Jim Rosenthal, which had 1.1 million 
viewers.

ITV1 dominated the main evening schedule with a triple helping of soaps. 
Emmerdale had 6.9 million viewers at 7pm, beating BBC1's The One Show, with 4.1 
million.

Monday's two episodes of Coronation Street then had 9 million and 8.6 million 
viewers at 7.30pm and 8.30pm respectively, beating BBC1's Watchdog, with 3.9 
million viewers, and Panorama, about stem cell research, with 2.3 million.

EastEnders snuck in between at 8pm with 8.7 million viewers, a 39% share, 
beating ITV1's Tonight, about staff taking a pay cut in the recession, which 
had an average audience of 3 million.

BBC2 continued to reap ratings rewards with its coverage of the RHS Chelsea 
Flower Show, with 3.1 million viewers, 14% of the audience, between 8pm and 9pm.

Channel 4's Dispatches, about bankers' bonuses, brought in 1.1 million viewers 
in the 8pm hour, while the penultimate episode of Five's The Gadget Show had 1 
million viewers, a 5% share. Another 87,000 viewers saw Dispatches on Channel 4 
+1.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 