
Just as the temperatures rise and cherry blossoms bloom, the month of May also 
brings the annual television upfronts, where networks bring in major 
advertisers and reveal their new fall schedules – and then try to pry money out 
of their hands with a flurry of steak dinners, open-bar parties, and empty 
promises of Hamilton tickets.

NBC
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b678b82ca7099503ec2b5898f86ad220628c5cf%2F0_244_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=TV%20upfronts%3A%20NBC%2C%20Fox%20and%20ABC%20showcase%20next%20season's%20hoped-for%20hits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=TV%20upfronts%3A%20NBC%2C%20Fox%20and%20ABC%20showcase%20next%20season%27s%20hoped-for%20hits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b678b82ca7099503ec2b5898f86ad220628c5cf%2F0_244_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
 Ryan Eggold and Famke Janssen, stars of The Blacklist: Redemption. Photograph: 
NBC/Getty Images 
Shockingly, the second-highest-performing network has only three new shows 
this fall.Timeless <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4glJzvUunOE>, a time-travel 
drama about three people in a time machine hunting down a man who wants to 
destroy the world by ruining history, will air on Monday nights at 10pm in the 
prime position after The Voice (all times US eastern).This Is Us 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rfUiKg28r_M>, a more conventional drama about 
a group of strangers who are interconnected in mysterious ways, airs on 
Tuesdays at 9pm after The Voice’s results show and before the hit Chicago Fire. 
The only comedy of the bunch,The Good Place 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UMf24rEsMOs>, featuring Kristen Bell as a dead 
woman trying to get into heaven by correcting the mistakes she made in life, 
airs on Thursday at 8.30pm . Don’t worry, she has Ted Danson to help her out.

RuPaul's Drag Race: empathy and naked emotion are the point, not winning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/rupauls-drag-race-political-correctness-identity-gender>
While NBC has more comedies coming mid-season, it’s worth noting that the 
former home of must-see TV now has only one hour of comedy on its fall 
schedule. Most of the other hours are given over to The Voice and Dick Wolf’s 
shows, such as Law & Order: SVU and his Chicago franchise, which will add 
Chicago Justice to Chicago Fire, Chicago Med, and Chicago PD mid-season. The 
Blacklist is also getting a mid-season spin-off, Blacklist: Redemption, which 
focuses on Famke Janssen’s character from the original. Speaking of The Voice,
NBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> also announced its two new coaches 
on the show: Miley Cyrus and Alicia Keys.

The network is also taking a different direction with its comedies, shying 
away from the three-camera shows it ordered in recent years (including the 
flops The Michael JFox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> Show and Sean 
Saves the World) and instead returning to the single-camera comedies that were 
critical smashes but didn’t always connect with viewers, like 30 Rock and Parks 
and Recreation.

 A few buzzy dramas will air later in the winter, among them Emerald City, 
which brings a Game of Thrones vibe to The Wizard of Oz. Also skewing 
supernatural: Midnight Texas, which is based on the books by True Blood author 
Charlaine Harris. High-concept comedies include Powerless, about a woman 
without gifts who lives in a world full of superheroes, and Trial and Error, 
where a big-city lawyer goes to a small town to defend a man (John Lithgow) 
accused of killing his wife. Yes, it’s a comedy.

Fox
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6fe9e2c626681e84f77616b6e567fb26fff43f1%2F0_114_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=TV%20upfronts%3A%20NBC%2C%20Fox%20and%20ABC%20showcase%20next%20season's%20hoped-for%20hits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=TV%20upfronts%3A%20NBC%2C%20Fox%20and%20ABC%20showcase%20next%20season%27s%20hoped-for%20hits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6fe9e2c626681e84f77616b6e567fb26fff43f1%2F0_114_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Jailbreak: Sarah Wayne Callies, Wentworth Miller and Dominic Purcell. 
Photograph: Frank Micelotta/Rex/Shutterstock 
Fox also held its presentation on Monday, featuring an opening number from the 
cast of Empire and plenty of sniping about how advertising on digital video 
isn’t as good as advertising on television. Like NBC, Fox is adding only two 
new dramas and one new comedy this fall, but the network has been slowly 
drifting away from the traditional TV calendar, premiering more shows in 
mid-season and year-round than the competition.

The new dramas are both based on movies: Lethal Weapon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXZdEmvcFdU>, featuring Damon Wayans Sr, which 
will kick off Wednesday nights at 8pm before ratings juggernaut Empire; andThe 
Exorcist <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5NH3ffAp9aA>, featuring Oscar winner 
Geena Davis, which will plug a hole in Friday night at 9pm behind Hell’s 
Kitchen, which is strangely not a companion horror show but a reality program. 
The comedy is the truly bonkersSon of Zorn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kPnlQTi8heM>, in which a He-Man-esque cartoon 
character moves to Orange County to help raise his teenage son with his 
ex-wife. Zorn will attempt to conquer the time slot on Sundays at 8.30pm 
between The Simpsons and Family Guy.

Fox is also focused on bringing back its old shows, a strategy that worked 
well with 24 and The X-Files.Prison Break 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x9T-9fZn_oA> returns at mid-season with 
original star Wentworth Miller back in the clink (but this time out of the 
closet).24: Legacy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WtLA2BUdd0I> also debuts in 
mid-season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/24-legacy-is-already-the-best-show-of-2017-thats-a-guarantee>
 with Eric Carter (Corey Hawkins), the head of an elite squad of US soldiers in 
the Middle East, taking over from Kiefer Sutherland’s Jack Bauer.

Also worth checking out at mid-season are Star 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T2snL9QUIZI>, a drama about the rise of a girl 
group from Empire creator Lee Daniels,Pitch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0wLCGwYZ3g>, about the first female player in 
Major League baseball, andShots Fired 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RmkAihHeJg>, a 10-episode miniseries about 
the aftermath of a racially motivated shooting in the south. Fox is a little 
light on the comedies this season, but later in the year,The Mick 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQ6Jg5i_pqc>, about a con artist raising her 
rich nieces, andMaking History <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-TVyOqCkr0>, 
another time travel show, will be joining the roster.

ABC
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19219a42e8cfd808a32a4ceb2851d22e34e5dcf7%2F0_58_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=TV%20upfronts%3A%20NBC%2C%20Fox%20and%20ABC%20showcase%20next%20season's%20hoped-for%20hits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=TV%20upfronts%3A%20NBC%2C%20Fox%20and%20ABC%20showcase%20next%20season%27s%20hoped-for%20hits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftv-upfronts-nbc-fox-abc-shonda-rhimes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19219a42e8cfd808a32a4ceb2851d22e34e5dcf7%2F0_58_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The cast of Speechless. Photograph: Kevin Foley/ABC 
While everyone else is shying away from comedies, ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> is doing the opposite, offering more 
sitcoms than any other network. It has even rearranged its schedule, moving The 
Middle from Wednesday at 8pm to the same time on Tuesday and pushing Agents of 
SHIELD back an hour to 10pm on Tuesdays, to make room for the laughs. In the 
fall we’ll get American Housewife on Tuesdays at 8.30pm, about a woman raising 
her three kids, and Speechless on Wednesdays at 8.30pm, about a woman raising 
her three kids.

Don’t worry, they’re different. American Housewife stars Katy Mixon as a mom 
in tiny Westport, Connecticut, and Speechless stars Minnie Driver as a mom with 
a son who has special needs. Now that I think about it, every comedy on ABC can 
pretty much be boiled down to a mother raising her three kids, except 
Black-ish, where she has four kids, but two are twins so it doesn’t really 
count.

The other big news is that ABC is breaking up its all-Shonda Rhimes Thursday 
night block and pushing Scandal to premiere in early 2017, mostly so Kerry 
Washington can have time off to give birth. The new show on Thursdays at 9pm is 
Notorious, by Drop Dead Diva creator Josh Berman, about the relationship 
between a defense attorney and a reporter. It’s gonna have to work hard if it 
wants to hold on to its place in ABC’s Thursday night lineup.

Another drama joining the slate is Conviction, on Monday nights at 10pm, about 
a former first daughter who is forced to take a job at something akin to the 
Innocence Project so that she doesn’t go to jail for cocaine possession. This 
procedural should make the viewers who will miss the canceled Castle very 
happy. Also in the White House is Kiefer Sutherland, as a low-level cabinet 
member who suddenly is commander-in-chief thanks to an attack on Washington 
that kills the entire administration. He is the Designated Survivor, and we’ll 
see him every Wednesday at 10pm.

 Rhimes gets more space on the schedule at mid-season with Still Star-Crossed, 
about what happens to the Montagues and Capulets after the saga of Romeo and 
Juliet. And because we can’t get enough time travel, Time After Time, also at 
mid-season, will feature HG Wells travelling to modern New York hot on the 
trail of Jack the Ripper.

Today's TV shows are good – but they aren't The Sopranos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/golden-age-television-the-sopranos-mad-men>
As for mid-season comedies, ABC is offering Downward Dog, the story of a 
down-on-her-luck millennial (Fargo’s Allison Tolman) as told through the 
perspective of her dog. In keeping with the trend of characters who aren’t 
really there, Imaginary Mary stars Jenna Elfman as a woman whose imaginary 
friend is threatening to ruin her life. (Wasn’t this called Drop Dead Fred?)

ABC also has a few great events up its sleeves, including a three-hour remake 
of Dirty Dancing (Baby will still not be in the corner) and miniseries When We 
Rise, about some of the gay and lesbian families that fought the courts to 
legalize gay marriage.

Right now, all of these schedules are set in stone and it’s a rather 
conservative year, without much shifting going on at any of the networks. But 
let’s wait until October, when there are a few duds. Then these network 
executives will really be trying to travel back in time to fix their mistakes.
 