
So when is Twelfth Night? The Epiphany – the Christian feast to mark the visit 
of the three kings (or Magi) to the baby Jesus – is 6 January. If you count 
from Christmas Day, the 12th night is 5 January – the eve of the Epiphany. But 
some say you should count the 12 days after Christmas, which takes you to the 
6th. People treat either the 5th or 6th as the day to celebrate, and there are 
equal claims that each is Twelfth Night, so we’ll throw them all in together.

It’s a significant day in many countries, particularly Catholic ones, where 
Twelfth Night parties and celebrations are commonplace and usually involve the 
selection of a king, and sometimes a queen and other characters. In France, for 
example, thegalette des rois (“cake of kings”) has a token baked into it; 
patisseries sell it along with a gold paper crown for the recipient of the 
token, who becomes the party’s ruler. You may not find these traditions in 
Britain nowadays – we’ve all gone back to the office by then – but there are a 
number of Twelfth Night events in literature.

Our first example clears up another question. Samuel Pepys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/samuelpepys> celebrated the feast – always 
on 6 January, which he says marks the end of Christmas – and in 1663 goes to 
see Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night. The drama is “acted well, though it be but a 
silly play, and not related at all to the name or day” – which it isn’t, apart 
from a general air of misrule. Pepys usually has or attends a party, with 
dancing and merriment, and always a “brave” or “excellent” cake. There are 
other tokens baked into it: one year he gets the clove, which indicates he is a 
knave, but he smuggles it into someone else’s slice. In 1669 he mentions a new 
fashion, which is to draw paper lots for king and queen of the party, rather 
than finding a bean, so as not to spoil the cake (and perhaps to avoid the 
cheating just mentioned).

In Charles Dickens’s Christmas Carol, there is a reference to “immense 
Twelfth-cakes” 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=f8ANAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA47&lpg=PA47&dq=%E2%80%9Cimmense+Twelfth-cakes%E2%80%9D&source=bl&ots=t8slZp4WZr&sig=kfRbXtmaygTWOnQFGXauXY9p_u4&hl=en&sa=X&ei=JZOqVI7XIcHC7AbmlYGgDg&ved=0CDYQ6AEwBA#v=onepage&q=%E2%80%9Cimmense%20Twelfth-cakes%E2%80%9D&f=false>
, and Scrooge and the Ghost of Christmas Present visit a “children’s Twelfth 
Night party”. Dickens’s letters show that in his household there was a party 
every year: the date is his son Charley’s birthday, but it’s clear he thinks a 
Twelfth Night party is quite normal.

In James Joyce’s short story The Dead, from his collection Dubliners (1914), 
Gabriel Conroy and his wife Gretta go every year to an important party held by 
the Misses Morkan. There is dinner, dancing and singing, but alongside the 
festivities we see darkness and contemplation: snow falls over Ireland, and 
Gabriel looks through it as he thinks about his own shortcomings and about the 
wife whom he thought he knew. The idea of a character having a metaphorical 
epiphany, a moment of revelation or realisation, comes directly from Joyce, and 
each story in Dubliners features one. So although the event is not specified as 
being on Twelfth Night, it is in the early days of January and is always 
assumed to be an Epiphany party – an idea is made overt in John Huston’s 1987 
film of The Dead.

In Terry Pratchett’s Discworld there are Twelfth Night customs, involving a 
man who
 “finds a special bean in his tucker, oho, everyone says ‘you’re king mate’ 
and he thinks ‘this is a bit of all right’ only next thing he’s legging it over 
the snow with a dozen other buggers chasing him with holy sickles so’s the 
earth’ll come to life again and all this snow will go away.” 
This description (from the Folklore of Discworld, which Pratchett wrote in 
2008 with Jacqueline Simpson) is gently satirising the imaginative Victorian 
social anthropologist James Frazer, who describes similar customs in his 
not-wholly-reliable study of mythology and religion,The Golden Bough 
<http://www.bartleby.com/196/>.

In Antonia Forest’s strangely compelling YA novels about the Marlow family, 
the neighbours, the Merricks, hold an elaborate and exciting Twelfth Night 
party each year, and in two of the books – Peter’s Room (1961) and Runaway Home 
(1982) – it is a major event. It sounds like a great traditional party, with 
supper and ices and dancing, and all the local gentry in attendance. Clothes 
management is very important for the teenage sisters, and goes with changes and 
swings in their separate relationships with the young Patrick Merrick. Nicola 
Marlow’s cream silk dress – a last-minute choice, presenting her with “a wholly 
unfamiliar version of herself” – is, luckily, the perfect outfit for the second 
party. “Just for a second I thought [you were] Ginty,” Patrick says, to a sharp 
intake of breath from close readers of the books: is he going to choose the 
right sister after all, having messed up at the previous party? This is a 
life-changing moment.

Halfway through Angela Carter’s 1987 Wise Children 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/archive/writers/12245.shtml>, the Chance sisters attend a 
Twelfth Night costume ball at a country house called Lynde Court, involving 
royalty and riffraff from the worlds of acting and film – as Dora says: “We’d 
been to some smart parties since we got the star on our door but never one as 
smart as this.”

There is mischief and mayhem at the party: varied sex and nudity, and a major 
fire. The reference to the King of Misrule is clear: two brothers fight over a 
gold crown – only a battered theatrical prop of painted cardboard, “a flimsy 
bit of make-believe, a nothing”, but a symbol of their enmity.

Margaret Drabble’s The Radiant Way 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/97/10/19/home/drabble-radiant.html> (1987, same 
year as the Carter) features a Twelfth Night party to celebrate the beginning 
of 1984 – the book began with a New Year’s party in 1979. This time there is 
some confusion among people who think the event will be on the 12th January, 
not the 6th. The party, in Putney, is full of politicians, civil servants, TV 
presenters, lawyers and academics – nobody productive, as one guest points out. 
There are three women at the heart of the book: one of them, Alix, laughs and 
shines, with paste diamonds in her hair: she has never worn them before but has 
thought “this Twelfth Night, why not?” – it is some kind of tiara, she is Queen 
of the event. There are changes in the air …

So authors have used Twelfth Night celebrations as the setting for mischief, 
malice, epiphanies, the taking of power, and life-altering events. There must 
be more examples out there – let us know in the comments.
 