
Twitter’s latest new feature involves celebrities and brands curating 
“collections” of their favourite products and places for their followers on the 
social network – although in some cases, their lists are decidedly 
self-promotional.

“You’ll be able to browse rich collections from influencers you care about and 
get more information about the products or places you find interesting,” 
explained Twitter product manager Amaryllis Foxin a blog post 
<https://blog.twitter.com/2015/testing-new-ways-to-make-it-easier-to-discover-products-and-places>
 as the feature went live.

The collections can be found by tapping a new “browse collection” on the 
profile of participating stars and brands.

They include musicians (Amanda Palmer, Ariana Grande, Demi Lovato, Cody 
Simpson and Steve Aoki); other celebrities (William Shatner, Reese Witherspoon 
and Michelle Phan); media companies (Penguin Random House, The Ellen Show, 
Warner Bros, Fox Home Entertainment); and brands (Beats By Dre, Mountain Dew 
and Nike) among others.

What kind of products are they curating? Ariana Grande’s My Everything 
collection <https://twitter.com/ArianaGrande/timelines/608785792215863297> 
includes her album My Everything as well as branded t-shirts, a poster and 
social app Fahlo, where she has a profile.

Amanda Palmer’s World of Amanda Palmer collection 
<https://twitter.com/amandapalmer/timelines/608420397067862016> includes her 
Patreon crowdfunding page, her Theatre is Evil album, her The Art of Asking 
book and a collection of her sheet music, among other products.

William Shatner’s Electic Cool Collection 
<https://twitter.com/WilliamShatner/timelines/606926374549323776>, meanwhile, 
includes his longstanding commercial partner Priceline and box-sets of his 
Boston Legal and Star Trek TV shows – plus quirky selections like a nose-shaped 
shower-gel dispenser and a “kitchen art ham dogger”.
 New collections on Twitter: but are they curation or commerce? Photograph: PR 
The new feature looks less like curation and more like commerce, as things 
stand – something that may fit in well with Twitter’s desire to make more money 
from shopping through its social network.

In fact, the collections’ launch came as Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> debuted another new feature: 
dedicated pages for products and places, to which many of the collections 
tweets link.

“These pages will feature images and video about the product alongside 
information such as a description, price, and an option to buy, book, or visit 
the website for more information,” explained Fox.

Twitter unveils 'Project Lightning' to bring live events to life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/19/twitter-project-lightning-live-events>
“We’re starting to experiment with a small number of products and places. As 
we test, within your timeline you may see pages and collections of pages that 
are shared by influencers and brands.”

Twitter has been experimenting with online shopping for some time, launching a 
“buy” button in beta in September 2014. At the Web Summit conference that 
November, its president of global revenue Adam Baintalked about Twitter’s 
social-shopping ambitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/05/twitter-soggyfries-big-data-advertising>
.

“We’re experimenting with different price points with different products, and 
more importantly what emotions you need to generate as a business to get 
someone to buy in the moment,” he said.

“We’re trying to prove to those marketers that we can actually move 
transactions, and once that’s in place, a variety of business models come into 
play.”
 