
The bodies of two people missing since Wednesday have been found, said 
Mississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> emergency 
management agency spokesman Greg Flynn, bringing the state’s storm death toll 
to 10. Among the victims was a seven-year-old boy who perished while riding in 
a car that was swept up and tossed by storm winds.

Unseasonably warm weather this week helped stimulate the high winds, tornadoes 
and torrential precipitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/26/severe-storms-alabama-tornado-southern-states-aftermath>
 that by Saturday had left at least 18 people dead and dozens of families 
homeless in several southern states.

In northern Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, residents 
were warned to be alert for moderate to severe flooding Saturday, a day after a 
tornado briefly touched down in the state’s most populous city but caused only 
a hint of damage.

The flooding is the result of heavy downpours that have been thrashing the 
southeastern US since Wednesday, bringing record rainfalls in some areas. The 
city of Mobile, for example, was walloped with 4in (10cm) of rain Wednesday, 
smashing the previous record of 2.2in (5.6cm) set in 1990.

Six people were killed in Tennessee, including three who were found in a car 
submerged in a creek, according to the Columbia police department. TheTennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee> Emergency Management Agency 
said the victims were a 19-year-old female and two 22-year-old males.


One person died in Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas>, 
and dozens of homes were damaged or destroyed.

Survivors of violent storms across the south thankful to see another Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/25/severe-storms-mississippi-survivors-southeast-tornadoes>
Alabama governor Robert Bentley announced Saturday that he would visit 
weather-damaged areas in Coffee County. A statement from the governor’s office 
said that about 190 roads across Alabama were closed due to flooding.

The National Weather Service warned residents to avoid driving in areas where 
flooding was expected. Major flooding is forecast for Big Nance Creek, which 
runs through the town of Courtland in northern Alabama. The area is about 40 
miles east of Huntsville. The creek is not expected to fall below flood stage 
until early Monday.

A flood warning was also in effect for the Coosa River, swollen by up to 8in 
(20cm) of rain over the past week, and threatening the city of Gadsden.

The Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles are bracing for what National Weather 
Service forecasters are calling a “historic blizzard”, but the areas under 
threat are lightly populated.

Between 6 and 15 inches (15 to 37.5cm) of snow are forecast for the region, 
which includes Amarillo and Lubbock. High winds will drive wind chills as low 
as -10F (-23C) and cause low visibility due to blowing and drifting snow.

The blizzard warning for the region takes effect at 6pm Saturday.

Peak tornado season in the south is in the spring, but such storms can happen 
at any time. Exactly a year ago, tornadoes hit Mississippi, killing five people 
and injuring dozens.

A tornado touched down in Birmingham on Friday evening, but damage was 
limited. The funnel was spotted by witnesses outside the city about 5pm. An 
hour later, the National Weather Service confirmed that first responders were 
on the scene along Jefferson Avenue, a working class neighborhood less than 10 
miles from downtown Birmingham.

Lt. Sean Edwards, a Birmingham police spokesman, said trees were knocked down 
and people were trapped inside damaged houses, adding that several people were 
taken to hospitals for treatment of minor injuries.
 