
Double acts, duos, two-twos, twixles, zweisters. Whatever you call them – and 
those last three are yet to catch on, despite our best efforts – comedy 
pairings inhabit a unique space in the cultural firmament. For one thing, 
they’re twice as funny as standups; that’s just simple maths.

Given we are professional zweisters ourselves, travelling the world as Max & 
Ivan (though you might know us better as Ben and Jerry, the two guys silently 
nodding at a table in the BBC’s W1A), the Guardian asked us to assemble this 
highly subjective – but in many ways totally definitive – list of the world’s 
top five sketch duos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fmax-ivan-comedy-five-best-sketch-duos-matt-lucas-david-walliams-harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-ronnie-corbett-barker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe935a78f6864d8aa3141b5217e604712a21edbc9%2F226_135_4297_2577%2F4297.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two's%20company%3A%20comedy's%20five%20best%20sketch%20duos%2C%20according%20to%20Max%20%26%20Ivan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fmax-ivan-comedy-five-best-sketch-duos-matt-lucas-david-walliams-harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-ronnie-corbett-barker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%27s%20company%3A%20comedy%27s%20five%20best%20sketch%20duos%2C%20according%20to%20Max%20%26%20Ivan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fmax-ivan-comedy-five-best-sketch-duos-matt-lucas-david-walliams-harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-ronnie-corbett-barker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe935a78f6864d8aa3141b5217e604712a21edbc9%2F226_135_4297_2577%2F4297.jpg>
 Double trouble … Max and Ivan. Photograph: Dan Burn-Forti 
Matt Lucas & David Walliams

 We both grew up in awe of Rock Profiles and still find ourselves quoting 
Lucas’s bizarre but wonderfulShirley Bassey <https://youtu.be/lrLO0F-nKYs>: 
“She doesn’t have the range!” But it was Little Britain that was probably 
responsible for planting the seeds that led to us thinking “making it in a 
double act” was a possibility. Lou and Andy’svisit to the swimming pool 
<http://www.funnyordie.com/videos/0c3e8dfb46/lou-andy-swimming-pool-from-littlebritainfan?_cc=__d___&_ccid=a94189cf-fc58-4320-8927-bfa58a2a493b>
 is sketch perfection.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrLO0F-nKYs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrLO0F-nKYs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrLO0F-nKYs&media=>
In fact, their career is also the benchmark our parents are using to establish 
our joint success or failure. So until we become a worldwide phenomenon, sell 
merchandising that includes a 500-piece Ravensburger jigsaw puzzle, and our 
catchphrases are repeated daily by people of all ages, we’ll be a source of 
disappointment. Ah well – at least we’re writing for the Guardian.

Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-qv7k2_lc0M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-qv7k2_lc0M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-qv7k2_lc0M&media=>
 Terrifyingly flawless performers. These boys are masters of “the game” – by 
which we don’t mean the creepy mid-noughties pick-up bible or the rapper 
currently starring in a reality TV show in which a load of women compete to 
marry him, but rather the timeless comedy principle of taking a concept and 
escalating it to the point of absurdity and beyond.

Many people love Obama’s anger translator 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-qv7k2_lc0M>, Luther – they’re almost 
certainly the only double act to perform alongside a US president – although 
there are rumours that Bill Clinton once voiced Vic and Bob’s Dove From Above 
in a long lost episode of Shooting Stars). Our personal favourite Key & Peele 
sketch is theangry substitute teacher 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dd7FixvoKBw>. KMK does anger very well.

Tiny Fey and Amy Poehler
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fmax-ivan-comedy-five-best-sketch-duos-matt-lucas-david-walliams-harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-ronnie-corbett-barker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7381632d4972ad2be2e249b1da9cec3794991dc%2F91_147_1780_1068%2F1780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two's%20company%3A%20comedy's%20five%20best%20sketch%20duos%2C%20according%20to%20Max%20%26%20Ivan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fmax-ivan-comedy-five-best-sketch-duos-matt-lucas-david-walliams-harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-ronnie-corbett-barker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%27s%20company%3A%20comedy%27s%20five%20best%20sketch%20duos%2C%20according%20to%20Max%20%26%20Ivan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fmax-ivan-comedy-five-best-sketch-duos-matt-lucas-david-walliams-harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-ronnie-corbett-barker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7381632d4972ad2be2e249b1da9cec3794991dc%2F91_147_1780_1068%2F1780.jpg>
 Sketching their way to the top … Tiny Fey and Amy Poehler. Photograph: Paul 
Drinkwater/Reuters 
OK, so if you consult the double-act rulebook, this pair might not fully 
qualify. For one thing, they don’t brand themselves as Tina & Amy, Fey & 
Poehler or “The Funny Girlz”. But they have written, acted, presented and 
worked together for the past 20 years, producing some of the most amazing 
sketch material over that time. Cutting their teeth on the improv circuit, this 
duo rose to fame on the comedy institution that is Saturday Night Live, where 
they displayed not only incredible individual performances, but also (as this
montage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NG2iMgsGQaU> will show) some of that 
trademark double act magic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNG2iMgsGQaU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNG2iMgsGQaU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNG2iMgsGQaU&media=>
We’d love to share with you the 
slightly-controversial-but-ultimately-hilarious SNL sketch “Meet Your Second 
Wife”, but for some reason it’s disappeared from YouTube. Oh well. Instead you 
can bask in their glory as they take down everyone at the 2015Golden Globe 
awards <https://youtu.be/dZRTIX4Dxo4>.


Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-2z-AdzgKjY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-2z-AdzgKjY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-2z-AdzgKjY&media=>
 Living as a double act can be a tricky thing (even writing this is difficult 
– Max types the consonants and Ivan the vowels), but it’s the likes of Harry 
and Paul who give us hope we will still be writing and performing together in 
25 years. Their latest TV offering felt as fresh as their first, with thepanel 
show sketch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-2z-AdzgKjY> certainly pulling no 
punches. As for a favourite moment, we’re not sure you could get away with it 
now, butNelson Mandela <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC2UO1JGAtU> hawking 
his hybrid drug “crackabis” is a slice of surreal beauty.

 The Two Ronnies
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy0C59pI_ypQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy0C59pI_ypQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy0C59pI_ypQ&media=>
Even amid the wealth of tributes to the late Ronnie Corbett, how could we 
write about double acts without mentioning these legends?* TheirMastermind 
sketch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y0C59pI_ypQ> alone cements them onto 
this list. A brilliant premise followed by punchline after punchline, it is one 
of the most flawless 2 minutes and 45 seconds of pure comedy in existence. 
Sure, they didn’t write it – but then Ivan doesn’t write any of our stuff, he’s 
asleep on my lap right now (although, somehow still typing the vowels…).

 * Max & Ivan: The End <http://maxandivan.com/tour2016> is at the Rondo theatre
 <http://www.rondotheatre.co.uk/>, Bath, on 22 April. Box office: 0333 666 
3366. Then touring the UK.

 * Our apologies and love to Morecambe & Wise, Fry & Laurie, French & 
Saunders, the Pajama Men, Vic & Bob, Flight of the Conchords, Mitchell & Webb, 
Peter Cook & Dudley Moore, The Umbilical Brothers, Hamish & Andy, Adam & Joe, 
Ant & Dec, Statler & Waldorf, Simon & Garfunkel, Mac & Cheese, Fish & Chips, 
Knife & Fork, and anyone else we missed.
 