
Somalia’s al-Shabaab militants have come under renewed pressure from the US and
Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, as military leaders 
announced an airstrike and special forces raid that are presumed to have killed 
two major militant leaders.

News of the two operations coincided with another brutal terror attack in the 
capital of Mogadishu, whereal-Shabaab gunmen killed at least 10 people at the 
Ambassador hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/al-shabaab-gunmen-attack-mogadishu-hotel-ambassador-somalia>
.

The airstrike on 27 May targeted Abdullahi Haji Da’ud, “a senior military 
commander” for the al-Qaida-linked group, the Pentagon press secretary, Peter 
Cook, said in a statement on Wednesday. Da’ud was “principal coordinator” and 
intelligence chief for attacks in Somalia, Kenya and Uganda, Cook said. Cook 
added that the militant was “responsible for the loss of many innocent lives 
through attacks he has planned and carried out”.


“We are confident that the removal from the terrorist network of this 
experienced al-Shabaab commander,” Cook said, “will disrupt near-term attack 
planning, potentially saving many innocent lives.”

Cook told reporters that Da’ud was “presumed killed”, but the Pentagon 
declined to confirm details of the attack, or that it had killed Da’ud, saying 
only “we are currently assessing the results of the operation”.

The US also assisted in a Somali special forces raid that killed senior 
militants in the south of the country, according to officials who spoke 
anonymously to Reuters. One of the men killed, according to Somali officials, 
was Mohamed Dulyadin, also known as Kuno Gamadere and the man believed to have 
orchestrated an attack on Kenya’s Garissa University in April 2015. In that 
attack, four al-Shabaab gunmen killed 148 people, 142 of whom were students, at 
the school north-east of Nairobi, Kenya.

The Pentagon also declined to describe what kind of support it provided the 
African forces in the raid, though the US routinely provides intelligence and 
helicopter transport to east African allies.


“Sixteen armed men, four of them senior commanders, including Mohamed Mohamud 
Ali, known as Dulyadin,” said Abdirashid Janan, minister of state security for 
Jubaland, an autonomous region in southern Somalia, “were killed by the Somali 
commandos and the special forces of the Jubaland.”

Last summer the Kenyan government claimed that a US drone strike had killed 
Dulyadin but quickly recanted the statement.

Although not nominally at war in any African nation, the US has steadily 
increased military action on the continent in the wake of mass terror attacks 
like the one at Garissa University. In April, a US drone strike near the Kenyan 
borderkilled al-Shabaab leader Hassan Ali Dhoore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/01/us-military-somalia-airstrike-al-shabaab-terrorist-targets>
, who helped plan a 2014 Christmas day attack and 2015 hotel attack. In March, 
US warplanes and drones bombed a training camp in Somalia, killing more than 
100 people in what was probably one of the largest single American military 
raids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/al-shabaab-us-airstrike-training-camp-somalia-eyewitness>
 in over a decade.

The US has also sent special forces into Somalia to assist government troops 
against al-Shabaab, which has affiliated itself with al-Qaida and staged
terrorist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/04/westgate-mall-attacks-kenya> in 
Somalia and Kenya for years.

Earlier on Wednesday at the luxury Ambassador hotel, a car bomb exploded at 
the gates and al-Shabaab gunmen stormed the building, killing at least 10 
people. Police captain Mohamed Hussein told the Associated Press that “at least 
two gunmen are still holed up inside the building” and battling soldiers.

Though al-Shabaab forces have largely been expelled from Somali cities, they 
have continued suicide attacks, killing nine people at another hotel in 
February and exploding a car outside a restaurant in April, killing five.
 