
It will be interesting to see how the film The Iron Lady 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1007029/> fares in former coalfield areas. Our 
colleagues at theShields Gazette <http://www.shieldsgazette.com> find straws in 
the wind in advance of the local opening today, Twelfth Night.

On their patch of South Tyneside, where memories of the miners' strike and the 
perceived dismantling of heavy industry in the Thatcher era remain vivid, 
prominent figures are boycotting the picture and hoping that others do likewise.

There was a charity preview 
<http://www.tynesidecinema.co.uk/whats-on/films/view/the-iron-lady> at the 
Tyneside Cinema last night in aid of the Cinema and TV Benevolent Fund which 
looks after workers in the industry in hard times. But that hasn't altered the 
views of commentors to the Gazette such as Coun Iain Malcolm, leader ofSouth 
Tyneside council <http://www.southtyneside.info>. He says:

I'm not interested in seeing a film about that woman. Although she was the 
first female PM, she did little or nothing for the women's movement and did not 
appoint a single woman to the cabinet.

Thatcher's government de-industrialised the North East, to the extent we are 
still managing the consequences.We are still coping with the unemployment that 
followed the demolition of our shipyards and our colliery in South Shields.

Thatcher only held power because of the Falklands War and because the Labour 
Party at the time was terribly divided, leading to the creation of the SDP.

Meryl Streep's laurels for her portrayal of Thatcher's career, shown in 
flashbacks from the former PM's retirement, are equally unenticing to Coun Jim 
Perry of Primrose ward in Jarrow, the town still legendary for itsworkers' march
 <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/04/jarrow-march-london> to 
London in previous hard times. He chaired the mechanics' section of the 
National Union of Mineworkers at Westoe Colliery in South Shields during the 
1984-5 strike, and says:


I cannot see many local people going to see this film, and certainly not 
ex-miners, because of the pain inflicted on them during the Thatcher years.


The sharpest critic is local socialist playwright Ed Waugh 
<http://www.edwaughandtrevorwood.co.uk> whose work includes the play Maggie's 
End, co-authored with Trevor Wood. He says:

The film sounds like a whitewash and I don't wish to watch anything about that 
evil woman and her evil Tory Party. I cannot see many people in South Tyneside 
going to see the film, only middle-class types. This was the woman who called 
the miners 'the enemy within' â€“ the same miners who had fought against fascism 
in the Second World War. To the day I die, I will hate her.

Were you affected by the 'Maggie Years' and if so, do you have an appetite for 
watchingThe Iron Lady? Is it too early to revisit those terrible times for 
coalfield communities/ Or are the critics too unbending and harsh?
 