
UBC Media is in talks with a number of US-based venture capital companies 
about investing in AudioBoo, in a funding round that could potentially value 
the audio social network at more than £10m.

UBC, which is the largest shareholder in AudioBoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jun/11/ubc-media-largest-shareholder-audioboo?INTCMP=SRCH>
 with a 37% stake, has appointed Pagemill Partners of Palo Alto, California to 
lead the fundraising round.

In a statement UBC said that the latest round of fundraising – which if it 
successful will mean AudioBoo will be worth significantly more than the £2m it 
was valued at following the last round of investment – will involve bringing on 
board a new lead investor.

 This means UBC Media will reduce its stake, although it is understood the 
company has no intention of selling up entirely, but it is not clear if it will 
remain the largest shareholder following the conclusion of the fundraising 
round.

In a statement to the stockmarket, UBC Media said AudioBoo is going through a 
period of "rapid growth" with active users quadrupling to 4.4 million year on 
year in the six months to the end of March, with "listens" per month more than 
doubling to 8.2m.

In addition, Imagination, the British technology company that counts Apple and 
Intel as shareholders, has upped its stake in UBC Media from 10% to potentially 
15%.

To reach the 15% control mark, Imagination, which owns the Pure radio brand 
and also holds a stake in music service 7Digital, has to fulfill certain 
"commercial conditions" this year in relation to projects it is working on with 
UBC.

UBC, which supplies multimedia content to the BBC and 250 commercial radio 
stations, said its interactive division has also signed the first overseas deal 
for internet radio service RadioPlayer.

The service, which in the UK is backed by the BBC and the commercial radio 
industry, has been licensed to Digitalradio Norge, the body representing radio 
broadcasters in Norway.

UBC said in that it expects turnover to by up 17% year on year to £3.8m in the 
12 months to the end of March. However, operating losses are expected to be 
about £600,000, a 20% increase year on year.

"The progress in our domestic and international business with Radioplayer and 
the growth at AudioBoo are exciting developments and put us at the heart of the 
way the radio industry is creating its digital future," said Simon Cole, chief 
executive of UBC. "I'm pleased that our progress in these areas, and our 
commercial partnerships with Imagination, have led to them becoming more 
significant shareholders. There is much we can achieve together".

The AIM-listed UBC has a market capitalisation of about £5m.

Earlier this month, AudioBoo founder Mark Rock announced that he is to leave 
the company on 1 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/apr/10/mark-rock-audioboo?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 after "internal tensions", but that he will remain a significant shareholder 
with a seat on the board.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 