
Multimedia content company UBC has acquired digital music service 7digital as 
part of a reverse takeover to create a £30m global digital music and radio 
business.

UBC Media, which provides radio content to 250 companies, including the BBC 
and Yahoo, has acquired 7digital for £16.5m.

The next step in the deal will see the formation of a new public company, 
7digital group, which will list on the stockmarket from 10 June with an 
expected stockmarket valuation of £29m.

Under the deal, the existing shareholders of 7digital, which provides digital 
music services for brands including Samsung, HTC and Pioneer, will control 75% 
of the new company.

Upon listing, the new company will be chaired by Qualcomm director Sir Donald 
Cruickshank, the former chairman of the London Stock Exchange.

Ben Drury, the founder and chief executive of 7digital, said that the deal 
made sense in the face of the rapid convergence of radio, music and internet 
technology.

"Look at iTunes radio in the US and Apple possibly buying Beats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/09/apple-beats-digital-music-spotify-google>
," said Drury. "The two worlds are converging. The 7digital open platform 
simplifies access to the world's music and the combination with UBC will help 
further enhance the platform to include radio-style capability and services to 
help unlock the mass market for our customers and partners."

UBC Media supplies multimedia content to the BBC and 250 commercial radio 
stations, while its interactive division provides the software behind the UK 
RadioPlayer's station listings and search functionality.

"This transaction will create a world leading digital music and radio platform 
that is ideally positioned to exploit the convergence of radio and digital 
music services," said Simon Cole, the chief executive of UBC. "The new business 
will also be well-placed to drive consolidation of the fragmented B2B digital 
music industry."

In a separate deal, UBC has reduced its stake in audio-sharing service 
Audioboo from 34% –the largest investor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jun/11/ubc-media-largest-shareholder-audioboo>
 – to 18.7% following a takeover by a listed investment vehicle, One Delta.

Audioboo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo> will now be listed 
in its own right, under the name Audioboom, with the new 7digital group able to 
up its stake to 19.7%.

Drury said that while the company retains a valuable strategic investment, 
currently worth £3m, the Audioboo business was not core to 7digital group.

"Audioboo is a consumer-facing audio social network," he said. "7digital group 
and UBC focus on the business-to-business market".

Cole will become chief executive of the enlarged company, Drury will take the 
position of chief strategy officer.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 