
Planned changes to apprenticeship funding in England have been attacked by 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs, who warn the shakeup 
risks cutting the number of schemes on offer and runs counter to Theresa May’s 
reported pledge to boost social mobility.

More than 50 MPs have written to Robert Halfon, the apprenticeships and skills 
minister, asking him to rethink proposals that would involve cuts in May 2017 
of 30-50% to funding rates paid to some colleges and training providers that 
teach young apprentices.


The letter, written by the Labour MP for Tottenham, David Lammy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-lammy>, and seen by the Guardian, 
says the cuts “hugely undermine the government’s pledge to create 3m 
apprenticeships by 2020, and also entirely contradict the prime minister’s 
promise to ‘help anybody, whatever your background, go as far as your talents 
will take you’.”

Apprenticeship levy will go ahead next year, government confirms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
As part of a push to raise productivity and address skills shortages, 
ministers have set ambitious targets to increase apprenticeship numbers and are
introducing a levy on larger employers from next April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
 to help fund the new placements. The government has also presented 
apprenticeships as a way of tackling inequality. Halfon recently described the 
levy as crucial to ensuring “people of all ages and backgrounds have a chance 
to get on in life”.

But Lammy said the the proposed funding changes, published by the Skills 
Funding Agency 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/skills-funding-agency> last month, 
were the latest sign that the government viewed apprenticeships as the “poor 
cousin” to higher education.

“These cuts are a direct attack on social mobility and a direct attack on the 
life chances of working class kids,” said Lammy.


“The government talk a good game about social justice and helping people from 
disadvantaged and low-income backgrounds to get on in life, but time and time 
again they take from the poor and give to the rich.”


The proposed funding rates for apprenticeships 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/apprenticeships-proposals-for-funding-from-may-2017>
 were published in August along with an invitation for feedback to help test 
“how they support the government’s emerging industrial strategy and ensure that 
individuals from all backgrounds and parts of the country have the opportunity 
to get on in life.” The agency is aiming to confirm the final apprenticeship 
funding arrangements in October.


An analysis of the proposed funding rates by the further education newspaper 
FE Week 
<http://feweek.co.uk/2016/08/19/exclusive-funding-rates-cuts-up-to-50-for-the-most-deprived-16-18-apprentices/>
 found the two most popular apprenticeships for 16- to 18-year-olds – the level 
2 apprenticeships in business administration and in construction – face cuts of 
27% -52%, depending on location. The analysis also found that the funding for 
many apprentices aged 24 and over would go up under the new proposals, 
particularly for those living in affluent areas outside the south-east and 
working for large employers.

The government wants to move away from using a range of different funding 
rates for apprenticeship places depending on age and location and to simplify 
the system to make it easier for employers to navigate.

The government is also introducing extra support 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/views-sought-on-plans-to-boost-apprenticeships>
, worth £2,000 per trainee, for employers and training providers who take on 
16- to 18-year-old apprentices or young care leavers.

Asked about the call by 55 Labour MPs for a rethink, Halfon noted that the 
government was ensuring more money was going into the apprenticeship system 
overall and more money on average per apprenticeship.

“This government is doubling investment in apprenticeships because we know 
they create a ladder of opportunity for our young people. Through the new levy, 
£2.5bn will be invested in apprenticeships by 2019-20 - twice what was spent in 
2010-11,” Halfon said.

He said the changes were also designed to encourage employers to take on 16- 
to 18-year-olds. “This will help to ensure every young person, regardless of 
background or ability, has the chance to take their first step into work,” the 
minister added.

However, training providers fear the proposed changes could force them to 
withdraw some schemes altogether because the new funding rates will mean some 
apprenticeships are no longer viable.


The Association of Employment and Learning Providers <http://www.aelp.org.uk/> 
said the proposals threatened to “wipe out” the training provision for young 
people in disadvantaged urban areas, with London particularly hard hit.

The association, which represents training providers delivering more than 
three-quarters of England’s apprenticeships, has called on the Department for 
Education to explain why all apprenticeships for 16- to 18-year-olds are not 
fully state-funded.

Mark Dawe, its chief executive, said: ‘Why should apprentices be the only 16– 
to 18-year-olds not to get free education and training? This approach appears 
discriminatory.”

The group fears that plans to remove extra support for apprentices in deprived 
areas could halve funding rates for the most vulnerable young people on 
apprenticeships. “The end result would be that these learners would have the 
choice of an apprenticeship taken away from them and areas such as inner London 
becoming apprenticeship deserts,” said Dawe.



 