
Tough new targets to curb the overuse of antibiotics and cut the risk of the 
resurgence of killer diseases have been announced by the government, which will 
require doctors to halve the number of inappropriate prescriptions written for 
the drugs by 2020.

David Cameron told world leaders at the G7 summit in Japan that the issue was 
a priority for him, as he revealed plans to crack down on prescribing within 
the UK. Experts warn that unless action is taken drug-resistant infections will 
kill more people than cancer, taking 10 million lives a year by 2050.


England’s chief medical officer warns of ‘antibiotic apocalypse’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
Inappropriate prescribing of antibiotics – for instance for infections such as 
coughs and colds caused by a virus rather than bacteria – is to be halved 
within the next four years. Officials say 10% of the 34m antibiotics prescribed 
each year are handed to people inappropriately, suggesting a target reduction 
of 1.7m prescriptions annually by 2020.

A financial incentive scheme has already produced results. On Wednesday it was 
announced that GPs in England have cut all antibiotic prescriptions by 2.6m 
last year, a drop of 7.3%.NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
commissioners were offered an extra £5 per head of the local population for 
meeting a target of 1% decrease in their use.

The government’s second target is a commitment to halve the number of 
drug-resistant bloodstream infections, such asE coli, acquired by patients in 
hospital by the same year, reducing the need for antibiotics.

Third, it will reduce the use of antibiotics in farm animals and farmed fish 
and control or ban those drugs that are important in human health.

No antibiotics without a test, says report on rising antimicrobial resistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/no-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance>
The measures follow last week’s seminal report by Jim O’Neill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/no-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance>
, who has called for a global response to what has been described as an 
“antibiotic apocalypse”. Dame Sally Davies, the chief medical officer for 
England, said50,000 people were dying every year in Europe and the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
 from infections that antibiotics have lost the power to treat.


Lord O’Neill set out a 10-point blueprint <http://amr-review.org/Publications> 
for reversing the erosion of the power of antibiotics to treat infection, from 
reducing doctors’ prescribing to curbing use of the drugs in farm animals and 
incentivising drug companies to invent new antibiotics. The new targets are all 
in line with the recommendations in his report, which was commissioned by 
Cameron two years ago.

Downing Street says overuse of antibiotics for decades has been the key driver 
of the emergence of bugs that are starting to outsmart the drugs.

The government has also accepted O’Neill’s proposals to incentivise the 
development of new drugs. The UK will give £50m to kickstart a new fund to 
reward companies that develop new, successful antibiotics and make them 
available to everyone who needs them. The O’Neill report suggested $1.6bn 
(£1bn) a year over 10 years was required to develop 15 new drugs. The 
government said that was a relatively small figure when compared with the total 
annual global sales of pharmaceutical products of about $1tn.

Accepting another of the report’s recommendations, Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England is to test a new public 
awareness campaign into how to drive behavioural change.


The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said the $40bn asked for over 10 years by 
O’Neill was “vastly outstripped by the costs of inaction, which is potentially 
in the trillions”.

The public health minister, Jane Ellison, agreed that doing nothing was not an 
option. “We know that inappropriate use of antibiotics is a key driver of these 
drug-resistant infections. In England we are beginning to make progress, with 
family doctors achieving a 7% reduction in antibiotic prescribing last year,” 
she said. “These new goals will help to maintain this momentum.”

Davies welcomed the announcement while Nigel Gibbens, the chief veterinary 
officer, added: “It’s important that we act now to start reducing antibiotic 
use in livestock, and our commitment to meet Jim O’Neill’s suggested 50mg/kg 
target overall by 2018 sets the UK well on that path.”

Dr Annette Heinzelmann, medical director of Médecins Sans Frontières called 
drug-resistant infections a “looming threat” to the work of her NGO.

“They’re everywhere: we see them in war-wounded patients we treat in Jordan 
and in newborns in Niger. Our medical staff are increasingly seeing people who 
have infections that can only be treated with one of the last lines of 
antibiotics. It is vital that this important topic is high on the political 
agenda as it can no longer be ignored. All countries need to realise the 
gravity of the issue and take action,” she told the Guardian.

 