
A new taskforce to reduce the use of antibiotics in farming in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/10/investors-fast-food-pub-chains-reduce-farm-antibiotics>
 is being set up in response to government concerns on thegrowing resistance of 
diseases to antibiotic medicines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/no-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance>
.

The alliance for the Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture (RUMA) said 
it would work with organisations including farming leaders, food companies and 
government to find ways to replace antibiotic use where possible, and reduce it 
where not.

John FitzGerald, secretary general of RUMA, said: “We understand the ambition 
to develop long-term targets [on antibiotic use]. The industry has long 
recognised the beneficial role targets can play, but is acutely aware that 
inappropriate targets can also be counterproductive, and even lead to increased 
risk of resistance.”

He said the taskforce would “harness the expertise of specialists across 
different sectors”, and try to identify effective goals that would protect 
animal welfare.

England’s chief medical officer warns of ‘antibiotic apocalypse’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
The government has been conducting a review of antibiotic resistance, led by 
Jim O’Neill <http://amr-review.org/>. It has found increasing risks in the 
over-prescribing of antibiotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
, both in human health and for farm animals, and has warned that increasing 
resistance risks making routine surgery, such as hip replacements, dangerous to 
patients.

Antibiotic use in animal husbandry has often come under fire from campaigners, 
but has rarely been a focus of government intervention up to now.

The O’Neill review called for a raft of new measures, including a massive 
global public awareness campaign, improved hygiene, the reduction of the 
unnecessary use of antibiotics in agriculture, and improved surveillance of 
drug resistance in animals and humans. This will also include developing better 
methods of diagnosis for animal diseases, and promoting the use of alternatives 
to medication.

Last year, the Guardian conducted a major investigation into antibiotic use in 
farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/mrsa-superbug-in-supermarket-pork-raises-alarm-farming-risks>
, and found that variants of the deadly superbug MRSA are now to be found among 
UK livestock herds. The Guardian also conducted tests on supermarket meat 
products, and found nine samples in 100 of pork products from major UK 
supermarket chains tested positive for livestock-associated MRSA.

Livestock-associated MRSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/what-is-the-superbug-la-mrsa-cc398-and-why-is-it-spreading-on-farms>
 has also been found to be present in UK hospitals. The bug generally causes 
skin infections in humans, which are not life-threatening, but in some cases – 
especially among older patients or those with lowered immune systems - it can 
be fatal.

Denmark has struggled with the disease among its pig herds, and it has spread 
to farm workers and other people there. The Danish government last year set up 
a new strategy to deal with the problem, and the Danish environment minister 
told the Guardian that the scourge could be repeated in the UK if similarly 
strong measures are not taken here.

Antibiotic use is frequently a feature of intensive farming, where animals are 
reared in close proximity over the course of their lives, often in large sheds, 
where if one animal contracts an infection the rest of the herd must often be 
treated as well.

The government does not collate statistics on the details of how antibiotics 
are used on farms, leaving vets to prescribe them.

FitzGerald said: “The Danish government invested heavily to allow its pig 
farmers to build new high-health premises. The Netherlands [after reducing its 
antibiotic use by nearly 60%] is now at approximately the same level of use as 
the UK. So we must look at how we develop the right goals for our sectors.”
 