
Many migrant organisations are critical of the UK government's recent changes 
to the English language requirement for people immigrating from outside 
European Area countries, claiming that the new rules require an unnecessary 
level of "speaking and listening", and that many people will remain separated 
from their partners as a result.

Melanie Cooke 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/departments/education/people/academic/cookem.aspx>, 
research associate atKing's College London <http://www.kcl.ac.uk/index.aspx>, 
says the new language requirements will affect those applying for indefinite 
leave to remain or for citizenship, but who cannot reach the necessary level of 
proficiency – known as "B1" – in five years.

Until 2007, she says, English for speakers of other languages (Esol) classes 
could be obtained for free. "But these free classes were gradually removed and 
now everyone except those on benefits has to pay. The government cuts of up to 
25% in adult education is impacting on Esol," Cooke said.

As part of the new language requirement, all applicants for settlement will 
need to pass theLife in the UK Test 
<http://lifeintheuktest.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/>, a computer-based bank of 
questions about UK history, culture and institutions, and present an English 
language speaking and listening qualification at B1 level or above on theCommon 
European Framework of Reference for Languages 
<http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/cadre_en.asp>. Some exemptions exist, for 
example those who are skilled workers from Commonwealth countries where English 
is a person's first language and they have been accepted into the UK to work.

But what does achieving this new standard of English mean in practical terms?

According to Dr Nick Saville, director of research and validation at test 
providerCambridge Esol <http://www.cambridgeesol.org/index.html>, B1 level 
means people are starting to become "independent language users".

"For example, people at this level can offer advice in a known area and 
understand public announcements. B1 is a challenging level for many learners. 
There are some countries where a majority of secondary school students achieve 
this level of English as part of their regular studies, but in other countries 
most students do not reach this level. For example, only a small proportion of 
pupils learning French or German in England achieve level B1," he said.

Thomas Huddleston, co-ordinator of the Migrant Integration Policy Index 
<http://www.mipex.eu/> in Brussels, says that to be granted settlement most 
countries require lower language skills than the B1 test. Only Denmark, Estonia 
and Germany explicitly require B1 or higher, and for permanent residence most 
countries only require the less demanding levels A1 or A2.

The new requirements for the UK are set to be introduced in October 2013. They 
are part of a range of changes that the government has announced on 
immigration, including a minimum income requirement for some categories of 
British sponsors of spouse visa applicants of around $40,000 a year.

In recent statements the UK Border Agency <http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/> 
(UKBA) has defended the changes as necessary to "prevent abuse of the family 
immigration system, in particular sham marriages, and to successfully tackle 
abuse when it occurs", claiming that the changes will reduce burdens on the 
taxpayer and on public services because demand for training and translation 
services will fall.

The UKBA also states that the new language rules will "promote integration and 
community cohesion", arguing that a high level of English will probably mean 
better employment prospects. The aim of the new rules is to "improve public 
confidence in the immigration system. A consequential reduction in net 
migration would be a welcome additional benefit," it said.

It is this last issue that campaigners such as Cooke believe is the real 
reason behind the changes.

"There is an important civil rights issue here if we are saying you can pay 
taxes and volunteer and raise your kids, but you can't have your full rights as 
a citizen if you have low literacy or can't acquire spoken English, because for 
instance you work all day in a hotel cleaning, and you don't have the 
opportunity to learn English to the B1 level."

Guy Taylor, a spokesman for the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants 
<http://www.jcwi.org.uk/> in the UK, agrees. "Raising the level of English 
required to enter the UK is not a step towards integration; it is a barrier to 
immigration. Thousands of EU nationals come to the UK with poor English, and 
the majority of them learn good English quite quickly."

Many people trying to achieve indefinite leave to remain are aware that B1 is 
a level of English that is challenging.

John Perry, a UK citizen and campaigner on migrant issues, lives with his 
wife, Abigail, in Nicaragua and both understand how hard it is to study English 
to satisfy visa requirements for the UK. Abigail went through the process 
before the level was raised to B1.

"Now you can arrange a test in Nicaragua via an agency in El Salvador that 
sets tests here as needed. This does not, of course, remove the other barriers 
or difficulties, such as that the accents aren't English. My wife was far 
better off learning English in the UK – there is simply no comparison in 
standards, unless of course you are well off and can afford the best tuition," 
Perry said.

Allan Hewitt, a retired UK national living near London whose wife is from 
Thailand, shares concerns about the cost of tuition. His wife has been finding 
it difficult to achieve even the current, lesser level of English required. 
They have known each other since 1984, and she has been studying English in 
England and in Thailand.

"Last time she did [the test], it was $200, and the sample test was $40 per 
test. I think the test is unfair, it keeps spouses apart," Hewitt said.

Taylor agrees, saying that the previous A1 level is already demanding enough.

"We know of a number of people retaking tests who could easily get by in the 
UK. By far the best place to learn English is in a country where it is commonly 
used."
 