
The UK is to expand its contribution to the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> peacekeeping force in South 
Sudan, raising the planned total from 300 to 400.

Although still small, the troop number marks a significant change on the part 
of the British. While contributing financially to UN peacekeeping operations, 
the UK has until recently limited its troop commitments to the 250 personnel in 
Cyprus.

The British troops heading to the world’s newest country will join a 
12,000-strong UN force from 50 nations. The UK is also deploying about 40 
troops to the UN force inSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> 
combating the jihadi fighters of the al-Shabaab group.

'We just want to live' – South Sudanese refugees bear scars of brutal civil war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/south-sudanese-refugees-scars-civil-war-uganda>
The UK deployment will be formally announced by the defence secretary, Michael 
Fallon, in London on Thursday, at an international conference aimed at 
improving UN peacekeeping efforts.

South Sudan, which came into being in 2011, has for the last three years 
collapsed into a conflict which has left thousands dead and displaced an
estimated 1.7 million people. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/10/south-sudan-capital-juba-violence-salva-kiir>

The British commitment comes against a background of tentative peace talks 
involving UN and African diplomats.

A small number of British troops arrived in the country over the summer, with 
the rest to be deployed later this year and next. They will mainly be engaged 
in engineering projects, while the extra 100 troops are due to help set up a 
field hospital. Others are attached to the UN peacekeeping headquarters inSouth 
Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>.

Although the UK defence force has shrunk dramatically over the last decade and 
has scaled back on overseas deployment, ministers frequently talk up the 
involvement of British forces abroad.

Fallon will say on Thursday: “This large-scale deployment underlines how we 
are stepping up our global commitments. Backed by a rising defence budget, it’s 
part of our effort to tackle the instability that leads to mass migration and 
terrorism. It will help keep Britain safe while improving lives abroad.”
 