
UK Trade & Investment <http://www.ukti.gov.uk/%E2%80%8E>, the government arm 
offering business opportunities, trade advice and support to help UK-based 
companies grow overseas, is to partner with the Guardian across its Activate 
Summits inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-new-york>
 andSingapore <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore>.

Under the partnership, the UKTI is inviting UK-based companies to apply for 
funding to attend the events (£500 for New York, £650 for Singapore), while the 
Guardian, who is partnering with the global consultancyMediaGuru 
<http://www.mediaguru.in/en/> in Singapore, is waiving the delegate fee for all 
companies who receive UKTI funding (typically $999 for New York and SGD $950 
for Singapore).

Companies applying for Singapore funding can also receive a discounted rate at 
the iconic Marina Bay Sands hotel where the event is taking place, if booking 
by the 1 November. To access this rate please stipulate when returning your 
application form via email and a member of the team will be in contact.

To be eligible for funding companies must have less than 250 employees and an 
annual turnover not exceeding £45m.

For full details and to apply for funding download the application form here >>
 <http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1382542736725/MissionApplicationformandMA.pdf>

Activate is the Guardian's global platform for leaders working with the 
internet to change the world, and attendees of both events can expect to learn 
from and do business with some of the biggest names in media and technology 
with the emphasis very much on networking and deal brokering.

Successful applicants will also be invited to attend the Activate Tech Talent 
days which will run in bothSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/15/activate-tech-talent-day-startup>
 andNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/18/activate-new-york-tech-talent>
 and where the focus will be on connecting startups with investors and 
like-minded entrepreneurs in the region.

For full details and to apply for funding download the application form here >>
 <http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1382542736725/MissionApplicationformandMA.pdf>

To find out more about Activate New York click here >> 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-new-york>

To find out more about Activate Singapore click here >> 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore>
 