
The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, said antimicrobial resistance is a 
“fundamental threat” to global health and safety at the first general assembly 
meeting on drug-resistant bacteria.

It is only the fourth time the general assembly has held a high-level meeting 
for a health issue.

“If we fail to address this problem quickly and comprehensively, antimicrobial 
resistance will make providing high-quality universal healthcare coverage more 
difficult if not impossible,” said Ban. “It will undermine sustainable food 
production. And it will put the sustainable development goals in jeopardy.”

Just before world leaders convened for the meeting, all 193 member states 
agreed in a declaration signed on Wednesday to combat the proliferation of 
antibiotic resistance.

The declaration routes the global response to superbugs along a similar path 
to the oneused to combat climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
. In two years, groups including UN agencies will provide an update on the 
superbug fight to the UN secretary general.

It is estimated that more than 700,000 people die each year due to 
drug-resistant infections 
<https://amr-review.org/sites/default/files/AMR%20Review%20Paper%20-%20Tackling%20a%20crisis%20for%20the%20health%20and%20wealth%20of%20nations_1.pdf>
, though it could be much higher because there is no global system to monitor 
these deaths. And there has been trouble tracking those deaths in places where 
they are monitored, like in the US, where tens of thousands of deaths have not 
been attributed to superbugs, according toa Reuters investigation 
<http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/usa-uncounted-cdc/>.

“It’s ironic that such a small thing, is causing such an enormous public 
threat,” said Jeffrey LeJeune, a professor and head of the food animal research 
program at Ohio State University. “But it is a global health threat that needs 
a global response.”

Resistance isn’t futile – how to tackle drug-resistant superbugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/19/antibiotics-new-research-end-of-drug-resistant-superbugs>
Scientists have known for more than half a century that patients could develop 
resistance to the drugs used to treat them – one of the first people to sound 
the alarm was Alexander Fleming, who is credited with creating the first 
antibiotic, penicillin, in 1928. He cautioned of the impending crisiswhile 
accepting his Nobel prize in 1945 
<http://www.nww2m.com/2013/02/scitech-tuesday-sir-alexander-flemings-ominous-prediction/>
: “There is the danger that the ignorant man may easily underdose himself and 
by exposing his microbes to non-lethal quantities of the drug make them 
resistant.”

But scientific innovation, and increased awareness, has shown the severity of 
the threat.The World Bank announced this week 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/publication/drug-resistant-infections-a-threat-to-our-economic-future>
 that without containment, the economic impact of the crisis makes it unlikely 
for the UN to reach its sustainable development goals for 2030.

“The scale and nature of this economic threat could wipe out hard-fought 
development gains and take us away from our goals of ending extreme poverty,” 
said the World Bank president, Jim Yong Kim. “We must urgently change course to 
avert this potential crisis.”

There has also been considerable advocacy by health officials, like Sally 
Davies, chief medical officer of the UK.

“Drug-resistant infections are firmly on the global agenda but now the real 
work begins,” Davies said in a statement. “We need governments, the 
pharmaceutical industry, health professionals and the agricultural sector to 
follow through on their commitments to save modern medicine.”

The World Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organization 
director general, Margaret Chan, said on Wednesday that it was imperative for 
consumers and medical providers to rely less on antibiotics for disease 
treatment.


“On current trends, a common disease like gonorrhea may become untreatable,” 
Chan said. “Doctors facing patients will have to say, ‘I’m sorry - there’s 
nothing I can do for you.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fun-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d11ddaeaae6fdfad47a5635d62d14fadc439ae4%2F0_382_5153_3092%2F5153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20meeting%20tackles%20the%20'fundamental%20threat'%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fun-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20meeting%20tackles%20the%20%27fundamental%20threat%27%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fun-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d11ddaeaae6fdfad47a5635d62d14fadc439ae4%2F0_382_5153_3092%2F5153.jpg>
 Margaret Chan, director general for the World Health Organization, speaking at 
another UN event on refugees and migrants. Photograph: Julie Jacobson/AP 
She also called for more innovation in antibiotic development, noting that 
only two new classes of antibiotics reached the market in the past half 
century. “The emergence of bacterial resistance is outpacing the world’s 
capacity for antibiotic discovery,” Chan said.

She warned specifically about gram-negative bacteria, which causes infections 
like pneumonia, wound or surgical site infections and meningitis in healthcare 
settings, and is proving increasingly resistant to antibiotics.

“With few replacement products in the pipeline, the world is heading to a 
post-antibiotic era in which common infections, especially those caused by 
gram-negative bacteria, will once again kill.”

Signatories to the UN declaration committed to encouraging innovation in 
antibiotic development, increasing public awareness of the threat and 
developing surveillance and regulatory systems on the use and sales of 
antimicrobial medicine for humans and animals.

Only three other health issues have been the subject of general assembly 
high-level meetings: HIV/Aids,non-communicable diseases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/mar/02/stroke-heart-disease-attack-cancer-developing-countries>
 and Ebola.

Mark Woolhouse, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the University 
of Edinburgh, said he was encouraged that unlike withHIV/Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/12/hiv-infecting-2m-more-people-every-year-warns-un>
 and Ebola, the UN is addressing this health crisis before it has spun out of 
control.

“It’s very serious indeed – it’s killing people around the world at the rate 
of hundreds of thousands of year and we all expect it to get worse if something 
isn’t done now,” Woolhouse said. “But the UN is coming in at just the right 
time, in a sense.”
 