
Not every superpower deserves to be given the cinematic treatment. 

Take Ant-Man. He can make himself small. As far as superpowers go, that is 
frankly rubbish. Superman is practically invincible, has X-ray vision, can fly, 
and tops this all off with a renegade disregard for society’s underpant/trouser 
conventions.Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> is small, and 
also quite strong for a thing that is small. That director Peyton Reed managed 
to wring a half-decent film out of this character is bordering on the 
miraculous.

Ant-Man review: diminishing returns for latest expansion of Marvel universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
For as long as comic-book adaptations keep raking in more cash than film 
studios know how to spend, a search will always be on for which to adapt next. 
But there are characters lurking in the murky world of comic books with 
superpowers even worse than Ant-Man’s. Abilities so soporifically dull that 
filming them would be practically pointless …

Tar Baby

Marvel’s Tar Baby <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tar_Baby_(comics)>, born in 
comic form in 1985, possessed one of the most spitefully pointless superpowers 
in history. He could secrete a tar-like substance through his skin, allowing 
him to stick to things, like walls and stuff. And, well, that was about it. He 
just stuck, like a handful of mud or some well-buttered toast. He presumably 
also left dirty black smudges behind, at the very best making him a hero to the 
sponge industry – but not to anyone else. If the ability to stick to things is 
a superpower, then, technically, a blancmange hurled at a wall is a superhero. 
Is there a scenario in which sharing the adhesive characteristics of a used 
tissue might result in edge-of-the-seat rollercoaster entertainment? Probably 
not.

Cypher

Some X-Men are psychics, others are shapeshifting double-hardnuts. Some have 
impressive chair-chucking telekinetic powers, others are truly blessed and are 
Hugh Jackman. So spare a thought forCypher 
<http://www.comicvine.com/cypher/4005-14559/>, who, propping up the more 
adminny end of the superhero spectrum, can translate any language into any 
other. Handy, sure, like a dictionary or a cheap app, but probably about as 
much use as either in a dust-up against a death lizard from the pain dimension. 
On screen, watching him do his thing would be more interesting than watching 
someone type a phrase into Google Translate. But not by much. Not by much at 
all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel's%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel%27s%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch the Ant-Man trailer 
Color Kid

No one enjoys the cheerless rigmarole of repainting a room, or getting to the 
pub only to realise that you’re wearing the same outfit as one of your 
stupidest friends.Color Kid <http://www.comicvine.com/color-kid/4005-32224/>’s 
power – he can change the colour of things at will – could save the world from 
both of these injustices. He points, and poof, your living room is a snazzy new 
lemon hue; your navy pantaloons are suddenly an alluring mauve. Two hours of 
Color Kid doing just this might sound like it could wear thin, but with a car 
chase, a couple of shootouts and climactic fistfight shoehorned in, could it be 
spectacular? Could the thrill of seeing a thing become the 
same-albeit-different-coloured thing make audiences flock to cinemas in their 
millions? No. It probably couldn’t.

Gambit 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGn6hIPLO9VQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGn6hIPLO9VQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGn6hIPLO9VQ&media=>
Despite his obvious awfulness, Gambit was permitted to appear in the generally 
woefulX-Men Origins: Wolverine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-origins-wolverine>. He has the ability 
to charge objects with kinetic energy, meaning he can hurl them with power and 
accuracy generally detrimental to the target’s ability to remain alive. Which, 
on paper, sounds great. But his weapon of choice? Playing cards. The same 
weapon branded by those oafs in sunglasses called Randy or Rooster on 
late-night Channel 5 poker shows you only watch when you’re too drunk to find 
the remote. So watching Gambit is basically like watching a man called Sambob 
throwing cards at people while being a douche, for what feels like a thousand 
years.

Mister Midnite

Perverts, sporting cheats and superheroes – the three groups who’d surely 
benefit most from the ability to stop time. It would provide a decent premise 
for a comic-book film too, with ample potential for tension, whizz-popping 
special effects and expensive set-pieces. The problem is, stopping time is not 
whatMister Midnight  <http://pdsh.wikia.com/wiki/Mister_Midnite>does. No, with 
a grand exaltation of “STOP TIME!”, he stops clocks. Not time, you understand, 
just clocks. The world itself keeps on rolling along as normal, it just 
temporarily has fewer functioning clocks in it. Which means that, as a 
superhero, Mister Midnight is beaten in terms of actual power by Bernard from
Bernard’s Watch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CNeMcosZJok>. A $100m summer 
blockbuster about a man making people slightly late for things? It seems 
unlikely, mainly because it sounds terrible. On the other hand, a film about 
Bernard from Bernard’s Watch, crazed by decades of limitless power, laying 
waste to humanity? That sounds amazing.

Marvel vs DC: dawn of the superhero blockbuster movie war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/marvel-vs-dc-dawn-of-the-superhero-blockbuster-movie-war>
Dummy 

This DC Comics villain’s superpower is the ability to disguise himself as a 
ventriloquist’s dummy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dummy_(DC_Comics)>, 
leaving him to rule the criminal underworld in anonymous form. In essence, his 
superpower is disguise, serving a function that a hessian sack over the head 
could perform equally well. Uniquely, this particular superpower also carries 
with it the alarming risk of a hand mistakenly being inserted into the 
possessor’s fundament – a risk no one should ever take unless there’s 
absolutely no alternative. And, as we’ve established, with sacks in existence, 
there really is.

 Real power ... Captain America Photograph: MARVEL STUDIOS/Allstar/MARVEL 
STUDIOS 
Goldstar

Goldstar <http://dc.wikia.com/wiki/Ernest_Widdle_(New_Earth)> at least 
possessed some abilities that might be of use to your average jobbing 
superhero. He could fly, which is a boon for anyone wanting to flaunt it on the 
big screen, and he had super strength. In theory then, he was as hard as Jimmy 
Nail’s favourite nail. Where Goldstar fell down was his unforgivable 
teacher’s-pet wetness: he wanted everyone to be nice to each other all the 
time, so he projected energy beams that caused people to banish negative 
thoughts, including salacious ones. Meaning he’d never use his super strength 
to punch a baddie’s face out through the back of their head, there would be no 
arguments, and no one would ever get to have sex. He’s the Lib Dem of the 
superhero world. The coffee Revel. The plain cheeseburger. The flaccid, clammy 
crybaby. He’s a do-gooding, milquetoast, whomping great blubber-gimp. I hate 
Goldstar so much.
 