
An undercover police officer has been accused of encouraging and helping an 
animal rights campaigner to commit illegal acts which led to his being jailed 
for four years, according to legal documents.

The campaigner, Geoff Sheppard, has lodged an appeal to overturn his 
convictions for possessing a shotgun and components for an incendiary device, 
alleging, in effect, that he was a victim of an agent provocateur.

Sheppard said the undercover officer, whose covert role is revealed by the 
Guardian this Thursday, actively encouraged him to buy the shotgun and offered 
him money to purchase it. He claims that as part of a “determined, cynical, and 
targeted effort” against him, the undercover spy asked him for instructions on 
making an incendiary device, and tested it.

The Guardian has established that the undercover officer at the centre of the 
new allegationsworked for a controversial covert unit that infiltrated hundreds 
of political groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/24/special-demonstration-squad-undercover-unit-analysis>
 for 40 years.

The officer, a member of the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police>’s special demonstration 
squad, used the fake name of Matt Rayner to pose as an animal rights campaigner 
for five years.

In the last three years 50 campaigners have had their criminal convictions 
quashed becausekey evidence gathered by undercover officers had been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/07/activists-appeal-convictions-involvement-police-spy>
 concealed from their trials.

The home secretary, Theresa May, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has commissioned a lawyer, 
Mark Ellison QC 
<http://www.qebholliswhiteman.co.uk/queen-s-counsel/mark-ellison-qc.aspx>, to 
examineother convictions of political campaigners to see if they should 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/26/theresa-may-undercover-police-inquiry-campaigners-convictions>
 also be overturned.

She has also ordered a wider ranging public inquiry into the conduct of  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/06/stephen-lawrence-theresa-may-inquiry-police>
undercover officers following a succession of revelations, ranging fromspying 
on the family of Stephen Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/24/undercover-police-unit-collected-information-family-campaigners>
 to formingsexual relationships with women placed under surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/22/undercover-police-lovers>.

The allegations made by Sheppard are contained in a legal application lodged 
at the appeal court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/court-of-appeal> and focus 
on Rayner, the latest undercover officer to be publicly identified.

Like the other undercover officers Rayner developed a fake identity, bolstered 
by false documents; he pretended to be an animal rights campaigner between 1991 
and 1996. Among the campaigns he infiltrated was aLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> group campaigning to stop the high 
street chemists Boots from selling products that had been tested on animals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Fundercover-met-spy-animal-rights-overturn-conviction-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417707954788%2Faffce8c7-2ffe-4653-9364-225dd84c71da-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undercover%20police%20spy%20accused%20of%20encouraging%20activist%20to%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Fundercover-met-spy-animal-rights-overturn-conviction-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undercover%20police%20spy%20accused%20of%20encouraging%20activist%20to%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Fundercover-met-spy-animal-rights-overturn-conviction-appeal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417707954788%2Faffce8c7-2ffe-4653-9364-225dd84c71da-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Met policeman ‘Matt Rayner’ developed a fake identity and pretended to be an 
animal rights activist. Guardian Photograph: Guardian 
Sheppard, who was one of the activists he was spying on, had come out of jail 
in 1990 after being convicted of setting fire tothree branches of Debenhams in 
a campaign <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/13/police> against the sale 
of fur.

In the legal application drawn up by his lawyers Sheppard said he had returned 
to animal rights campaigning “but did so initially on the basis of entirely 
lawful protest including leafleting and demonstrating at stores that were 
connected with animal experimentation”.

In May 1995 police raided his home in London and found a shotgun, cartridges 
and components for making an incendiary device. At his trial in September 1995, 
prosecutors said he had been planning to produce an incendiary device to 
further an Animal Liberation Front campaign against Boots.

Sheppard alleges that Rayner targeted him and “deliberately encouraged him to 
take more serious direct action against Boots” and to commit crimes he had been 
initially unwilling to carry out.

Sheppard also alleges that Rayner took part in direct action protests and 
encouraged activists by driving them in a van to and from demonstrations, such 
as for an occasion to sabotage a grouse shoot.

His lawyers, from the civil liberties firm Bindmans <http://www.bindmans.com/>
, claim that he was convicted unfairly because prosecutors withheld from his 
trial Rayner’s involvement and misled him into pleading guilty.

It is the second conviction that Sheppard is seeking to overturn on grounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2012/jun/25/undercover-police-arson-debenhams-bob-lambert>
 that theinvolvement of an undercover officer was not disclosed at his trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/undercover-police-animal-liberation-front>
.

In this second case, Bob Lambert, another undercover officer working for the 
SDS, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/26/theresa-may-undercover-police-inquiry-campaigners-convictions>
 secured vital intelligence in 1987 thatled to the convictions of Sheppard and 
another activist, <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/13/police> Andrew 
Clarke, for setting fire to Debenhams.

By the 1990s Lambert, who fathered a child with an animal rights activist 
before abandoning the pair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/23/police-compensation-payout-woman-undercover-officer>
, had been promoted to run the operations of the SDS, and he supervised Rayner.

Rayner ended his deployment in 1996, telling activists he was going to work 
for a wine company in France and then Argentina, before disappearing. In 
reality, he returned to Scotland Yard and was reassigned to other duties within 
special branch.

The Met said it was not “prepared to confirm nor deny” whether Rayner worked 
as an undercover officer. It added that the police’s internal inquiry into the 
SDS,known as Operation Herne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/24/undercover-officers-police-chief-met>
, had attempted to talk to Sheppard and that it would welcome an opportunity to 
speak to him about his claims about Rayner.
 