
A report released this week by Anglicare on the number of jobs available 
throughout Australia highlights the difficulty for low-skilled workers and also 
that unemployment programs designed to punish unemployed are fatally flawed.

One of the more interesting statements to come out of the Senate estimates 
hearings was that the government doesnot see the purpose of work for the dole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/01/nearly-90-of-work-for-the-dole-participants-not-in-full-time-work-after-three-months>
 as necessarily about getting participants a full-time job.

Only one job advertised for every six low-skilled jobseekers – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/only-one-job-advertised-for-every-six-low-skilled-jobseekers-report>
The secretary of the Department of Employment told the Senate estimates 
committee 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/estimate/aec2ee4d-136a-4a60-98fc-2a868bc421ca/toc_pdf/Education%20and%20Employment%20Legislation%20Committee_2016_10_19_4517.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf>
 that while only 11.7% of those who did the work-for-the dole scheme found 
full-time work and 16% found part-time work, “the purpose of work-for-the-dole 
is not necessarily to lead directly to a full-time job”, rather it was “much 
broader than that”.

Instead of just getting work, the purpose of work-for-the-dole was “the 
activation of jobseekers who have been on the case load for an extended period 
of time and so may have started to lose connection with the labour market” – 
that is, things like improving their “confidence, employability and motivation”.

It’s not hard to be a tad sceptical. It all sounds a bit management-speak: an 
employment initiative that is not really a failure ... despite not 
significantly improving the chances for the participants to become employed.

Talking about “confidence” is all very well, but it reminds me of freelance 
writers being told they won’t get paid for their work, but they will get a lot 
of exposure. Confidence, like exposure, doesn’t pay the bills.

But really, not even confidence is the true reason behind work-for-the-dole – 
rather it is the belief that the unemployed must somehow earn their Newstart 
payments, because they are, to some degree, at fault for being unemployed.

Why unemployment is no longer the best indicator of the economy's health | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/22/why-unemployment-is-no-longer-the-best-indicator-of-the-economys-health>
The problems with this approach are highlighted in Anglicare’s Job 
Availability Snapshot, released as part of its annual State of the Family 
Report.

Anglicare’s Michelle Waterford notes that while there are around four to five 
unemployed per job vacancy, that number is much higher when you include the 
increasing numbers of underemployed – people who would like to work more hours.

While both measures have improved over the past year, with 10.3 underutilised 
workers for every job vacancy in Australia, it clearly is not a straightforward 
proposition of getting a job just because you want one.

The snapshot importantly highlights that while the overall figure of 4.1 
unemployed per vacancy is historically quite low, that average hides the fact 
that getting a job is greatly affected by where you live and your level of 
skill.

The snapshot categorises the job vacancies listed in the department of 
employment’s Internet Vacancy Index according tofive levels of skills 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/C4BECE1704987586CA257089001A9181?opendocument>
 – from Level 1 (jobs requiring a bachelor degree or higher, or at least 5 
years of relevant experience) to Level 5 (where either no education or work 
experience, or the barest level of high school completion is required).

The snapshot found that in the past year the biggest increase in job vacancies 
has been for those jobs requiring the highest level of skill and conversely, 
despite overall job vacancies increasing, the number of vacancies has shrunk 
for those requiring the lowest level of skill:

The report found that since the start of 2015 the proportion of job vacancies 
requiring skills in the two highest levels has surged, whereas those for the 
two lowest skill levels have gone from accounting for 45% of job vacancies to 
now just under 42%:

To an extent it is not surprising that there has been an increase in the job 
vacancies for work requiring the highest level of skills as these account for 
35% of all jobs (not just due to academic qualifications, but also the 
five-year experience aspect).

But even among skill levels, the picture varies across the states.

For example, in the ACT, job vacancies requiring the highest level of skill 
account for 50% of all vacancies – reflecting the high number of public service 
positions. And not surprisingly, while Tasmania and South Australia have the 
lowest percentage of Level 1 skilled vacancies, they have the highest 
proportion of Level 5:

But just because those two states have a greater share of job vacancies for 
low=skill level work does not mean they are particularly good places to be such 
workers.

While in South Australia there are on average 6.2 unemployed fighting for each 
job, there is a stunning 9.4 low-skill level unemployed fighting for each 
low-skill level position. In Tasmania the situation is even worse. While 
overall there are 7.4 unemployed per vacancy, there are 10.6 low-skilled 
unemployed for each low-skill job.

In every state the difficulty for low-skill level unemployed is tougher than 
for the overall average unemployed person:

And it is worth noting that while these figures only count low-skill level 
workers going for each low-skill job, of course those jobs are open as well to 
people with greater skills, meaning the difficulty for low-skilled workers is 
even tougher than these figures suggest.

Anglicare argues that “the greatest ground for people with limited skills can 
be gained through supported employment programs”. Such programs stress “the 
importance of explicit pathways to real jobs for people who are, or believe 
they are, excluded from the workforce” and that it requires “a commitment from 
employers and from potential employees”.

This approach could work under the government’s “investment approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/22/christian-porters-welfare-figures-are-designed-to-shock-pay-them-no-respect>
” to welfare, which seeks to focus on at-risk groups within the community.

But the snapshot highlights the futility of government policy such as waiting 
periods until being able to access Newstart. It also shows that while 
work-for-the-dole programs may give the government a nice feeling that the dole 
isn’t being given for nothing, it is not a solution to entrenched unemployment 
for low-skilled workers.
 