
On each side of the door of Sean's Panaroma, rusty frying pans serve as 
lampshades. The view is good, but Bondi is overcast and the ocean is grey. The 
beach looks uncannily like the one on South Shields in early March. Four 
surfers are out in the drizzle. The restaurant has a good name. If a chef has a 
sense of humour, the food is likely to be loved.

"We bake our own bread," says the waitress, presenting a bottle of Nolan's 
Road olive oil as if it is 20-year-old claret. The ceremony seems too much 
until I taste it. It is clear and as drinkable as cold water, but with 
wheatgrass freshness. On the half shell of a Sydney rock oyster sit pink flakes 
of salt from the Murray river's banks. The perforated wooden wall panelling is 
reminiscent of the BBC Maida Vale studio. The bar between the kitchen and the 
restaurant is mirrored, so even if you aren't facing the window, you can gaze 
at the ocean.

The Western Australian freshwater marron (a large crayfish) arrives pretty on 
the plate, pinkish-red with puffs of parsley fried a vivid green. It's sweet, 
between a small lobster and a large langoustine. Equally pretty are the 
heirloom tomatoes in my friend's salad. Black, yellow and heavy red - some are 
fleshy and friendly, some tart and bitchy; all are different and stimulating. 
The Festoni pasta doesn't leap from the chalkboard menu, but as the waitress 
describes the chilli oil, rocket, parmesan and lemon, she pauses. "It's Sean's 
signature. He's served it every night for 12 years." You can sense the 
affection - the sheets of hand-made corrugated pasta, tumbled together like tin 
roofs.

It's always thrilling to discover new combinations of flavours, and astringent 
rosemary cuts lightly through the sweetness of a white chocolate and pistachio 
nougat that may otherwise have been cloying. Darkness falls and the surf 
swells, breaking on the beach like white rabbits falling from the curve of a 
rollercoaster. I leave the Panaroma, glancing up at a patch of unfamiliar stars 
scattered between the clouds.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 