
Aston, which was founded in 1895 and gained its university charter in 1966, 
offers offers a broad range of courses, with particular success in business, 
science, engineering, health sciences, social sciences and languages. Seventy 
per cent of the 7,500 or so undergraduates take sandwich placement years or 
years abroad, the highest proportion in the UK, according to Hesa 2010 figures.

The university is proud of its student diversity, links with industry and 
excellent graduate employment record (82% of 2007-2009 graduates entered 
graduate-level jobs, against a UK average of less than 70%). Aston is located 
on a green, self-contained campus right in the centre of Birmingham – just five 
minutes' walk from the Bullring shopping centre and 15 minutes from the 
stations – so you're perfectly placed to take full advantage of the shops, 
travel links and clubbing. The city of Birmingham is home to 70,000 HE 
students, the UK's second largest student city to London.

Fees
£3,375 for full-time undergraduates in 2011-12. Sandwich placement year fees 
are £1,680 but with major placement bursaries available.

2012-13 fees: click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/mar/25/higher-education-universityfunding>
 for latest information on how much universities are planning to charge.

Bursaries
Means-tested bursaries of up to £500 a year for students whose family income 
is below £25,000. In addition, all UK/EU students on a placement year (and 
paying the fee) will receive a placement bursary of £1,000 for that year.
Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> on a year abroad or 
on unpaid placement years get £500. Placement bursaries are not means-tested on 
family income. The majority of Aston students take paid placement years in year 
three; the average salary is about £16,000, which can also help with finances in
the final year.

Bursary information for 2012 entry will be published in June/July 2011.

Accommodation
Guaranteed for eligible first-years, all on campus with many places reserved 
for final-year students too. Self-catering accommodation ranges from £72 to 
£125 a week for 39-week letting periods. Meal plans available: about £290 a 
term will buy you two meals a day.

Facilities
Recent developments include a £22m extension to Aston business school, a £5m 
refurbishment of the campus sports centre and pool, and a £6m extension to the 
university library. Student accommodation has 10MB download-speed internet 
access. The library is open 24 hours a day at key times of the academic year 
(seven days a week all year round), and was extended in summer 2010. 
Off-campus, the university's 45-acre sports grounds include grass and 
all-weather pitches, floodlighting and a pavilion.

Transport
No need to worry about getting into town: you're there already. Excellent road 
and train links to virtually anywhere else, especially Manchester, London and 
going west.

Contact
Tel: 0121 204 3000
Email: ugenquiries@aston.ac.uk
Web: aston.ac.uk <http://www.aston.ac.uk>
Accommodation: aston.ac.uk/accommodation <http://www.aston.ac.uk/accommodation>
 