
The University of Sydney has reneged on its proposed merger of the Sydney 
College of the Arts <http://sydney.edu.au/sca/> with the University of New 
South Wales following widespread backlash from students, teachers and the wider 
arts community.

The university’s vice-chancellor, Dr Michael Spence, announced the decision on 
Thursday afternoon, citing differences in vision between the University of 
Sydney andUNSW <https://www.unsw.edu.au/>.

The announcement in late June that SCA would merge into UNSW Art and Design 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/sydney-university-art-school-merger-with-unsw-sparks-outrage-among-students-20160621-gpofi2.html>
 sparked protests and criticism from students and high-profile graduates of the 
college, such as film directorJane Campion <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001005/>
 and artistBen Quilty <http://www.benquilty.com/>.

Spence said the proposed merger had always been dependent on a clear and 
achievable vision, shared by both institutions, but “despite the best efforts 
of all involved”, the two “have a different vision of what a centre of 
excellence in the visual arts might entail”.

Spence said one of the points of contention was the importance of preserving 
the SCA’s “distinctive tradition”. He informed the vice-chancellor of UNSW, 
Prof Ian Jacobs, of his decision to terminate the agreement on Wednesday.

Australian universities warn parties education policy chaos is harming students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/09/australian-universities-warn-parties-education-policy-chaos-is-harming-students>
The uncertain future of the National Art School <https://www.nas.edu.au/>, 
which was also to be involved in proposed new arts program, was also a factor 
in the decision. “We have become increasingly concerned about the adequacy of 
the facilities available to realise our vision of a centre of excellence,” 
Spence said.

Jacobs said in a statement that UNSW had entered into negotiations with the 
University ofSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> in good 
faith. Though the agreement reached in June was not binding, he said at no 
point did UNSW back away from any part or from its commitment to making it work.

In 1976, SCA became the first tertiary art school to be established in NSW. 
Its alumni also include artist Shaun Gladwell, designerMarc Newson 
<http://marc-newson.com/> and cartoonist Cathy Wilcox 
<http://cathywilcox.com.au/>.

Current and former students, and other supporters of SCA gathered on the steps 
of the Art Gallery of NSW on 15 July, coinciding with the Archibald Prize 
ceremony, to hold a protest against the merger.

Frederico Câmara, a current international student who has been campaigning 
against the proposed merger, said it reflected the trend towards 
corporatisation of universities worldwide. He warned that the research coming 
out of the school, the university’s international reputation and the quality of 
life in Sydney would suffer with the merger.

“The University of Sydney will have to live with the shameful image that its 
leaders are casting for itself as a world top-ranking university that does not 
support the arts,” he said.

The National Association for the Visual Arts <https://visualarts.net.au/> had 
also expressed “very grave concern” in an open letter to the University of 
Sydney’s senate, warning of the “deleterious consequences for art education in 
Australia”.

Jamie Parker 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/members/Pages/member-details.aspx?pk=82>, 
the state MP for Balmain, said the proposal seemed more driven by cost saving 
than excellence in the arts: “Combining these three very different art schools 
together risks diluting the unique individual strengths of each organisation,” 
he said.

When it comes down to it, what are universities really for? | Andrew Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/17/when-it-comes-down-to-it-what-are-universities-really-for>
The announcement means the 600-odd students currently enrolled at the school 
will be able to continue their studies, though Spence did signal changes to the 
program in the future.

The SCA will now become a part of university’s faculty of arts and social 
sciences and move from its current site in Callan Park in Rozelle to the 
university’s campus in Camperdown/Darlington from the beginning of next year. 
The move from Callan Park wasconfirmed by the university 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/art-and-design/sydney-university-abandons-art-school-at-callan-park-20151124-gl6rus.html>
 in 2015.

Spence said the University of Sydney would not be accepting new applications 
for the bachelor of visual arts next year but was optimistic a “re-imagined” 
program will commence in 2018.

Applications for the master of moving image program will be accepted for a 
2017 start.
 