
The most extensive UK retrospective of sculpture and other work by the late 
Sir Anthony Caro, which his wife the artistSheila Girling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/23/sheila-girling> had been 
working on until her own death last month, will be held across the four sites 
of theYorkshire Sculpture Triangle <http:// http://www.ysculpture.co.uk/> this 
summer. The exhibition will include the last sculptures Caro was working on 
before his death in 2013, going on display for the first time in Britain.


“It seemed the time to celebrate every aspect of Tony’s work,” Peter Murray, 
founding director of the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, said. “Sheila’s death was a 
great shock – she had been so involved in the planning andso knowledgeable 
about the work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/05/sheila-girling-anthony-caro-sculpture-ended-too-soon-but-good-life>
 – but the family was adamant the project should go ahead.

 Anthony Caro’s Promenade, 1996, in Yorkshire Sculpture Park. Photograph: 
Jonty Wilde/Barford Sculptures Ltd 
“He was always immensely enthusiastic about her work, but it became clear 
working on the exhibition what a significant influence she had been on his – 
not just in his use of colour, which is widely acknowledged, but her judgment 
about his work, about scale, about materials, about what worked and what 
didn’t, was absolutely spot on.”


It was Girling who suggested that the 1962 steel sculpture Early One Morning 
would be better painted red rather than its original green: he agreed and the 
piece became one of his most famous early works.


Yorkshire, Girling had agreed, was the perfect place for a major retrospective 
of Caro’s work. “He wasn’t aYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> man, but he was a great 
supporter of everything we were doing here, despite his initial reservations 
about showing his own work here,” Murray said.


Caro’s initial problem with the sculpture park was its sheer beauty– 500 acres 
of Georgian landscaped gardens and rolling green fields, sheep and cattle. “He 
liked to control every aspect of where his work was shown, and he realised he 
could not do that out of doors – but he came round to it.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Funseen-anthony-caro-sculpture-show-retrospective-yorkshire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426767890187%2F09d1b2da-ccff-4a26-b6bb-89c1cd6d171d-1020x698.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unseen%20Anthony%20Caro%20works%20on%20show%20in%20major%20Yorkshire%20retrospective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Funseen-anthony-caro-sculpture-show-retrospective-yorkshire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unseen%20Anthony%20Caro%20works%20on%20show%20in%20major%20Yorkshire%20retrospective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Funseen-anthony-caro-sculpture-show-retrospective-yorkshire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426767890187%2F09d1b2da-ccff-4a26-b6bb-89c1cd6d171d-1020x698.jpeg>
 Anthony Caro’s Month of May, 1963. Sheila Girling advised him on colours for 
his works. Photograph: Barford Sculptures Ltd 
Caro in Yorkshire, a joint exhibition by the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, the 
Hepworth Wakefield, the Henry Moore Institute and the Leeds Art Gallery – 
independent institutions that have come together as theYorkshire Sculpture 
Triangle <http://www.ysculpture.co.uk/> – will include works from throughout 
the career of one of the best-loved and most admired British sculptors of the 
20th century, which spanned six decades and continued to within weeks of his 
death. It will range from very early drawings from his days as a studio 
assistant to another giant of British sculpture, Henry Moore – some with 
scribbled corrections by Moore himself – tojewellery-sized wearable pieces 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/3/19/1426768757138/anthony-caro-Pendant-BB1-001.jpg>
 and giant sculptures big enough for visitors to walk into, such as his 1983 
wooden sculptureChild’s Tower Room 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/3/19/1426768910796/Anthony-Caro-Childs-Tower-001.jpg>
.


The Yorkshire Sculpture Park <http://www.ysp.co.uk/> will explore his 
relationship with painting, and theHepworth Wakefield 
<http://www.hepworthwakefield.org/> his lifelong interest in architecture – 
which he dubbed “sculpitecture”. This culminated in a work of art that millions 
walk across every year, the Millennium Bridge across the Thames in London, 
designed with the architect Lord Foster.


A major sculpture will be sited outside the Leeds Art Gallery 
<http://www.leeds.gov.uk/museumsandgalleries/Pages/Leeds-Art-Gallery.aspx> 
throughout the summer, and the neighbouringHenry Moore Institute 
<http://www.henry-moore.org/hmi> is organising an international conference on 
Caro’s work.

 * Caro in Yorkshire runs from 18 July to 1 November at the Yorkshire 
Sculpture Triangle <http://www.ysculpture.co.uk/>  