
Rare unpublished pages from Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's Le Petit Prince 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780152164157/le-petit-prince>
, which shed new light on the beloved story, have been discovered and are set 
to be auctioned later this month.

The pages were part of a collection of Saint-Exupéry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/antoine-de-saint-exupery>'s 
writing passed to French auction house Artcurial by a private collector earlier 
this year. Reading through the material, experts were astonished to discover 
that it included two unpublished pages fromThe Little Prince 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/aug/01/little-prince-return-multimedia>, 
one of which features entirely original material and could give a political 
perspective to the story of the prince from a tiny planet who journeys through 
the universe before arriving on Earth.

"His writing is terrible, but we managed to interpret it and realised that two 
of the pages, among all these pages, were unpublished material from The Little 
Prince," said Benoît Puttemans from Artcurial's books department. "It was a big 
shock." The Little Prince has sold millions of copies around the world. 
Saint-Exupéry died in action in 1944, the year after it was published.
 Up for auction … pages from an early draft of Le Petit Prince by Antoine de 
Saint-Exupéry 
The first page reveals an early version of the moment when the hero arrives on 
Earth, the seventh planet he visits. In the unpublished version, Saint-Exupéry 
wrote: "If we gathered together all the inhabitants of this planet, all next to 
each other, tightly, as they do for some big public assembly, the whites, the 
yellows, the blacks, the children, the old people, the women, and the men 
without forgetting a single one, all of humanity would fit on Long Island." 
This compares to the final text, which reads: "If the two billion inhabitants 
who people its surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, 
as they do for some big public assembly, they could easily be put into one 
public square 20 miles long and 20 miles wide".

"These are interesting variants," said Puttemans. "In this draft, 
Saint-Exupéry is much more precise. He talked of Long Island, which would be a 
detail for American readers, not others. In the definitive text, he changed 
this and made things much more universal – but it's interesting to see what was 
in his head as he was writing."

The second page introduces an entirely new character to the storyline – a 
crossword enthusiast, the first human the Little Prince meets when he arrives 
on Earth. "'Where are the men?' said the little prince to himself as he was 
travelling," writes Saint-Exupéry in the draft. "He met the first of them on a 
road. 'Ah!' he said to himself, 'I am going to find out what they think about 
life on this planet,' he said. 'That may be an ambassador of the human spirit 
…'"

The man tells the Little Prince he is very busy."'Of course he is very busy,' 
said the little prince to himself, 'he takes care of such a large planet. There 
is so much to do.' And he scarcely dared disturb him. 'Perhaps I can help you,' 
he nevertheless said aloud: The little prince enjoyed being helpful. 'Perhaps,' 
said the man […]. 'I have been working for three days without success. I am 
looking for a six-letter word that starts with G that means 'gargling'."

The page then ends. "We don't know the solution, it's not on the page, and 
that's part of the beauty of it – it makes many readings possible because we 
don't know what Saint-Exupéry was thinking," said Puttemans. "But he wrote it 
in 1941, in New York, when he was very engaged with the war. So I think one 
meaning for the six letter word could be 'guerre' [war]. Which changes our 
interpretation of the text a little bit."

Usually, Puttemans said, The Little Prince is seen as a universal text, but if 
the solution to the crossword clue is "guerre", then the book could be seen as 
having an anti-war perspective.

"In French, 'to gargle something' can also mean 'to be proud of oneself, or of 
something'. This pride can be compared to a nationalism which, in 1939-1940, 
unleashed the conflicts in Europe which we know of," he said. "Obviously this 
is only a guess: the text does not give us an answer, and maybe it's better 
that way."

The pages will go up for auction on 16 May 
<http://www.artcurial.com/en/asp/fullCatalogue.asp?salelot=2130+++++384+&refno=10383852>
, with a guide price of €40,000 (£32,000).
 