
It used to be a running joke when players won the first grand slam event of 
the year that they would be asked, at some stage in their post-match press 
conference, whether they thought they might be able to win the calendar year 
Grand Slam. When it comes toNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, though, it is a serious 
question.

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win the 2016 Australian Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
No man has managed to win all four majors, the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, French Open, Wimbledon and 
the US Open, in the same year since Rod Laver did it for a second time in 1969. 
Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Djokovic himself have all managed three in one 
year but all found the complete set one step too far. The demands of the modern 
game, experts said, make the Grand Slam almost impossible but suddenly, in the 
era of Novak, it seems possible once more.

It was fitting that Laver should be there to see Djokovic move alongside him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 and Bjorn Borg in the all-time list of grand slam champions with 11. That puts 
him fifth equal, with Roy Emerson, whose record of six Australian Opens he 
matched, on 12, Pete Sampras and Rafael Nadal on 14 and Federer still out on 
his own at 17.

Though he won his first grand slam title in 2008, in Australia, it took 
Djokovic three more yearsto win his second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/30/andy-murray-australian-open-final>
, again in Melbourne. Since then, he has won nine of the past 20 grand slams, 
as dominant as anyone has been in the game’s history. He has won four of the 
past five grand slams, his only disappointment coming at the French Open last 
summer, where helost in the final to Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-stanislas-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-win>
.

It still takes an awful lot to achieve the Grand Slam. Not only does it 
require staying fit and healthy, avoiding injury, it also needs a bit of luck 
and for no one else to have a hot streak, as Wawrinka did in Paris. At 28, 
Djokovic is still improving and Laver, who knows what it really takes, believes 
if anyone can do it, it is the Serb.

“I remember when Roy Emerson and I were competitors back in our era,” Laver 
told reporters. “After one of us won the Australian, you’d say, I guess I’m 
going for the Grand Slam. I certainly almost saw it last year, except for the 
French. I would have thought it would have been a perfect situation for him. He 
had three legs in at that stage.

“I think it’s good for the sport if someone does win a Grand Slam. This is not 
a club that I’m a member of, it’s an open course.

“I think someone like Novak is well on his way to trying to accomplish that. 
He’s going to have a lot of competition, there are a lot of players in there 
that are just starting to come into their own. I think that will show up 
through this year. But Novak certainly has a chance to pull off the Grand Slam.”

In Australia, on a surface he loves, he seems unbeatable. Against Murray he 
ran through the first set and then, when Murray upped the ante on his 
groundstrokes in the second and third sets, he used his incredible athleticism 
to nullify the threat.

Jamie Murray set to beat Andy to world No1 spot after long road to top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/jamie-murray-andy-world-no1-doubles-australia-open>
No one returns as well or as deep as he does, no one puts their opponents 
under such pressure from the first ball. He can attack or defend, whatever it 
takes. As he told Channel 7: “It’s fair for me to think confidently that I can 
win every match that I play.”

In reaching 17 straight finals, across the regular Tour and grand slams, 
Djokovic has compiled a 92-5 record, equalling Federer’s record in 2006, the 
year he dominated the Tour like no other.

Federer’s attempts to win the Grand Slam were always denied by Nadal at the 
French Open, the only one of the slams Djokovic has still to conquer. On this 
form, it is going to take something special to stop him and at this rate, 
Federer must be wondering if Djokovic could overtake his record of 17 slam 
titles.

Djokovic knows he is playing the tennis of his life and he does not want to do 
anything to jinx it, including discussing how many more slams he believes he 
can win.

“I don’t take anything for granted, even though I won the last four out of 
five grand slams and played five finals out of the last five grand slams that I 
played,” he said.

“I don’t want to allow myself to be in that frame of mind. If I do, the person 
becomes too arrogant and thinks that he’s a higher being or better than 
everybody else. You can get a big slap from karma very soon. I don’t want that.”
 