
BBC1's time travel cop drama Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> added 800,000 viewers 
last night, March 6, against ITV1's live Uefa Cup coverage.

Ashes to Ashes, which stars Phillip Glenister and Keeley Hawes, pulled in 6.6 
million viewers and a 29% share in the 9pm hour, according to unofficial 
overnights. This was up from 5.8 million last week.

ITV1's coverage of the Tottenham Hotspur's 1-0 Uefa Cup defeat by PSV 
Eindhoven scored an average of 3.9 million viewers and a 17% share between 8pm 
and 10pm, peaking at 4.3 million for the final 15 minutes.

BBC1's 8pm drama Waterloo Road had 5.9 million viewers and a 25% share across 
an hour.

BBC2 came back down to earth somewhat in the 8pm hour following last week's 
final of MasterChef, which pulled in 5.1 million viewers, with its coverage of 
dog show Crufts picking up a still respectable 2.5 million and an 11% share.

Channel 4's Cutting Edge documentary Phone Rage attracted 2 million viewers 
and a 9% share in the 9pm hour, with a further 173,000 watching on Channel 4 +1 
an hour later.

Channel Five's Britain's Funniest Comedy Characters picked up 800,000 viewers 
and a 5% share between 9pm and 12.05am.

EastEnders had the better of Emmerdale when the two soaps went head to head 
between 7.30pm and 8pm, with the BBC1 show pulling in 7 million viewers and a 
31% share.

The ITV1 series had 6.3 million viewers and a 28% share during that half hour. 
Emmerdale averaged 6.7 million viewers and a 31% share across the full 7pm hour.

EastEnders also attracted a further 1.1 million viewers and a multichannel 
share of 6.8% for its repeat showing on BBC3 at 10pm.

BBC1's news won the 10pm slot with 5 million viewers and a 27% share over 35 
minutes; while ITV1's News at Ten had 2 million and an 11% share over the same 
period.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 