
Let’s be honest. Australian Rules football is a desert where music goes to 
die. The bleached bones of melody and lyricism lie about, discarded, like an 
elephant graveyard. You need only look at the decrepit roster of grand final 
entertainers over the years, pursued by attendants with cobweb scrapers and 
apparently chosen by anAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> executive’s 
dad who last switched on a radio via a Bakelite dial in 1984.

Now and then some poor bugger has to compile another article on great football 
songs. A list that beyond Mike Brady’s Up There Cazaly and the Richmond club 
songTigerland <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gxakg-EgCkk> will be desperately 
populated by novelty efforts and the sharp decline of Brady’s back catalogue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAGfrYMmWhas&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAGfrYMmWhas>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAGfrYMmWhas&media=>
Then there’s the match day experience. While fans of other sports seem to 
spontaneously form stadium choirs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/03/football-chants-manchester-united>
, at AFL matches 100,000 Australians will only mutter and cheer and scream 
“ball!” between the canned music of two club songs before the game and one 
after it. Aggrieved fans may offer as rebuttal the tradition of the victory 
song, but that would only hold weight if club anthems were not almost uniformly 
awful.

At AFL level these songs have an absurd sense of 1930s camp, an air of jolly 
good chaps and waxed moustaches, like a BBC bandleader snuck into the studio 
one afternoon and knocked them out as a job lot. They use imported 
turn-of-the-19th-century tunes:Brisbane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A35yE11h5j4> stole La Marseillaise, Melbourne 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N-NznmUykqQ> an ode to the stars and stripes, 
Adelaide <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=otd-dfhzaEw> the hymn of the US 
Marines (or in my memory, the 8-bit soundtrack to the heavily pixelated
Adventures of Captain Comic <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzJOQb2yl1c>). 

It’s even hard to feign enthusiasm for my own team’s song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=akAkWj7kXt0>, built on Toreador 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RNPjH01PtZ4&feature=youtu.be&t=3m17s> from the 
opera Carmen. Where the aria offers a triumphal leap over the closing line of 
its refrain, Geelong players retreat into safety by reversing the octave, 
ending with a flatly descendant “down at Kardinia Park” that indicates anything 
but enthusiasm for going back there.

Then there are the songs with terrible lines (“we’ll never stop, stop, stop 
till we’re top, top, top”) – and those with ill-advised claims (“the 
premiership’s a cakewalk, the greatest team of all, fly up to win the flag”) – 
that sound pretty daft after your fourth win of the year in Round 18.

The solitary good line in the whole mess is in Sydney Swans’s club song, “
shake down the thunder from the sky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pteS-71frDY>”, which admittedly sounds pretty 
boss as a weekend activity. Tigerland’s strength comes not from its lauded 
“yellow and black” interjection but its clever assonance and internal rhyme and 
the energy that rolls through the thing like a real song. The rest are puppets 
with the strings cut.

Up There Cazaly, then, is probably the only Australian football song that both 
means something and deserves to. It is Brady’s high-water mark of a 
fast-receding tide: even his secondary hitOne Day in September 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIqmsxQ-ChY> devolves into recycling lines 
from the former tune, as if anxiously flagging who we’re listening to.

Up There Cazaly is not a great song, it’s a song with a great chorus. Really 
it’s two different songs: two variant choruses stuck between amateurish verses, 
like gourmet jam between supermarket sponge. Brady’s waffling about working 
hard and enjoying your weekend is barely recognisable as the introduction. Then 
that monstrous reverb kicks in, implying the echo of the crowd, and with a key 
change the refrain is away.

Up there Cazaly, in there and fight
Up there and at ‘em, show ‘em your might
Up there Cazaly, don’t let ‘em in
Fly like an angel, you’re out there to win 

It’s basic on paper, but it works. Roy Cazaly was a champion who belonged to 
everybody. Between 1909 and 1943 he was associated with Carlton, played for St 
Kilda and South Melbourne, then coached Hawthorn. A short man with a huge leap, 
he became famous for his aerial work and associated with daring and dash. “Up 
there, Cazaly!” was the urging cry of St Kilda teammate Fred Fleiter, which 
then fell into broader parlance.

The romance of his name probably helped – the letter Z in English hints at the 
exotic, where “Up there, McKinnon” might not have taken off. Peter FitzSimons 
says the cry was used by Australian soldiers on the Kokoda Trail, Noel Counihan 
says the same of North Africa. Both claims have an apocryphal tinge, but 
mythology did Cazaly’s folk hero status no harm. Brady performed its final act 
of confirmation.

More broadly, the song captures what Australian football is about: a game of 
physical drudgery flecked with occasional acts of brilliance. Players can run 
half a marathon of stop-start sprints while being crashed into the ground every 
few minutes. Wet days produce a mud pit. This is the first three-quarters of 
Brady’s chorus: in there and fight, don’t let them in.

As noted by Martin Ferguson this year, ruckman Shane Mumford pithily described 
football as a game where you “keep crackin’ in over and over again”. Two teams 
of players do just that. It’s all there in the chorus … but then there’s that 
last line. Sometimes you get the chance to redeem all that effort with 
something spectacular. Whether a leap or a sprint or a boundary line goal, 
sometimes you fly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpxM8XB61ZvU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpxM8XB61ZvU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpxM8XB61ZvU&media=>
In the 1994 grand final, Geelong’s Billy Brownless took a mark. It wasn’t just 
a mark. I was 11 and watching from the stands when my favourite player 
levitated. A rangy forward with Gumby limbs and a crown of cherubic blond 
fluff, Brownless trailed West Coast’s Ashley McIntosh to a high ball, then 
leapt for a physics-defying boost. Macintosh was a full-size fullback, standing 
full height.In the photos 
<http://resources0.news.com.au/images/2014/09/25/1227070/084884-82e84a1a-42d0-11e4-9fcd-2dc30e9f71be.jpg>
 his entire body is visible but his head has vanished. Brownless floats above 
him like a kneeling Buddha, serenely airborne, eyes nowhere but up, arms 
outstretched for the ball. I was looking straight at him. It was something I 
could fold away small and take home.

West Coast would go on to smash us by 80 points. The game would become the 
third of four lost grand finals in seven years. Brownless would become a 
professional clown for the Footy Show, a few pounds heavier, leaden in foot and 
in humour, something that always made me sad for the uncomplicated way in which 
I’d loved him. Yet somehow, through all those years of slog in all its forms, 
there remained that moment when he had the chance to fly like an angel. He flew.

• Mike Brady’s new album Bloodlines 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/album/bloodlines/id914509249> is out on Fullmoon 
records

 