
Esayas is homeless. As a young man, he was imprisoned and tortured by the 
Derg, the communist regime that ruled Ethiopia from 1974 to 1987. He had a 
breakdown, and upon his release, with no family support, spent days wandering 
the streets. Now aged 45, his health is slowly recovering. "I had a little 
mental disturbance, I was not sociable. But now I've improved," he says.

His lifeline was Sister Zinash Hailemariam, 28, an award-winning HEW who has 
transformed the lives of some of Addis Ababa's most vulnerable people. She 
points to Esayas' new refuge – a small bed sheltered by a rickety structure of 
corrugated iron and plastic sheeting, which she renovated with funds and 
manpower from the local community. They all know Esayas and often bring him 
food. "This is a huge change," she says. "Before, there were piles of dirt 
inside. There's more to do, but it's a lot better."

Hailemariam is part of Safe Home, a collaboration between Addis Ababa 
University and UK-based King's Health Partners, that aims to harness the local 
expertise of urban HEWs by training them to support homeless, mentally ill 
people. In countries where mental health is not yet integrated into primary 
healthcare, and resources are limited, community-based approaches are a 
promising starting point.

"For patients like Esayas, medication is not enough," says project lead Dr 
Abebaw Fekadu. "You have to get them out, and give them skills and livelihood 
activities. Then they can engage with life a bit more."

The long-term plan is to develop HEW-led rehabilitation in communities, but 
Hailemariam's neighbourhood is already reaping the rewards of her work. She 
identified a man who "used to spend day and night in a drainage pipe. He got 
rained on and there was sewage everywhere; he was absolutely unkempt. But after 
a week in hospital, he was clean, in clean hospital pyjamas and I was really 
happy about that."

Some names have been changed
 