
The US has carried out an airstrike in Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, killing more than 150 people the 
Pentagon said were fighters with the al Qaida-linked Islamist group al-Shabaab.

The strike, followed US intelligence on preparations for a large-scale 
militant attack, according to the Pentagon.

The weekend strike using both unmanned drones and manned aircraft targeted 
al-Shabaab’s “Raso” training camp, a facility about 120 miles north of the 
capital Mogadishu, the Pentagon said.


The US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> said on 
Monday it had been monitoring the camp for several weeks before the strike and 
had gathered intelligence, including about an imminent threat posed by the 
trainees.

“We know they were going to be departing the camp and that they posed an 
imminent threat to US and to Amisom, African Union mission in Somalia forces, 
that are inSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>,” said Pentagon 
spokesman Captain Jeff Davis.

 The strike, using drones as well as piloted warplanes, has killed a reported 
150 people – the largest casualty total in a US military attack of the 
post-9/11 era – although Pentagon spokesman Peter Cook said on Monday the 
military was still “assess[ing] the results of the operation”.

Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> was pushed out of 
Mogadishu by African Union peacekeeping forces in 2011 but has remained a 
potent antagonist in Somalia, launching frequent attacks in its bid to 
overthrow the western-backed government.

 The group, whose name means “The Youth”, seeks to impose its strict version 
of sharia law in Somalia, where it frequently unleashes attacks targeting 
security and government targets, as well as hotels and restaurants in the 
capital.

 Al-Shabaab was also behind deadly attacks in Kenya and Uganda, which both 
contribute troops to an African Union peacekeeping force in Somalia.

 Davis said as many as 200 fighters were believed to be training at the Raso 
camp at the time of the strike and expressed confidence there were no civilian 
casualties.

 “Their removal will degrade al-Shabaab’s ability to meet the group’s 
objectives in Somalia, which include recruiting new members, establishing bases 
and planning attacks on US and Amisom forces there,” Davis said.

 No US forces on the ground participated in the strike.
 