
A US drone has fired two missiles at a compound in north-west Pakistan, 
killing four suspected militants. The attack came as Washington runs out of 
patience with Islamabad's refusal to reopen supply routes for Nato troops in
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

US drone strikes have complicated negotiations over the routes, which Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> closed six months ago in 
retaliation for US air strikes that killed 24 Pakistani soldiers along the 
Afghan border. Pakistan's parliament demanded the strikes stop after the 
attack, but the US refused.

The latest strike took place in Datta Khel Kalai, a village in the North 
Waziristan tribal area, Pakistani intelligence officials said, speaking on 
condition of anonymity.

Pakistan's parliament also demanded an "unconditional apology" from the US for 
killing its troops. The Obama administration has expressed regret but is not 
willing to tender an apology out of concern that it could open up the president 
to criticism by Republicans angry at Pakistan's lack of co-operation in the 
Afghan war.

Despite these disagreements, Pakistan appeared close to reopening the supply 
routes last week, prompting Nato to invite PresidentAsif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari> to last weekend's summit 
in Chicago. But negotiations faltered because of a Pakistani demand for much 
higher transit fees, and the US has made clear its frustration.

Obama refused to meet Zardari and omitted Pakistan from the list of countries 
he thanked in his speech on Monday for helping get war supplies into 
Afghanistan.

On Tuesday, a Senate panel approved a foreign aid budget for next year that 
slashes US assistance to Pakistan by more than half and threatens further 
reductions if it fails to open theNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> 
supply routes.

Legislators are also frustrated by suspicions that Pakistan may be aiding 
militants who use its territory to attack US troops in Afghanistan â€“ 
allegations Islamabad has rejected. There is also lingering resentment over the 
fact that Osama bin Laden was found hiding deep inside Pakistan.

But the US cannot afford to turn its back on Pakistan entirely. The US and 
other Nato countries fighting in Afghanistan shipped about 30% of their 
nonlethal supplies through Pakistan before the attack that killed the Pakistani 
troops. The coalition has had to compensate since then by using a far more 
expensive path through Russia and central Asia.

And the route through Pakistan will become even more important as the US 
begins to withdraw a decade's-worth of equipment as it pulls out most of its 
combat troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2014.
 