
A powerful US lobbying group that bankrolls climate change sceptics and 
leading members of the Tea Party is mobilising British opposition against plans 
to sell cigarettes in plain packs.

As the UK government considers the proposals, it has emerged the American 
Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), an organisation sponsored by big tobacco 
and other corporate interests, is playing a key role in trying to scupper them.

Supporters of the plans say they will deter young people from smoking. But 
opponents say there is little evidence this is the case and warn that generic 
packs will encourage counterfeiting.

Alec, which is heavily supported by Charles and David Koch, the billionaire 
oil baron brothers, has launched a sophisticated global lobbying campaign 
against the plan.

Alec, which proclaims its "belief in the power of free markets and limited 
government to propel economic growth", has warned countries looking to impose 
plain packaging that they will be violating intellectual property provisions 
laid down by the World Trade Organisation, opening themselves to legal 
challenges.

It is targeting the UK, where the government has recently pushed the deadline 
for its consultation on plain packaging back by a month until the end of August 
as lobby groups on both sides of the debate make their submissions.

Karla Jones, Alec's taskforce director, briefed members of its international 
taskforce at a luxury retreat that such a move threatened major business 
interests. Jones told those attending: "Among the countries considering plain 
packaging bills are Canada, the UK and Australia, and if passed, plain 
packaging regulations could effectively deprive corporations of what is often 
their most valuable asset, their brand, trademark and/or logo."

Alec has also written to the Australian government, which intends to introduce 
plain packaging later this year, saying 2,000 state legislators, representing 
all 50 US states, "as well as 101 congressional alumni and over 250 companies 
and public policy associations" oppose the plan.

The organisation is seeking to convince politicians that the move would 
increase smoking. Alec warns in a submission to governments considering the 
plan: "Studies have shown that increased availability of generic cigarettes 
drives up cigarette consumption. As would be expected from their price, generic 
cigarettes appeal most to the poor, elderly and most dependent smokers. This 
proposal, then, will exploit those who can least afford to smoke and those who 
suffer most from smoking."

Alec also persuaded politicians from around the world to back a trade 
resolution attacking the European Union ban on snus, a moist smokeless tobacco 
product that comes in fruit flavours and is targeted at younger consumers.

The organisation's attempts to influence the debate outside its native US has 
angered health campaigners. "Alec's free-market rhetoric may work in the US but 
it won't wash here in the UK," said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of Action on
Smoking <https://www.theguardian.com/society/smoking> and Health (Ash). "The 
tobacco industry and its lobbyists have money to burn, and they might as well 
just set fire to it as their campaign against plain packs is going nowhere. 
Their legal case is weak and the evidence in support of plain packaging is 
strong."

Losing their brand identity would be a blow for cigarette companies, which are 
fighting the proposal tooth and nail.

British American Tobacco, Imperial Tobacco and Philip Morris, a major 
supporter of Alec, have launched high court challenges against the Australian 
laws, saying they infringe trademark rights. The tobacco companies have placed 
a series of adverts in the British media, including theObserver.

In recent months, concerns about some of Alec's activities have seen a number 
of its high-profile corporate sponsors resign their membership. The exodus has 
thrust the Koch brothers into the limelight. The two are reputed to bankroll 
the Tea Party via a series of trusts, although both deny attending any of its 
events. According to Greenpeace USA, the Koch brothers have channelled almost 
$62m (Â£40m) "to climate change-denial front groups that are working to delay 
policies and regulations aimed at stopping global warming".

Alec has enjoyed close links with the Atlantic Bridge, the defunct charity 
chaired by former Tory defence secretary Liam Fox, which sought to foster links 
between conservatives on both sides of the Atlantic. It was dismantled last 
year after criticism from the Charity Commission of its aims and operations.

Alec did not return calls.
 