
You have to hand it to the women at Code Pink, the all-purpose protest group 
originally formed to oppose the Iraq war. They know how to liven up a boring 
banking conference.

Barely had Karl Rove arrived on stage at the Mortgage Bankers Association's 
convention in San Francisco this week when he was set upon by a Code Pink 
campaigner wielding handcuffs.

"Karl Rove is not fit to address you," she yelled, declaring that she was 
executing a citizen's arrest for treason.

The former White House aide, who is presumably used to such attention, sat 
strangely still as his assailant approached. A security guard intercepted the 
meeting of minds at the very last moment (you can watch ithere 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=Ili0jgn_JD4>).

If America's mortgage bankers were looking for quality time to digest the 
year's disastrous happenings, they were disappointed. America's most liberal 
city was not going to let them slip quietly in and out.

To many people, the homeloans industry bears a large slice of blame for the 
financial crisis gripping the global economy. Irresponsible sub-prime mortgages 
in America triggered a chain of events which led to Bear Stearns' collapse, to 
Iceland's national demise, to queues outside branches of Northern Rock in 
Britain and to this month's slow-motion stockmarket crash.

Many of the attendees I spoke to here in San Francisco were philosophical, at 
least willing to admit to a smidgen of wrongdoing by their peers.

"A lot of folks are embarrassed to be part of this industry," one mortgage 
lawyer, Ted Eric May, told me sadly. "But there are a lot of very good, very 
smart people here. A few bad apples took advantage in every possible way they 
could have done."

William Quick, a mortgage lender from Washington state, agreed but insisted 
that shoddy behaviour was all in the past: "There's been a purge - a lot of the 
bad actors have gone into other industries."

As the mortgage industry's lobbying group, the MBA wasn't too keen to dwell on 
its role in an international economic scandal - though the association's new 
chairman, David Kittle, did come out with a few revealing utterances.

"Everybody needs a roof over their head - but not everybody needs to be a 
homeowner," said Kittle, in a moment of apparent revelation which sounded more 
like common sense. "As we move beyond crisis mode, we will learn from our 
mistakes."

He went on to quote a verse from the book of Proverbs: "He who seeks to 
increase his wealth by charging excess interest rates amasses his wealth for 
one who has pity on the poor."

All decent stuff. But it was only when Rove turned up to speak that the 
mortgage bankers showed their true colours.

President Bush's one-time right-hand man trumpeted the Republicans' standard 
attack line by blaming the crisis on Democrats in Congress for failing to 
introduce tougher regulation of America's two government-sponsored mortgage 
aggregators -Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/freddiemacandfanniemae>.

This claim, which has been repeated ad nauseum on the campaign trail by John 
McCain and Sarah Palin, refers to efforts by the Democrats to widen home 
ownership by getting Fannie and Freddie to buy up a broader spectrum of 
homeloans in the financial market.

"These were relentless political organisations masquerading as government 
enterprises," said Rove. "There's always going to be an imprudent borrower and 
there's always going to be an imprudent lender. To have someone who's going to 
facilitate that is extremely dangerous."

Getting a resounding cheer, Rove named two leading Democrats - Christopher 
Dodd and Barney Frank - as "persistent and unnecessary" defenders of "egregious 
practices". The mortgage bankers in the hall lapped it up. It seemed that it 
wasn't their industry's fault after all - it was the Democrats to blame.

One banker even felt moved to shout: "We love you Karl, you're great."

It was down to George Mitchell, the retired Democratic senator and peace 
negotiator, to remonstrate: "The implication that two Democrats on Capitol Hill 
are responsible for all the problems we have is completely untrue and so far 
fetched as to be unbelievable."

It doesn't really wash for mortgage bankers to pass the buck. Fannie and 
Freddie may have been excessively willing to buy dodgy loans on the secondary 
market - but that doesn't excuse those who wrote the absurd homeloans in the 
first place.

Last year, the Wall Street Journal found a Brazilian babysitter in California 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB119690485447515265.html> who was approved for 
a $495,000 mortgage. A housekeeper, married to a taxi-driver, got a $713,000 
loan.

The biggest homeloans company in America, Countrywide Financial, had to be 
rescued from the brink of bankruptcy by Bank of America. This month, it agreed 
to amend 400,000 mortgages by as much as $8.7bn to settle investigations by 
prosecutors in 11 states.

Picketers outside the convention wielded placards reading: "Jail bankers! Let 
them rot!"

The MBA's chief operating officer, John Courson, was unmoved by such protests 
â€“ he told me: "This is America. They're free to say whatever they will to 
whoever they want to say it."

Courson was keener to talk about initiatives such as Hope Now, which have 
helped avert a further 2.3m foreclosures. But he still seems to be in denial, 
insisting: "I don't think the American public is upset with the mortgage 
banking industry."
Surely he can't be serious.
 