
“It’s a good thing, you know, it’s a good thing,” Juan Felipe Herrera told me 
on the phone last week, as he reacted to the news that he was going to be the 
next poet laureate of the United States – the first Hispanic American to 
receive the honour. But he would rather not stop there: “The more we engage in 
society, the more firsts we have, then there will be a moment when we have no 
more firsts.” He thinks about that statement for a second, then adds, “Or maybe 
there will always be new firsts.”

Few people in America would speak of poetry as a realm of endless possibility 
in the way Herrera does, not anymore. For many people, poetry is still 
stereotyped as the inaccessible, ivory-tower stuff studied by academics and 
force-fed on high-school students or to be found in Father’s Day cards. Even 
the size of the stipend Herrera will collect as poet laureate – $35,000 – 
indicates a certain amount of public disinterest in this particular art.


But it was never that way for Herrera. Poets, for him are not just recluses. 
“We are hermits, that is true. We live in tiny rooms, and we stay in those 
rooms hours upon hours every day, every month, every year,” he admits. “But we 
also like to walk around and throw ourselves into big crates of tomatoes, and 
roll around in them, and then get up all tomato-stained.”

Walking around, taking in the rest of the world, is instead an integral part 
of his artistic process: “I like marketplaces, I like train stations, I like 
being in trains, I like airports, I like walking down the street with a pen in 
my hand, writing, writing, writing. I like to go in galleries that have 
photographs and paintings, Degas, Monet, photography, Andy Warhol, you name it, 
I like to get in there,” he said.

Herrera grew up the son of campesinos – farm workers – in central California. 
He came to verse by way of his public elementary school choir, he says, which 
gave his 12-year-old, largely Spanish-speaking self the courage to get up 
onstage and perform. He dove further into art later in the sixties when, 
wandering in the Mission District of California – he came across the live 
performance of something called El Teatro Campesino. The play was about people 
who had not gotten anything out of school, and involved drama and verse. And he 
still remembers, vividly, going home to his mother and saying, “I want to do 
that.”

So poetry, he said, gave him a voice. But he also says, “I gave my voice to 
poetry.” His own verses, like “Blood on the Wheel” and “187 Reasons Mexicans 
Can’t Cross the Border,” are often statements of anger over the situation of 
Chicanos in America. And the violence is hard to miss, for example, in verses 
like these:

Blood on the daughter’s breast who sews roses

Blood on the father, does anyone remember him, bluish?

But the images have a way of moving effortlessly between the personal and the 
political. As the poet and Harvard professor Stephen Burt once put it inan 
essay for the Poetry Foundation 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/learning/guide/244636>, Herrera’s work “shows 
roots in West Coast Chicano/a experience even while it exults in crossing 
national, regional, social, and linguistic boundaries.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjuan-felipe-herrera-poetry-is-one-of-the-most-beautiful-ways-of-participating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3eb43eb31048140e9292e67c9447bfdb39ada461%2F453_1269_1944_2923%2F1944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20poet%20laureate%20Juan%20Felipe%20Herrera%3A%20'Poetry%20is%20one%20of%20the%20most%20beautiful%20ways%20of%20participating'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjuan-felipe-herrera-poetry-is-one-of-the-most-beautiful-ways-of-participating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20poet%20laureate%20Juan%20Felipe%20Herrera%3A%20%27Poetry%20is%20one%20of%20the%20most%20beautiful%20ways%20of%20participating%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjuan-felipe-herrera-poetry-is-one-of-the-most-beautiful-ways-of-participating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3eb43eb31048140e9292e67c9447bfdb39ada461%2F453_1269_1944_2923%2F1944.jpg>
 Allen Ginsberg takes a self portrait Photograph: Allen Ginsberg/CORBIS 
The poet Herrera found himself most inspired by, and which his work is most 
said to resemble, is that of Allen Ginsburg, who he picked up in high school 
when he came across Ginsburg’s A Supermarket in California. Herrera saw 
Ginsburg for the first time at Stanford in the 1970s and felt in awe of the way 
his poet filled the room. When he speaks of Ginsburg now, it’s in the reverent 
tones of a worshipper: “He didn’t back up, he didn’t shy away, he didn’t censor 
himself, he wasn’t afraid of his body, he wasn’t afraid of telling us about his 
body, he wasn’t afraid of being gay, he wasn’t afraid of exposing what was not 
exposable in society…”

“He was right about the poem being a mind-breath,” Herrera adds. “Each word 
depends on how your mind breathes.”

As a public figure in this late era of his career, Herrera devoted himself to 
helping others expose what is not exposable. Appointed as poet laureate of 
California by Jerry Brown in 2012, he promptly made public participation a 
signature element of his tenure. His biggest project in that regard was what he 
called The Most Incredible and Biggest and Most Amazing Poem on Unity in the 
World, which consisted of fragments submitted by California residents. Herrera 
said he hopes to continue that kind of work in his national role. “Poetry is 
one of the largest, most beautiful, most intimate and most effective ways of 
participating” in public life, he said.

This political potential of poetry isn’t something that’s obvious to everyone, 
but it is to Herrera himself. “Poetry, as odd as it is, and as hard to figure 
out as it is, many times, it’s almost something that we’re used to,” Herrera 
said. “It’s kind of like a dream language that we had centuries ago, so that 
when we speak poetically, or write a poem about what’s going on, a real 
difficult issue that’s facing our communities, people listen.” It carries a 
power that pamphlets and reports cannot, he says.

It’s not that he expects a poem to transform all of society in one sweeping 
movement. But, “the justice and change probably [comes] in those five seconds 
where the person gained an insight.”
 