
An Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> school district has 
apologized after singling out black students to attend an assembly about gangs.

Last Wednesday morning, an announcement at Maumelle high school, in a northern 
suburb of Little Rock, reportedly told all African American ninth-graders to go 
to the auditorium for an assembly where a local pastor, Dante Shelton, gave a 
talk on his personal story and the dangers of gangs, violence and drugs.

A segregation that was never black and white: Gordon Parks’s photographs of 
50s Alabama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/12/-sp-segregation-american-south-gordon-parks>
The focus on black students left some people angry. “[Where] does that leave 
kids that are mixed? ‘Oh, you know, that’s my other side that’s calling, let me 
go learn about gang-banging.’ To me, it’s just wrong on every level,” Aaron 
Perkins, whose younger sister attended the assembly,told KATV 
<http://katv.com/news/local/concern-over-african-american-only-student-assembly>
 news. “She felt that it was very racist … This is 2016. All kids should 
understand and listen to what this reverend had to talk about. It’s probably 
great information, but [don’t] single out the black kids.”

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Arkansas sent a letter 
<http://www.fox16.com/news/local-news/alcu-reacts-to-black-students-only-assembly>
 to the school expressing concern that the episode “violated these students’ 
rights to equal protection under the law and labels them with harmful 
stereotypes about students of color”.

A spokesperson for the school district said the event was “not an anti-gang 
assembly. It was a motivational speaker.” The district issued a 
counterintuitive statement which said that the black students were segregated 
as part of desegregation efforts.

“A local pastor was invited to speak to a group of African American, 
ninth-grade students. He shared his personal success story and encouraged 
students to make good choices. Freshmen students were identified by the school 
because it is a time of transition when they are more easily influenced,” the 
statement said.

“Black students were selected with the intent that the assembly would be an 
extension of the district’s court-ordered desegregation efforts, which 
encourage programs and opportunities tailored to minority students. Students 
who did not want to attend the program were not required to do so, and the 
response to Mr Shelton’s presentation was overwhelmingly positive. The Pulaski 
County Special School District [PCSSD] regrets that this inspirational program 
was not made available to all students and in the future will work to ensure 
that when outside speakers are brought into a school that all students are 
included.”

In response to the ACLU, Whitney Moore, an attorney for the school district, 
said in a letter that the staff member who approved the assembly was 
reprimanded but had acted in good faith in a misguided attempt to comply with 
federal requirements.


Little Rock and its surroundings have been under court scrutiny for decades 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2014/01/07/260461489/decades-later-desegregation-still-on-the-docket-in-little-rock>
 because of segregation that has fostered racial disparities in the education 
system.

“PCSSD remains under federal district court supervision generally as to its 
ongoing obligation to not discriminate on the basis of race. A specific aspect 
of this requires PCSSD to create special programs designed to reduce disparate 
impact between black and white students in application of discipline. I offer 
this only in mitigation, not as a defense,” the letter said. “You are right, we 
were wrong, and we won’t do it again.”
 