
A chemistry teacher in the final stages of moral putrefaction, a CIA agent 
with bipolar disorder and the late Władziu Valentino Liberace combined to 
thwart British hopes of dominating the Emmy awards.

Downton Abbey <http://www.itv.com/downtonabbey/> actors Hugh Bonneville, Dame 
Maggie Smith and Michelle Dockery and Homeland star Damian Lewis were all 
denied the big gongs of the night late Sunday, as were Dame Helen Mirren and 
Cat Deeley.

Despite being nominated in 11 categories and enjoying big success in previous 
years,Downton Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> 
took home just one award for outstanding music composition.

Breaking Bad <http://www.amctv.com/shows/breaking-bad> − which chronicles 
Walter White's descent from teacher to murderous drug lord − won its first best 
drama Emmy, while Anna Gunn, who plays White's wife, won the award for best 
supporting actress in a drama.

Downton's Bonneville had tipped Breaking Bad's Bryan Cranston, who plays 
White, for the best lead actor gong but in the end the pair both lost out to 
Jeff Daniels for his performance in Aaron Sorkin'sThe Newsroom 
<http://www.hbo.com/the-newsroom>.

Other winners included Claire Danes, named best actress in a drama series for 
her role as CIA agent Carrie Mathison inHomeland 
<http://www.sho.com/sho/homeland/home>, and David Fincher, who picked up the 
prize for directing in a drama series for the Netflix remake of the political 
drama House Of Cards.

Jim Parsons was named best actor in a comedy series for his role as Sheldon 
Cooper in The Big Bang Theory, while Modern Family won its fourth consecutive 
trophy for top comedy series.

There was, however, consolation of sorts for the British writer Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>, who won an Emmy for The Hour, 
the 1950s-set television news drama that was axed by the BBC after two series.

Morgan, whose other work includes the screenplay for Margaret Thatcher biopic 
The Iron Lady, won the award for writing in a mini-series or movie.

There was also recognition for Armando Iannucci's Veep, with two of the stars 
of the US political satire − Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Tony Hale − picking up 
acting awards.

Meanwhile Danny Boyle's London 2012 Olympic Games opening ceremony scooped the 
title of outstanding art direction for variety programming.

Much of the night belonged to the Liberace biopic Behind the Candelabra 
<http://www.hbo.com/movies/behind-the-candelabra>, which stormed the film or 
miniseries category: Michael Douglas won the best actor award for his portrayal 
of the much-sequinned showman, Steven Soderbergh won the best director Emmy, 
and it was named best movie.

Douglas, 68, found himself in the unusual position of competing for an Emmy 
rather than an Oscar after US studios proved uninterested in helping to fund 
Soderbergh's film. The Ocean's Eleven director eventually sold his project to 
pay TV network HBO in the US, making it ineligible for film's most high-profile 
awards ceremony. Nevertheless, Behind the Candelabra screened as a competition 
entry at the Cannes film festival in May, and later debuted in UK cinemas.
Soderbergh revealed last year that Hollywood studios had refused to finance the 
biopic because it was "too gay" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/07/steven-soderbergh-liberace-film>.

Douglas thanked his fellow nominee and co-star Matt Damon on stage, telling 
the audience at the at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles that he could not have 
done it without the man who played his on-screen lover Scott Thorson.

"This is a two hander," Douglas said. "And Matt, you're only as good as your 
other hand. You're magnificent, and the only reason I'm standing here is 
because of you. You really deserve half of this. So … you want the bottom or 
the top?"
 