
US television network Epix will screen a colour version of the Oscar-nominated 
comedy drama Nebraska on Sunday, despite director Alexander Payne having 
previously said he hoped nobody would ever see it,reports Variety 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/color-version-of-nebraska-to-air-on-epix-1201276310/>
.

Payne shot the 2013 film in black and white, but revealed in the wake of its 
release that studio Paramount asked for a colour version for broadcast in 
countries that refused to strike financial deals for monochrome films.

"Eventually I said, 'I'll even give you a coloured version for those specific 
TV outlets in Moldova and Sierra Leone and Laos or wherever,'"said Payne 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/news/alexander-payne-hopes-no-one-ever-sees-nebraska-in-color-1200861306/>
. "So I made a colour version. I hope no one ever sees it."

Now it appears that Paramount, which also owns Epix, is to show the colour 
version in the US. A promotional video on the network is advertising the 
"colour premiere", according to Variety.

It is not clear whether Payne, the Oscar-winning US director of acclaimed 
films such as About Schmidt, Sideways and The Descendants, has made any 
specific complaint with regard to the US screening. However, Nebraska producer 
Albert Berger, toldThompson on Hollywood 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/thompsononhollywood/color-version-of-nebraska-to-show-on-epix-that-alexander-payne-hoped-would-never-be-seen-20140805>
 that the film-maker was, to his knowledge, unaware that the screening is going 
ahead.

In December, Payne told the Guardian's Xan Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/dec/03/nebraska-alexander-payne-video-interview>
 that his decision to shoot Nebraska in black and white was inspired by the 
"visual storytelling" of the silent-film era.

The Epix screening recalls Orson Welles' famous battle against the 
colourisation of his classic 1941 film Citizen Kane 
<http://www.apnewsarchive.com/1989/We-ll-Never-Know-If-Rosebud-Was-Red/id-3da27b3969212eb7885db3dbd81b597e>
. A 1988 attempt by the media mogul Ted Turner to add colour was eventually 
defeated after critics pointed out that Welles had spoken out about the process 
prior to his death. Theactor Angelica Huston won a 1991 legal battle in the 
French courts 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1991/08/25/movies/film-makers-are-victors-in-a-lawsuit-on-coloring.html?n=Top/Reference/Times%20Topics/Subjects/C/Color>
 after her father John's 1950 noir The Asphalt Jungle was subjected to the 
process, contrary to express wishes made before his death.

• Nebraska: watch the trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/sep/17/nebraska-exclusive-trailer-video>
• June Squibb interview: 84 years an actor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/27/june-squibb-84-years-actor-nebraska-oscar>
 