
Use of some of the strongest antibiotics available to treat life-threatening 
infections has risen to record levels on European farms, new data shows.

The report reinforces concerns about the overuse of antibiotics on farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/20/mrsa-in-pork-farming-leaders-join-calls-for-clampdown-on-illegal-antibiotics-use>
, followingrevelations from the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/revealed-mrsa-variant-found-in-british-pork-at-asda-and-sainsburys>
 of the presence of the superbug MRSA in UK-produced meat, inimported meat for 
sale in UK supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/what-is-the-superbug-la-mrsa-cc398-and-why-is-it-spreading-on-farms>
, and on British farms.

According to the data from the European Medicines Agency 
<http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/regulation/document_listing/document_listing_000302.jsp>
, medicines classified as “critically important in human medicine” by theWorld 
Health Organisation <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs194/en/> 
appear to be in frequent use on farm animals across the major countries of the 
EU, including the UK. This comes in spite of WHO advice that, because of their 
importance, these drugs should be used only in themost extreme cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/10/investors-fast-food-pub-chains-reduce-farm-antibiotics>
, if at all, in treating animals.

The latest report from the EMA collates data from member states on the sales 
of antibiotics for veterinary purposes in 2014, and shows that antibiotic use 
on farms fell by about 2% on the previous year overall, and by as much as 12% 
in many countries. But this disguises the rise in the use of the strongest 
medicines, such ascolistin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/18/antibiotic-defences-against-serious-diseases-under-threat-experts-warn>
, which is a last resort for life-threatening human illness.

The percentage of antibiotics sales made up by the most potent antibiotics 
remained steady or in some cases increased slightly, indicating an increase in 
the amount of so-called critically important antibiotics used.

For instance, sales of fluoroquinolones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/30/who-calls-urgent-action-antibiotics-antimicrobial-resistance>
 – the newest versions of which are used to treat life-threatening illnesses 
including pneumonia and Legionnaire’s disease – stood at 141 tonnes across the 
countries surveyed in 2013, and rose to 172 tonnes in 2014. Sales ofmacrolides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/26/early-antibiotic-use-may-predispose-children-to-weight-gain-and-asthma>
, also classed as critically important to human health, rose from 59 to 67 
tonnes in the same period. This shows that efforts to prevent the drugs most 
crucial for human health from being used in farming are failing.

Experts are increasingly concerned by growing evidence that the overuse of 
antibiotics on farms – which in the EU account for three times the quantity of 
antibiotics dispensed to the human population – isendangering human health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/no-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance>
 by fostering the development of bacteria resistant to even the strongest 
medicines.

The scare over MRSA in pork shows responsible farming isn’t a luxury – it’s a 
necessity | Joanna Blythman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/18/mrsa-pork-responsible-farming-superbug-antibiotics-farms-meat>
Cóilín Nunan, of the Alliance to Save Our Antibiotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/18/mrsa-pork-responsible-farming-superbug-antibiotics-farms-meat>
, which comprises several NGOs concerned with animal and human health, said: 
“The shocking overuse of farm antibiotics shown [in the report] is a result of 
the continued failure by most countries to ban routine preventative mass 
medication in intensive farming.

“Spain now uses 100 times more antibiotics per unit of livestock than Norway, 
80 times more than Iceland and 35 times more than Sweden. The main reason for 
the difference is that Spain, like most of Europe, allowsroutine mass medication
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/18/is-it-time-for-antibiotic-free-label-on-our-food>
, whereas the Nordic countries do not. The increased use of last-resort and 
critically important antibiotics is particularly alarming and confirms that 
reliance on voluntary and softly-softly approaches is not working.”

The Guardian has exposed new evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2015/jun/18/superbugs-la-mrsa-pigs-antibiotics-video>
 of the superbug MRSA present in meat produced in the UK and on sale in UK 
supermarkets. When present in food, the bug can be killed by cooking, but 
lapses in hygiene can result in human infection. It can be contracted from 
infected farm animals, so the finding that UK farms are becoming a reservoir 
for the disease shows there is a danger of it spreading more widely in Britain.

Antibiotic resistance has been called a threatened “apocalypse” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
 by the UK’s chief medical officer, Dame Sally Davies. She has warned that in 
less than two decades operations now regarded as simple, such as hip 
replacements, could become dangerous to patients because of the risk they could 
contract untreatable infections. The overuse of antibiotics has been a key 
factor in the rise of resistant bacteria.

The government’s review of the situation, conducted by Lord O’Neill and 
published last year, found that farms were a potential source of increasing 
resistance. Germs that acquire immunity to strong antibiotics in animals can 
spread to humans.

Routine use of antibiotics on animals – which is frequently practised across 
the world as a method of promoting their growth – is supposed to be banned 
within the EU.

However, the new data from EMA showed that farmers and vets are over-using 
strong antibiotics, campaigners told the Guardian.The O’Neill review advised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/19/uk-farmers-to-cut-antibiotic-use-to-combat-drug-resistance>
 that the UK and other countries should aim to use no more than 50mg of 
antibiotic per kilogramme of livestock, but the data shows that the average use 
across the EU is three times higher at 152mg per kg, according to the Alliance 
to Save Our Antibiotics.
 