
Business, as a rule, doesn’t do utopia. The reason is simple: as the French 
author and philosopher Albert Camus put it, “utopia is that which is in 
contradiction with reality.” And reality, as far as conventional capitalism 
sees it, is about the no-nonsense pursuit of financial profit.

On the face of it, therefore, an abstract philosophy based around indigenous 
Andean precepts of harmony between humans and nature has little to say to 
rational, money-minded economists and business executives in the twenty-first 
century.

Yet proponents of the South American philosophy of Buen Vivir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/buen-vivir-philosophy-south-america-eduardo-gudynas>
(literally, “living well”) beg to differ. To prove it, proponents of the belief 
system have laid out a series of tangible policy steps that they say portend a 
shift towards a more sustainable, more balanced economy.

 Manifesto for ‘living well’ 

We realise that you can’t do this from one day to the next, so the proposal 
promotes the notion of ‘transition'
Eduardo Gudynas 
 Central to the 54-page manifesto <http://www.cpalsocial.org/documentos/98.pdf>
 (pdf) entitled ‘Climate Change and Transitions toBuen Vivir’, circulated 
during the UN climate conference in Lima last year, is a transition away from 
fossil-fuel dependency. Top of the list, therefore, is an immediate moratorium 
on all oil and gas projects that cause environmental harm. As for those 
hydrocarbons that remain, these should only be traded within the Andean bloc 
and sales revenues should be used to fund investment in renewables.

 “When these countries run out of hydrocarbons, they won’t have the likes of 
wind or solar to replace them,” says the report’s co-author and leadingBuen 
Vivir writer and activist Eduardo Gudynas, who warns of a pending energy crisis 
on top of the very real threat of severe climate change impacts.

A second, related goal is the cutting of greenhouse gas emissions. The 
manifesto calls for a massive investment in public transport (particularly 
buses in cities) and a phased transition away from private car ownership. The 
Colombian capital of Bogotá provides a model in itscar-free day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/jun/16/cycling-ethical-living>
. Introducing mandatory green building regulations in major cities is also 
proposed.


Oil company employees should consider quitting their jobs | Jonathon Porritt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/10/oil-company-employees-quit-jobs-jonathon-porritt>
A third focus of the proposal is around agriculture. Using fertile land to 
grow cash crops for export and then importing food from overseas “makes no 
sense”, Uruguay-born Gudynas maintains. Ecuador’s export-oriented fresh-flower 
industry serves as an archetypal example of the “strange” logic of exporting 
cash crops to earn dollars so as to import staple foods. “Ecuadorians don’t eat 
flowers”, he notes.


Instead, the Buen Vivir-inspired proposals suggest a return to more organic 
(or “agro-ecological”) modes of agricultural production. There is food and job 
security in a post-oil society, the logic runs. Likewise there is no longer a 
dependency on fuel-thirsty machinery or expensive, petroleum-based chemicals. A 
more manual style of farming, meanwhile, will provide work for those formally 
employed in the extractive sectors and related industries.

 The proposals, which are aimed at the Andean countries and Amazon region 
primarily, are unashamedly utopian. “The specific objectives for this programme 
are zero poverty and zero extinction of the species,” says Gudynas, who notes 
that one fifth of theAmazon biome has already been lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/31/amazon-rainforest-deforestation-weather-droughts-report>
 and one fifth seriously deteriorated.

Urgent transition

A sense of urgency is also a feature of the manifesto. “Our message to the 
Andean regions is that they can’t wait for a global change [in the economic 
system] because when that change comes it will be too late,” states Gudynas. 
Why? “Because the impacts of climate change are already being felt in these 
countries. And secondly, because they are going to run out of oil soon.”

Can multinationals deliver selfless community projects?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/09/community-projects-multinationals-problems-nigeria>
 For the best part of a decade, the resource-rich states of the Andes – 
Bolivia, Peru, Colombia and Ecuador – have seen sharp escalations in economic 
growth thanks to surging world demand for basic commodities. Not only is that 
external demand beginning to slow, but their capacity to keep pace with supply 
isn’t infinite. Several of the Andean states are already facing “peak oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/peak-oil>”, he argues. 

That may be up for debate, but what appears incontrovertible are the social 
and environmental costs of Latin America’s current “extractivist” model. 
Nowhere is that clearer than in Ecuador. Despite enshrining the rights of the 
environment into in its constitution, the green light was given last year to
extend oil exploration in the Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/may/23/ecuador-amazon-yasuni-national-park-oil-drill>
.

 For all his radicalism, Gudynas is not blind to life’s realities. “We realise 
that you can’t do this from one day to the next, and it’s for this reason that 
the proposal promotes the notion of ‘transition’”, he states. That said, he 
doesn’t buy the line that the Andean economies would collapse tomorrow without 
extractive export revenues. “Ten years of growth means that domestic 
consumption and sales taxes are now more important that duties or royalties,” 
he states.

Neither he nor his fellow proponents are under any illusion about the region’s 
entrenched attachment to a neoliberal form of development.Even in Bolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jul/04/bolivia-evo-morales-hypocrisy-environment>
, whose national constitution also reflects elements ofBuen Vivir thinking, the 
government is considering a nuclear power station to fuel industrial growth. “I 
mean, how much more anti-Pachamama can you get?”, Gudynas asks, referring to 
the Mother Earth figure of indigenous belief.

 It may be too late in the day to stave off a climate crisis, Gudynas fears. 
ButBuen Vivir-inspired policy measures represent the best defence against what 
lies down the road. Action cannot be delayed, however. That way, as Camus said, 
“some kind of future, if perhaps not the ideal one, will remain possible.”

The social impact hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/social-impact> is 
funded by Anglo American. All content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find outmore here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Become a GSB member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more stories 
like this direct to your inbox.
 