
‘Cheers,’ says Vanessa Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vanessa-redgrave>. She clinks her glass of 
elderflower pressé against my coffee. At 79, with those cornflower-blue eyes 
and that great silver streak of hair, she looks as striking as ever. I tell her 
that my daughter loves watching her niece Jemma in the TV soap Holby. As 
compliments go, it’s not up to much for the woman who was proclaimed by Arthur 
Miller and Tennessee Williams as the greatest actor of their time, but she 
responds gracefully. “Oh, does she? How sweet! I’ll pass that on.” She could 
not be more charming.

Then we start the interview. Every question is dissected for falsehood, 
insult, bias, innuendo and booby traps. She is the bomb-disposal expert of 
interviewees.

We are sitting in the front row at the empty Almeida theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/almeida-theatre> in north London, where she 
is rehearsing for Shakespeare’sRichard III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2016/jun/07/ralph-fiennes-richard-iii-almeida-theatre-miles-aldridge-in-pictures>
. I ask if the stage scares her. “Scared?” she replies, as if it’s the most 
ridiculous question in the world. “Scared? What about?” Going on stage? “No, 
not really.”

Vanessa Redgrave: ‘I’m stunned anyone ever said a word against Howards End’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/vanessa-redgrave-im-stunned-anyone-ever-said-a-word-against-howards-end>
Has she never had any fear on stage? “Well, I’ve lived for 79 years so you’re 
allowing yourself a bit of a sweeping swath of time. Of course I’ve had stage 
fright.” Now, the suggestion that she might never fear the stage seems like the 
most ridiculous question in the world.

In Richard III, she plays the vengeful Queen Margaret, the bitter widow of 
King Henry VI, whose son has been murdered by Richard. Five years ago, she 
played another terrifying Shakespearean matriarch, Volumnia, inthe film of 
Coriolanus <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/19/coriolanus-review> 
(with Ralph Fiennes, who is Richard III in this production). Redgrave can be 
wonderfully steely – that slow, coruscatingly clear delivery, with every 
syllable another stab to the heart. She can also be wrenchingly tender.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fralph-fiennes-richard-iii-almeida-theatre-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Fiennes%20plays%20Richard%20III%3A%20'I%20can%20add%20colours%20to%20the%20chameleon'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fralph-fiennes-richard-iii-almeida-theatre-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Fiennes%20plays%20Richard%20III%3A%20%27I%20can%20add%20colours%20to%20the%20chameleon%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fralph-fiennes-richard-iii-almeida-theatre-video&media=>
Ralph Fiennes plays Richard III: ‘I can add colours to the chameleon’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jun/09/ralph-fiennes-richard-iii-almeida-theatre-video>
It’s always been the eyes with Redgrave. You can see through them into her 
soul. So blue, so weepy, such longing; she was born to play Chekhov. Which of 
course, she has done beautifully. Twenty-five years ago, she was a 
heartbreaking Olga (the spinster teacher who tells her youngest sister, Irina, 
she would have married “any man, even an old man if he had asked”) inThree 
Sisters, alongside her real-life younger sister, Lynn, and niece, Jemma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/jul/11/jemma-redgrave-corin-redgrave-interview>
.

Redgrave might be most garlanded for her stage work, but she also has six 
Oscar nominations (Morgan: A Suitable Case for Treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/10/morgan-suitable-case-for-treatment-dvd>
,Isadora <https://youtu.be/LE68rRevL2g>, Mary Queen of Scots 
<https://youtu.be/jaEn4C-EhTA>, Julia <https://youtu.be/U_u7Hvj14s0>, The 
Bostonians, Howards End). When she finally won an Oscar in 1978, for playing 
the eponymous Nazi resistance fighter in Julia, she gavethe most notorious 
acceptance speech in the Academy’s history 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAcOsK9gRLk#t=1m52s>, thanking it for refusing 
“to be intimidated by the threats of a small bunch of Zionist hoodlums”. In the 
previous year, she had funded a documentary in support of a Palestinian 
homeland. Effigies of her were burned by the Jewish Defense League, which 
picketed the Oscars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIAcOsK9gRLk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIAcOsK9gRLk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIAcOsK9gRLk&media=>
 Redgrave’s Oscars acceptance speech. 
Her politics have often attracted more headlines than her acting. She and her 
brother,Corin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/06/corin-redgrave-obituary>, were 
once leading members of theWorkers Revolutionary party <http://wrp.org.uk/>. In 
recent times, she has endured more than her share of tragedy; within the space 
of 14 months, she lost her oldest daughter, the actorNatasha Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/19/natasha-richardson-obituary> (who 
suffered a traumatic brain injury after askiing accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/19/natasha-richardson-dies-skiing-accident>
 at the age of 45), Corin, and in May 2010,Lynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/03/lynn-redgrave-obituary> (yet 
another successful Redgrave actor with two Oscar nominations).

The Redgraves are the ultimate acting dynasty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/jul/09/theatre.artsfeatures>, going 
back five generations. Vanessa’s parents, Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson, 
were both actors. The tabloids have often feasted off the family with their 
penchant for romance, revolution and scandal.Michael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/18/michael-redgrave-screen-legend> 
was bisexual, as was Vanessa’s first husband, Tony Richardson, who left her for 
the actor Jeanne Moreau, and died of an Aids-related illness in 1991. Last 
year, Redgrave suffered a serious heart attack, and the newspapers were quick 
to report details about just how badly it had debilitated her. Perhaps it is 
not surprising she is suspicious of journalists.

Redgrave might be dogmatic in many ways, but her views can also be surprising 
– not least about women. In Richard III, as in Coriolanus, she plays a woman 
chiefly defined as a mother. Didn’t you say that being a mother is the ultimate 
role for a woman, I ask.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b04e91cceb1b6f47b31512413492f0c55ee23a6%2F0_0_4350_3798%2F4350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vanessa%20Redgrave%20on%20why%20she%20was%20ready%20to%20die%3A%20%E2%80%98Trying%20to%20live%20was%20getting%20too%20tiring%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vanessa%20Redgrave%20on%20why%20she%20was%20ready%20to%20die%3A%20%E2%80%98Trying%20to%20live%20was%20getting%20too%20tiring%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b04e91cceb1b6f47b31512413492f0c55ee23a6%2F0_0_4350_3798%2F4350.jpg>
 Family matters … Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson with (left to right) 
Corin, Lynn and Vanessa, in 1946. Photograph: George Konig/Getty Images 
She bristles. “I don’t think I said that. It’s a very unusual combination of 
words for me.” Then she splutters to a stop. Redgrave has a terrible hacking 
cough. I tell her she’s right; I am paraphrasing her, and read back the actual 
quote: “We are child-bearers primarily and we are the weaker sex, and once 
we’ve given birth to our children, our life is by necessity bound to them. I 
wouldn’t advocate it any other way.”

She has another coughing fit, before nodding a terse reply.

“Well, I succeeded in saying what I meant.”

Is it correct that she has never considered herself as feminist? She smiles. 
“Yes, I would agree.” And her children went to private school? “Well, not all 
of them.” And she is convinced that Shakespeare was an aristocrat because a 
commoner could never have written how he did? “Well, now you’re getting into a 
very important subject.”

Does she still see herself as a revolutionary? “I think every artist is a 
revolutionary.That’s what Tennessee Williams said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/27/tennessee-williams>, and I think 
he put it very well.” Why? “The simple answer is you want to help change. Or 
before you can help change, you want to understand how can change be effected.”

You seem such a strange mix of revolutionary and traditionalist, I say.

But she’s not having any of it. “It’s fair for you to say whatever you like, 
but I’m not going to fall in with it. These labels are so nothing to do with 
what’s going on today. I think every journalist would do well to drop these 
outworn, outlived descriptive adjectives. They do not apply to anything, in my 
view.”

She splutter-hacks again. I ask her if she is OK – she sounds terrible. “I 
think some dust has caught in my chest.” She smoked all her adult life until 
the heart attack last year, when she gave up. How is she coping without her 
cigarettes? “Surprisingly well. I do, now and then, get a withdrawal because I 
was a big addict.”

Redgrave is dressed in blue top, tracksuit bottoms and blue trainers. She is 
six foot tall, still an intimidating presence, but there is something frail 
about her. The heart attack took a lot out of her. Is it true that her lungs 
are shattered; that she only has 30% capacity? “I’ve no idea,” she says 
imperiously. “I’ve never said how much of my lungs have been destroyed and I’ve 
never been told myself, so I don’t know howyou know.”

It’s been printed in the newspapers.

“And I’m saying to you, do you believe that?” (The 30% figure is a direct quote
 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/london-life/vanessa-redgrave-before-i-didn-t-care-at-all-now-i-find-myself-thinking-what-a-miracle-everything-is-a2954866.html>
 from an interview she gave to the London Evening Standard last September, five 
months after her heart attack.) Did she think she was going to die? “At the 
time? When I was in hospital I wanted to die,” she says gently. Why? “Because 
it was just getting too tiring.” Life or being ill?

“Trying to live was getting too tiring. I was with my daughter, and I said, 
‘I’m sorry, I just think I’m going to have to give up,’ – knowing she’d be 
unhappy, of course. And she was wonderful.” How did Joely (yet another 
successful actor) encourage her to keep living? “By telling me I could. Her 
saying I could give up released me.”

I have never met somebody who can go from wilfully cantankerous to 
heartstoppingly tender so quickly; who can make me want to scream with 
frustration and move me to tears in the same sentence.

“I told her what I thought I had to do … just give up. But I had to tell her 
that because I guess it’s my psychology. I didn’t want to hurt her, but I knew 
it would hurt her.”

'If you’re not happy to embace contradictions, you’re not going to get very 
far in understanding anything'
Vanessa Redgrave 
I know it’s a strange question to ask a Marxist, I say, but do you have faith? 
She smiles, almost beatifically. “Yes, certainly I do. And the reason why I do 
is because I don’t consider science and religion two fixed opposites. Human 
beings have felt the need to explain things that they couldn’t explain, and 
acknowledge the existence of things they can’t explain but want to.” She is 
talking so slowly, so deliberately, she could be setting a dictation test.

So religion and Marxism is another contradiction she is happy to embrace? 
“Yes, because if you’re not happy to embrace contradictions you’re not going to 
get very far in understanding anything.”

How does her faith express itself? “By reading, by inquiry, people I have 
discussions with, sometimes I go to church. It’s a Catholic church, because of 
the people I know.”

She says she has always had faith; always liked to go to church. As she talks, 
I can’t help wondering whether she wanted to die because she hoped to be 
reunited with loved ones that she has lost.

Before the question is out, she cuts me off. “No, don’t go there. Not at all. 
I just meant physically I felt I couldn’t go on trying to live. Not that life 
is too painful for me. Not at all. No.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70dc5fd65f981b402c0c9ebdd35c50dceead75f0%2F0_81_3104_1862%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vanessa%20Redgrave%20on%20why%20she%20was%20ready%20to%20die%3A%20%E2%80%98Trying%20to%20live%20was%20getting%20too%20tiring%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vanessa%20Redgrave%20on%20why%20she%20was%20ready%20to%20die%3A%20%E2%80%98Trying%20to%20live%20was%20getting%20too%20tiring%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70dc5fd65f981b402c0c9ebdd35c50dceead75f0%2F0_81_3104_1862%2F3104.jpg>
 Sixties style … David Hemmings and Vanessa Redgrave in Anonioni’s Blow-Up. 
Photograph: Moviestore/Rex Features 
Over the past five years, Redgrave has done so much work – in films such as 
the comedy-dramaSong for Marion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/21/song-for-marion-review>, 
alongside Forest Whitaker inThe Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/14/the-butler-review>, with Steve 
Carell in the Oscar-nominatedFoxcatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/08/foxcatcher-review-undoing-of-underdog-sports-movie>
, and on stage in New York alongside Jesse Eisenberg inThe Revisionist 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/01/theater/reviews/the-revisionist.html> and 
opposite James Earl Jones in theOld Vic’s Much Ado About Nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/sep/20/much-ado-about-nothing-review-rylance>
, directed by Mark Rylance.

Does working make things easier? “Easier than what?” she snaps. Well, I say, 
if you have too much time to think, you can drown in grief. “Ah, well, now it 
seems to me that you are talking about someone who’s a workaholic, or unable to 
stop being an actor.”

I didn’t mean that, I say, but it’s interesting you take objection to it. 
“Well, I do. It’s very unlife-enhancing. Very.” But yes, she says, there have 
been times she has been addicted to work, just as she was to cigarettes.

“It can happen for any number of reasons,” she says. “One is called paying the 
rent. Or the mortgage.”

Great performances: Vanessa Redgrave in As You Like It
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/27/vanessa-redgrave-rosalind-as-you-like-it>
You become a slave to rent?

“No, you’re putting words into my mouth.”

And we’re off again. “I’m not putting words in your mouth,” I say.” ‘I’m 
asking a question.”

“You just have put words into my mouth.”

“No I haven’t. They are my words, my question. You’re very difficult to 
interview, aren’t you?”

“I don’t think so. I think I’m illuminating. Hahahaha!” She rocks her head 
back, laughing.

And she really is heaving with laughter so much that I’m now every bit as 
worried for this dyspeptic national treasure as I was when she was having her 
coughing fit. We seem to have reached a new understanding. The war is over.

I’ve been watching a load of Redgrave films back to back. She started off as a 
sexy young thing, a symbol of the swinging 60s (in films such as Antonioni’s
Blow Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ywa6qeYJAg> and Morgan: A Suitable 
Case For Treatment) and gradually moved into ever more miserable territory. So 
often she seems to die for her politics (Julia) or be punished for her sins 
(Atonement andKen Russell’s The Devils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/25/devils-ken-russell-classic-dvd-french>
) or just be generally angst-ridden (Howards End 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iq1450mzTRA> and Bostonians 
<https://archive.org/details/the_bostonians_1984_trailer>). Rarely do we see 
Redgrave laugh in cinema – and she’s got a lovely laugh.

You have a reputation for being serious, I say. “Well, I am a very serious 
person.” Has she ever felt she was too serious? “No! And I don’t care how many 
people in the press have said that. And there have been times when I couldn’t 
and didn’t laugh, but I think I’ve grown a bit stronger now.”

Has she always wanted her work to have a political purpose? “Not a political 
purpose. Everybody always jumps to that.” What does she mean? “Well I’ve just 
noticed, Simon, that people jump to political. Perhaps it’s because they’re 
talking to me. They know I have been very political. I am also and have been 
for a long time very not political. It doesn’t mean I don’t have any politics 
though.”

For a long time, Redgrave has said she is interested in human rights, not 
politics – and she does have a distinguished record as a human rights 
campaigner. But I’m not sure that I understand the distinction. She explains, 
with a devastating simplicity.
 Internationallist … Vanessa Redgrave at the refugee and migrant hospitality 
camp in Eleonas, Athens. Photograph: NurPhoto/Getty Images 
“Politics is about divisions. Wherever you come in on the subject there are 
divisions.” Does she regret the divisions it has caused in her life? “I can’t 
regret. I can only be thankful for the contribution that it made to my life.”

Is politics a negative word for her now? “It’s not a negative word, it’s 
negative. Period.”

In 2014 she made a documentary about Bosnian labour rights 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-OUDz-2KX4> with her son Carlo Nero, whose 
father is Redgrave’s long-term partner, the Italian actor Franco Nero. She is 
now making a new film with him about refugees in Greece and Lebanon.

Human rights, she says, have always been at the heart of her life – politics 
just sidetracked her. She talks of Hitler’s genocide, and how Chamberlain 
refused visas for thousands of Jewish refugees right until the end of 1938. “I 
know this history like it’s my family history, though it’s not, really. But it 
has obsessed me, because I was a child of the second world war and I wanted to 
know if what happened could happen again, how could we stop them.”

How did she feel when she was labelled anti-semitic following The Palestinian 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanessa_Redgrave#Julia.2C_The_Palestinian_and_the_Oscar_controversy>
? “That was absurd, calling me anti-semitic. Everybody has a right to think 
whatever they want about anybody, but since I so wasn’t and never have been, 
what can you do? You think, ‘OK time will pass on that one’.”

But it didn’t. In fact, it damaged her movie career just when she was set to 
be one of the great Hollywood stars. “Yes,” says Redgrave today, “but that’s 
not really important. What’s important is what’s crying out in our world for 
justice – the Israel-Palestine question.”

Looking back, does she wish she had been more careful with her words – that 
she had not said: “Zionist hoodlums”? “Oh no.” But then she stops and starts 
again. “Well, I mean I wish I’d written myself a better speech, but that’s not 
the point, either.” In the end, it comes down to one thing, she says – respect 
for human rights.

“I am practically at the very end of my life, so it’s a good thing I’m still 
worried and that I’ve not fallen back into my armchair where the old blues will 
get me. I’ve still got to do something to help, however tiny it is. I always 
think of the old Hebrew saying, which is translated roughly into: ‘He who saves 
one life saves the world’, because it’s pretty ghastly to think of all the 
people we’re not saving.”

She has to get back to rehearsals. It has been little more than an hour, but 
it feels as if we’ve been through a lot together. A lifetime. And that we’ve 
reached an understanding, of sorts. “I wasn’t looking forward to it, but thank 
you,” she says. “I don’t like giving interviews when I’m preparing something.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dcbeb9f36bd9a685dbff0d0e431f4c60a4cbbcd%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vanessa%20Redgrave%20on%20why%20she%20was%20ready%20to%20die%3A%20%E2%80%98Trying%20to%20live%20was%20getting%20too%20tiring%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vanessa%20Redgrave%20on%20why%20she%20was%20ready%20to%20die%3A%20%E2%80%98Trying%20to%20live%20was%20getting%20too%20tiring%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fvanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dcbeb9f36bd9a685dbff0d0e431f4c60a4cbbcd%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 In rehearsals … Vanessa Redgrave as Queen Margaret in Richard III at London’s 
Almeida. Photograph: Miles Aldridge 
“Oh, come off it,” I say. “You don’t like giving them, full stop.”

She smiles. “Well, I’m always hopeful, or I used to be always hopeful, that it 
turned out the journalist was somebody I respected.”

I tell her I’m glad she didn’t give up on life. “Thank you.” She smiles a 
lovely, warm smile. “Gosh, that’s really sweet of you.”

As she walks off, I ask if she lives in England all the time or part of the 
year in Italy. She has one last snap for old time’s sake. “In England. But I go 
to spend time with my husband in Italy, who you didn’t ask me about.”

I apologise, and ask her to tell me about her non-legally-binding marriage to 
Nero. But she’s halfway out of the door. “I won’t. Thank you, Simon, goodbye.” 
As she leaves, I shout after her: “Vanessa Redgrave, who is the love of your 
life?”

With her back to me, she shouts out: “One of the loves of my life is Franco 
Nero.” And the others? “My children, my relatives, my co-mates who I’m working 
with. Thank you very much, Simon. Goodbye. Hahaha!”

And now the formidable, forbidding Vanessa Redgrave is laughing like a 
schoolgirl. “That is the weirdest end to an interview I’ve ever had. 
Hahahahha!” And she shuts the door, and disappears.

 * Richard III is at the Almeida theatre, London 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/whats-on/richard-iii/7-jun-2016-6-aug-2016>, until 6 
August and can be seen in cinemas around the world on 21 July
 