
Visitors to the Venice film festival <http://www.labiennale.org/en/cinema/> 
are advised to bring a waterproof and keep umbrellas at the ready. The event 
invariably starts out hot and sunny, but don't be fooled, it will end in 
storms; it's the same way every time. The thunder cracks and the rains come 
down and the whole affair takes an autumnal turn.

How fitting that this year's festival should have opened with the electrifying 
Birdman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uJfLoE6hanc>, in which 
Michael Keaton's fading old thespian turns his back on the mainstream and sets 
his sights on high art instead. It was a film that largely set the tone for the 
10 days that followed, as lightning flashed, arthouse curios sprouted and big 
American titles proved to be as rare as hen's teeth.Cannes 
<http://www.festival-cannes.com/en.html> may be more brash and exciting; 
Sundance <http://www.sundance.org/festival/> more airy and wholesome. And yet 
humid, rotting Venice possesses peculiar charms of its own. By the time the 
storms roll in (middle Sunday, just before midnight), we are positively 
drowning in decent pictures.

The 2013 edition <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venice-film-festival-2013> 
caught pundits unawares by delivering its crowning Golden Lion award to 
Gianfranco Rosi's unfancied ringroad documentarySacro GRA 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmq5yaWtGSg> – a decision that suggested 
home-turf advantage can be pivotal at Venice. This year we have three Italian 
hopefuls in the main competition. At the time of writing, the smart money was on
Black Souls <http://www.cineuropa.org/vd.aspx?t=video&l=en&did=262082>, a 
turbulent mafia drama about three brothers from a Calabrian crime syndicate. 
Francesco Munzi's film is rich, dark and impeccably staged. It's a tale that 
paints southern Italy as a ruined kingdom, poisoned by its past and hopelessly 
tangled in outmoded ideals of blood and honour. Everyone here is nursing 
ancient, burning grievances. All of them, you feel, are swiftly riding for a 
fall.

Might Abel Ferrara's Pasolini <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iOVDmHmisQw> 
qualify as an Italian film too? Heaven forbid; the very notion is heresy. 
Despite charting the last 24 hours in the life of the great director Pier Paolo 
Pasolini, it has been shot by a New Yorker and stars Willem Dafoe in the title 
role, while the bulk of the dialogue is spoken in English. Perhaps it was these 
flagrant transgressions that accounted for a sniffy reception from the domestic 
delegates. All the same, I liked this enormously. After the lurid histrionics 
of his recentWelcome to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/10/welome-to-new-york-gerard-depardieu-review>
, Ferrara appears to have harnessed his wilder impulses. HisPasolini is 
fragile, dreamy and sad, shuffling domestic vignettes with vibrant 
fantasy interludes as it cruises inexorably towards the rocks. Dafoe, too, 
proves purely terrific as the brilliant, ill-starred man at the centre.
 'Purely terrific': Willem Dafoe as Pasolini. 
Those of a patriotic stripe were forced to look further afield, in the 
festival sidebars, where a brace of British productions spotlighted life on the 
margins. Duane Hopkins'sBypass 
<http://www.cineuropa.org/vd.aspx?t=video&l=en&did=262420> provided a stylish, 
polished (perhaps too polished) piece of homegrown miserabilism, casting George 
MacKay as a sickly petty criminal with a kit-bag full of troubles. But on 
balance I preferredBlood Cells, in which Jimmy's Hall star Barry Ward plays a 
kind of modern-day hobo Odysseus, visiting the landmarks of his past as he 
picks his way painfully back towards the family home. Joseph Bull and Luke 
Seomore's begrimed rural drama drags its feet on occasion, but it's heartfelt 
and ambitious and confirms its directors as names to watch out for.

Regrets? We've had a few. Hopes were high for The Cut 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=khpZ3NtPjTM>, a sweeping epic of the Armenian 
genocide by the talented German-Turkish director Fatih Akin. This looked 
tremendous on paper but the delivery falls short. Tahar Rahim plays Nazaret, 
the mute, stoic survivor who goes in search of his daughters in the aftermath 
of the first world war. He's trudging widescreen landscapes of rock and sand, 
stooping to dip his pail in a well that turns out to be clogged with corpses. 
The direction is bullish; the soundtrack enticing. But Akin's film turns out to 
be as flat and featureless as the Turkish desert itself.

The Cut has no nuance; it never builds and swells the way it should. Instead 
it keeps nudging poor Nazaret on from one place to the next, ticking off the 
locations he visits like some endless country and western ballad. He seeks his 
daughters in Aleppo; he hunts them down in Cuba. He thinks they're in 
Minneapolis, but they might well have gone out west. I watched the final scenes 
in an agony of anxiety, half expecting that some shuffling extra was going to 
tap Nazaret on the shoulder and then direct him on to Perth. Had that happened, 
we'd probably still be watchingThe Cut today.
 'A giddy metaphysical burlesque': Roy Andersson's A Pigeon Sat on a Branch 
Reflecting on Existence. 
At least Peter Bogdanovich knows the value of not overstaying his welcome. 
She's Funny That Way <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j4YhRd6K0jQ> is the 
American director's first feature in 13 years, although it gives the impression 
of having been scripted at speed, at the end of a joyous, boozy lunch with 
friends. Bogdanovich's farce is a fun frippery, barely held together by Owen 
Wilson's drawling comic turn as a theatre impresario who wants to play the role 
of Pygmalion to the girls he orders from the escort service. Following the 
screening, I run into Wilson by the tennis courts of his hotel and am relieved 
to find him as scattily charming as I'd always hoped he would be.

The morning after the storm hits Venice, the first of the delegates begin 
peeling away. They're abandoning this elegant ruin in favour of the bustling 
modernity ofToronto <http://www.tiff.net>, the next event on the circuit. Those 
that remain are the diehards, the lifers and the wild-eyed stragglers. They 
come shuffling up the marble stairwells in search of a masterpiece to keep them 
going. My phone is stolen in the movie village and I can't remember where I put 
my programme. I feel like some pathetic first-world version of Kurtz, gone 
upriver inHeart of Darkness, or the demented Japanese soldiers who infest 
Shinya Tsukamoto's grippingFires on the Plain. Sad to report that Tsukamoto's 
soldiers wind up eating one another. If the pizza stall closes, we may well do 
the same.

In a perfect world, this year's Golden Lion award would go to Roy Andersson's 
bizarre and bewitchingA Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MhpedyLXevo>. Don't be spooked by the title, 
Andersson's film is a hoot. It's about a pair of glum salesmen travelling to 
Gothenberg with a suitcase full of monster masks and laughter bags. But it's 
also about Sweden's 18th-century invasion of Russia, and about a 
limping barmaid who demands her payment in kisses, and about men who "walk like 
zombies", and about a bunch of commuters who can't decide whether it's Tuesday 
or Wednesday or Thursday. Andersson skirts so many human mysteries andPigeon 
plays out as a giddy metaphysical burlesque. It's simultaneously heartbreaking 
and hilarious, silly and profound. It is both the finest film I've seen at 
Venice and the perfect picture for the final days.

Outside the main theatre, the lost souls collide on the walkways and stagger 
from one door to the next. They can hardly recall what day they're in; they 
can barely remember what films they have seen. Is it Thursday or is it Tuesday? 
Soon, fingers crossed, they will all find their way back home.

Rialto bites: the best of the Venice film festival 
 Al Pacino on the red carpet with his girlfriend Lucila Sola (right) and her 
daughter Camila. Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
Best line "We just want to help people have fun," explains one of the hangdog 
peddlers inA Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence. It's a line he 
repeats as a constant refrain (demonstrating plastic Dracula fangs and mask of 
"Uncle One-Tooth" to a succession of unimpressed shopkeepers) and it becomes 
perversely more amusing each time it's said. Perhaps the organisers can adopt 
it as their official festival slogan.

Best restoration The Oscar-winning editor Thelma Schoonmaker arrived at the 
Lido to collect a lifetime achievement award and to unveil the restored version 
of 1951'sThe Tales of Hoffmann <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D9ICpehv8S0>, 
directed by Emeric Pressburger and her late husband Michael Powell. Inside the 
casino, the guests were plunged into the intoxicating, expressionistic 
microverse of Offenbach's old opera. The colours gleamed, the music crashed and 
Powell and Pressburger's antique treasure put most of its modern rivals to 
shame.

Best moment of deja vu Venice's opening film, Birdman, contained a bravura set 
piece in which Michael Keaton's unstable ageing actor accidentally locks 
himself outside the theatre and has to convince the ushers that he's actually 
needed on stage. Three days later,The Humbling 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/video/humbling-trailer-730146> opened with a 
scene in which an unstable ageing actor played by Al Pacino does the exact same 
thing. Spend too long at Venice and even the films start talking to each other.

Best stunt Lars von Trier has sworn off press conferences following his 
ill-judged joking at the 2011 Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2011/may/19/lars-von-trier-nazi-cannes>
. But he was prepared to bend the rules for Venice, appearing on a laptop 
screen and having the actor Stellan Skarsgård feed him questions from the 
audience. Skarsgård had three lifelines and Von Trier was his "phone-a-friend". 
While this was typically playful behaviour from the controversial Danish 
director, one feared he had again misjudged his audience. Most of the reporters 
in the press room appeared utterly bewildered.
 