
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> and Venus 
Williams have claimed their fourth Australian Open women's doubles title with a 
straight-sets win over the top seeds, Cara Black and Liezel Huber. The sisters, 
who were the second seeds, won 6-4, 6-3 to defend the title they won at 
Melbourne Park last year.

The win gave them their 11th grand slam doubles championship and their fourth 
at Melbourne Park - and also preserved their perfect record in grand slam 
finals.

"I guess I was really focused and my serve was really working today," Venus, 
who did not concede a single service break, told Reuters. "They played really 
like a team and were really coming into the net and just doing everything 
right. So Serena and I just had to work together."

The Williams sisters overcame a sluggish start to win a break at 3-3 in the 
first set, then sealed it on the third set point when Black netted. They then 
carried the momentum into the second, winning an early service break before 
calmly serving out the match.

Such was Venus's focus that she did not realise that the title was won. After 
breaking Huber's serve to seal the match, she was set to ready herself for the 
next game.

"I actually didn't know the score. I thought that it was 5-2. I really don't 
know how I lost track," she said. "I thought '[Serena's] really happy about 
this break! I thought, 'Wow, I've never seen her this happy. But I'll go with 
it.'"

Serena, whose legs have been heavily strapped throughout the tournament, 
appeared on court with her wrist taped, but brushed off concerns about her 
fitness ahead of her clash with Justine Henin in the singles final. "I fell the 
other day a couple times in my match, so, yeah, I'm just adding to the list," 
she said.
 