
The Spanish No14 seed, and fourth-round conquerer of Andy Murray, Fernando 
Verdascowill contest the first slam semi-final of his career after defeating 
last year's runner-up,Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in four sets. Verdasco won 7-6 (7-2), 
3-6, 6-3, 6-2 in a match that was played under the closed roof of the Rod Laver 
Arena due to the temperature outside.

Tsonga, seeded fifth this year, was unable to withstand the heat generated by 
his opponent, and faded noticeably in the latter half, having come from a set 
down to level at 1-1. The Frenchman was also guilty of making life difficult 
for himself, taking just two break points from 13 opportunities. Verdasco by 
contrast converted four from four, and was also the sharper during the 
first-set tie-break, in which he broke Tsonga twice.

After prevailing in a closely-contested third set, Verdasco eased through the 
fourth in just 30 minutes to seal victory in the pair's first-ever tour 
encounter. The Spaniard will now face his compatriot Rafael Nadal for a place 
in the final, after the world No1 defeated Gilles Simon in straight sets.

The first set began in tight fashion, both men feeling each other out. 
Tsonga's power and accuracy were in evidence, as a series of forehand winners 
forced four break points, but Verdasco's serving, so brilliant against Murray, 
kept him alive in a set that was destined for a tie-break.

It was the underdog, Verdasco, who edged in front early on, when Tsonga, 
perhaps pressing too much, hit a wild forehand into the tramlines, and Verdasco 
assumed control of the tie-break by winning both of his points on serve to go 
4-1 up.

He promptly grabbed another mini-break – a wonderful backhand passing shot 
confounding Tsonga – and an ace sealed the breaker emphatically in Verdasco's 
favour.

In the second set, Tsonga continued to press and Verdasco's repeated 
concession of break points eventually cost him, the Spaniard missing an easy 
volley at the net. Tsonga proceeded to serve out the set 6-3 and level the 
match.

Verdasco swiftly set about retrieving the matter, breaking Tsonga in the 
second game of the third set, a lovely lob clinching the game to place him in 
control. Things went from bad to worse for Tsonga, who fell 4-0 behind, yet 
that was not the end of it, as he broke back in fine style, just reaching a low 
volley, and passing Verdasco with a sharp forehand to restore a competitive 
edge to the set.

There was further drama as Verdasco successfully challenged a line call that 
had denied him the set – the point was replayed, and the Spaniard eventually 
closed out.

Having gained the upper hand, Verdasco then confidently took the game to his 
opponent in the fourth, coming into the net and forcing mistakes from Tsonga. 
After breaking twice, he served out the set to clinch his place in the 
semi-finals.
 