
Victoria’s health minister, Jill Hennessy, has praised the scrapping of an 
anti-vaccination documentary from the program of a regional film festival.

Organisers of the Castlemaine documentary film festival announced this week 
thatthe discredited documentary Vaxxed: From Cover-up to Catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/02/vaxxed-from-cover-up-to-catastrophe-review>
, would be a part of its line-up.

Life story of controversial vaccine campaigner Andrew Wakefield heading to big 
screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/28/vaccine-campaigner-andrew-wakefield-film-vaxxed-robert-de-niro>
Since then it has faced a backlash from the public, including from health 
experts who said screening the film was irresponsible and risked spreading 
false information.

In a statement the organisers said since announcing the screening: “Our 
community-based film festival has suffered a campaign of highly coordinated 
abuse and intimidation.

“It has come to the point where members of the team feel personally and 
professionally threatened,” said the organisers of the festival, which is held 
120km north-west of Melbourne.

“This is unacceptable. It is a sad reflection on the state of Australian 
democracy that legitimate questions cannot be raised in a public forum without 
inciting a campaign of ill-informed and dishonest intimidation.”

The organisers did not detail the abuse and intimidation they had received and 
said they would be making no further comment.

Makers of controversial anti-vaccination film fire back after Robert De Niro 
Tribeca snub
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/30/vaxxed-robert-de-niro-tribeca-film-festival>
However, Hennessy responded to the news on Friday by saying: “wisdom prevails”.

“Vaccinations save lives,” she said. “Stare down the myth-makers. This is good 
news. I’ll back the health of our children every time [against the] 
anti-vaccination movement.”

The documentary was made by the discredited former doctor Andrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/28/vaccine-campaigner-andrew-wakefield-film-vaxxed-robert-de-niro>
, who fraudulently claimed in a research paper that there was a link between 
autism and the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine.This claim of a link has 
since been comprehensively disproven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
.

Public health physician Dr Ken Harvey, who quit his job with La Trobe 
University in 2014 over the university’s proposed deal with vitamin giant 
Swisse Wellness, said in his experience, educating those who were firmly 
anti-vaccination was a futile endeavour.

“Many of my colleagues say, and I respect their view, say that because this 
documentary has no evidence behind it and because Wakefield has been 
discredited, it is potentially harmful to public health to screen it,” he said.

No link between MMR and autism, major study concludes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
“However, I think that if there are people who are on the fence about 
vaccination, perhaps having a healthy public debate following the screening and 
opening the floor for comments would have been useful in order for them to hear 
from those people who know vaccines save lives.”

Harvey added that he believed in free speech and did not agree with 
intimidating or threatening those with alternative views.

“However, I think sometimes the organisers of controversial screenings like 
this get apprehensive following legitimate questions around the public health 
of what they are doing, and try to paint themselves as innocent little people 
just trying to hold a film festival but forced to cancel because of us 
wretched, evil skeptics.

“No colleague of mine would resort to bullying or intimidation.”
 