
I blame the house.


Between the ages of seven and 12, I lived in an eerie, grey, mouse-infested 
hilltop house with a stern-looking stone eagle on the roof. My friends took one 
look at it, and made comments about “castles”. Guests were unnerved by the 
weird spectral moans the wind made when it blew. No wonder I developed a taste 
for the old, strange, mysterious and gothic.

My parents let me scramble up and down the huge ladder that scaled their 
towering bookshelves, and dip into their books as I pleased. I plunged into 
Victorian novels among others, and quickly took a liking to the darker and more 
subversive ones. I was fascinated by gothic tales, melodramas and detective 
stories – the books where any respectable-looking door might suddenly open onto 
a world of mystery, murder, madness and malice.

My inspiration: Jonathan Stroud on Sir Arthur Conan-Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/10/sir-arthur-conan-doyle-jonathan-stroud-sherlock-holmes>
Predictably enough, my favourite Victorian heroines were the ones who showed 
signs of brains and a spine.

Galloping through my parents’ Sherlock Holmes omnibus 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sherlock-holmes-selected-stories.html>, I 
found the short story A Scandal in Bohemia. With delighted disbelief, I watched 
the great Sherlock Holmes match wits with a cool-headed, cross-dressing 
adventuress named Irene Adler… and lose. (Holmes’s deep admiration for Irene 
Adler’s intelligence made me respect him all the more.)

Another favourite was Marian Halcombe from Wilkie Collins’ The Woman in White 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/woman-in-white-19.html>. Unlike her sweet, 
girlish and rather wet half-sister Laura Fairlie, Marian is ugly, 
strong-willed, outspoken, wickedly humorous and brave. She is also smart enough 
to give the master-criminal Count Fosco a run for his money. And finally there 
wasJane Eyre <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/jane-eyre-51.html>, frail and 
formidable amid a stormscape of dark romance and gothic peril.

Of course, since then I’ve read a lot of novels set in Victorian times, many 
of them steampunk adventures and historical fantasies with amazing heroines. 
They’re wonderfully rebellious, strong-willed, defiant and adventurous. Some of 
them disguise themselves as boys like Irene Adler, but they go much farther 
than Irene, Marian or Jane ever did. They tote pistols, or use “unladylike” 
language, or openly rebel, or overturn the very society that wants to cage them 
in a dull, submissive life.

I love these stories, and I’m very glad they exist. They’re exciting and 
empowering. The heroines say what I like to think I would have said, and do 
what I like to think I would have done, if I had been surrounded by Victorian 
prejudices and conventions.

The well-read teenager: brilliant classics for young adult readers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/mar/22/well-read-teenager-classic-books-for-teens-young-adults-twilight>
Only of course I would have done nothing of the sort. 

Looking back now, it seems obvious to us that woman and girls had brains, and 
that they should have allowed the same education, career opportunities and 
voting rights as men and boys. At the time, however, it wasn’t clear to 
everybody. People believe what they’re brought up to believe, particularly if 
everybody around them also believes it. They call it “common sense” and never 
question it.

As a woman, rebelling would have been very hard indeed. You would need a will 
like a Sherman tank. It’s hard to have faith in your own opinions, when 
everybody you respect believes something else. And even people who do believe 
in themselves can get worn down if they’re faced by endless snubs, rejection, 
ridicule and obstacles. Defying all the silly social rules might seem like fun 
if you’re only faced by a tutting maiden aunt or a red-faced fuming guardian. 
But what if scandal might break your parents’ hearts or destroy your sister’s 
chances of a good marriage? And what if everyone tells you that disobeying your 
parents or your husband is going against God?

That is why I’m still fond of Irene Adler, Marian Halcombe and Jane Eyre, even 
after all these years. They were written back when most people did think that 
women had weaker minds and characters. The authors who invented them were 
taking risks, and challenging the common ideas about women. These were 
characters that broke rules and changed minds.

When I decided to write The Lie Tree 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280959/s/the-lie-tree/>
, a gothic murder mystery set in the Victorian period, I decided to make my 
14-year-old heroine Faith an intelligent girl with an unusual upbringing. She 
has had the run of her father’s library, and even dares to dream of becoming a 
scientist like her father.

At every turn, however, she sees this dream crushed, and even her beloved 
father will not take her ambitions seriously. She is unhappy, frustrated, 
angry… and eventually rebellious. I didn’t want to make rebellion look easy, 
however. That would have been unfair to all those real women who actually had 
to struggle with prejudice back in those times. I wanted Faith to be a 
relatively believable Victorian girl, tied in knots by the conflict between her 
own instincts and everything she has been taught. She is a tangle of 
self-doubt, loyalty, guilt, frustration, and smothered rage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Ffrances-hardinge-victorian-heroines-strong-willed-empowered-rebellious%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438954080057%2Ffdcfdbc1-6722-498f-aca0-76bcbf2ffadb-1347x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Characters%20that%20broke%20rules%20and%20changed%20minds'%3A%20Frances%20Hardinge%20on%20Victorian%20rebels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Ffrances-hardinge-victorian-heroines-strong-willed-empowered-rebellious%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Characters%20that%20broke%20rules%20and%20changed%20minds%27%3A%20Frances%20Hardinge%20on%20Victorian%20rebels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Ffrances-hardinge-victorian-heroines-strong-willed-empowered-rebellious%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438954080057%2Ffdcfdbc1-6722-498f-aca0-76bcbf2ffadb-1347x2040.jpeg>
During the course of the book, Faith will erupt from her role as “good girl” 
and dutiful daughter. She will have no choice. But it will not be easy. For 
anyone.

You might not want to be standing next to her when she does.

Frances Hardinge’s The Lie Tree is available in the Guardian Bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280959/s/the-lie-tree/>
.
 