Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z1mux2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z1mux2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z1mux2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Victoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> 
probably has as many friends in Melbourne this weekend as Lance Armstrong has 
kept in the past week but she is here to win the Australian Open, not a 
popularity contest. No matter how poor were her judgment and manners in the 
semi-final against Sloane Stephens, she is in the mood to deliver. Whether her 
allegedly bruised body has healed we will discover in the final against Li Na 
on Saturday.

Azarenka is not quite as angry as she was in an interview 18 months ago when, 
responding to criticism for another act of gamesmanship, she said: "Screw them, 
I am what I am." But neither is she a shattered shell. She has survived what 
was a mugging of a kid, in the tennis sense, by stretching the rules to the 
limit with a nine-minute medical timeout after being broken when serving for 
the match. She came back apparently no longer feeling like she was "going to 
have a heart attack" because of a blocked rib. Stephens had been lulled and 
Azarenka got the win.

Trying to hustle the 19-year-old American out of her first grand slam 
semi-final might well have had its origins in genuine stress but the timing was 
nakedly opportunistic. Stephens's coach, David Nainkin, called it "cheating 
within the rules" and, "unsportsmanlike".

Azarenka has tried to clear the air but does not admit culpability. "All I can 
do is try to give my best. What I can control is come to you guys and tell my 
side of the story. I can't control what you will write or what people will 
think, because that is out of my hands.

"I'm here sitting honestly, it's what I wanted to do, to clear the air. I can 
see [it through] the public eye, I can see [it through] the journalist's eye 
but I know my own thing – that is why I'm here to explain, to drop it and to be 
open. I hope we can move on for the final.

"It's not going to cause any problems because it was not intentional. I think 
[Stephens] didn't take it personal, and that is great for her. I think she is 
terrific girl [they share the same agent]. I'm going to send a message just to 
make sure that we are OK but I know we are fine and that is it."

So that train would appear to have left town. The final, meanwhile, presents 
the defending champion (whose problematic ribs are healing, apparently) with a 
tougher and more seasoned adversary in Li, who thrilled Melbourne when she 
reached the final here two years ago to inspire hope that China would react 
deliriously to the arrival of a standard bearer with hope of winning a grand 
slam. Not quite. She broke through definitively in Paris and we await the next 
wave of players from China with keen anticipation.

Li would not be drawn into criticising Azarenka. "I'm not her," she said, "so 
I didn't know the truth. I mean, also I wasn't on the court to see, so I 
couldn't say anything."

In a quick and wholly unscientific trawl of opinion beyond the locker room, as 
the throng filled Melbourne Park on a cooler but not unpleasant day, it was 
obvious sentiment will not be with the Belarusian. Li is their darling, anyway, 
a quirky and talented individual whose tennis is grounded in hard work and 
growing belief. "Gotta be the Chinese girl, mate," said one spectator. 
"Azarenka totally got it wrong."

But she may totally get it right on the court. While she has betrayed 
vulnerability here in the past – succumbing to the heat and being carried from 
the court on a stretcher – on her day, she is capable of the most rugged and 
nagging tennis. Her strength is in her muscle but her tennis brain is acute too.

The suspicion is that the controversy has galvanised her. She holds their 
title but not – for the moment – the affection of Australians. So she must show 
them that the real Azarenka is a champion not a cheat.

She has already secured the world No1 ranking, so her self-esteem will be 
intact and victory would put her alongside Serena and Venus Williams, Maria 
Sharapova and Svetlana Kuznetsova as the only active players with two or more 
grand slam titles. Those numbers and the title matter more to her than 
opprobrium that will be forgotten soon enough.
 