Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2xox2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2xox2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2xox2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Victoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> 
appeared to suffer a panic attack trying to close out her Australian Open 
semi-final against the American teenager Sloane Stephens and the defending 
champion needed a long medical timeout before setting up a final against Li Na.

Li had earlier laid waste to the supposedly irresistible force of Maria 
Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> on a blazing hot 
day on Rod Laver Arena to reach her second Melbourne Park final.

Azarenka complained of knee and rib injuries but was clearly struggling for 
breath as she headed off court for a lengthy timeout after failing to convert 
five match points towards the end of her 6-1, 6-4 victory.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2wmx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2wmx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2wmx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"I almost did the choke of the year right now," the world No1 said at 
courtside. "At 5-3 having so many chances, couldn't close it out but I'm glad I 
could close it out. Nerves got into me for sure. It was important to overcome 
this struggle and finish this match."


Li's 6-2, 6-2 victory over the four-times grand slam winner Sharapova was more 
comprehensive and the 30-year-old Chinese sixth seed now gets a chance to add 
another to her impressive list of firsts in Saturday's final.

The Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
markets itself as the "Grand slam of the Asia-Pacific" and Li, whose first trip 
to the Melbourne Park final ended in defeat to Kim Clijsters in 2011, has a 
second chance to give the tournament its first Asian champion.

"I'm really hungry for the title," the former French Open champion said. "I 
think this time should be maybe a different story or maybe the same story. But 
I will try."

Sharapova, the second seed, had carved her way ruthlessly through the draw at 
Melbourne Park, conceding only nine games on her way to the last four.

Li, reinvigorated by Justine Henin's former coach Carlos Rodr√≠guez, has also 
been in impressive form this year and will be confident she has the measure of 
Azarenka.

Certainly in the semi-finals she showed none of the mental frailties that have 
dogged her in the past as she thrashed Sharapova, who had ridden her own fierce 
concentration through a string of one-sided affairs in the earlier rounds.

"At beginning of the match I was nervous," Li said. "I was happy to be back in 
the semis again, but for some reason I really wanted to win the match. I don't 
know what happened today. I just come to the court, feeling like: 'OK, just do 
it'."

Sharapova, who lost just as comprehensively to Azarenka in last year's final, 
was broken in her first service game and never really recovered.

"When your opponent is always up and ahead, it's always a little bit mentally 
easier for them to keep that going," Sharapova said. "If I would have taken 
those chances and clawed my way back and made it a bit tougher for her, I'm 
sure she would have thought a little bit more. But I certainly didn't make her 
think about anything."
 