Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2wmx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2wmx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z2wmx2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Victoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> will 
defend her Australian Open title against Li Na on Saturday hoping the bruises 
to her integrity have healed alongside her sore ribs after she was widely 
condemned for taking what appeared to be a dubious medical timeout in the final 
moments of her tense two-set win over the American teenager Sloane Stephens.

Coming close to tears in front of a hostile media, she vehemently denied 
gamesmanship and claimed a rib injury that had troubled her for two days flared 
in the sixth game of the second set, restricting her breathing.

After dropping serve then blowing five match points at 5-4, she rushed from 
the court to have a rib "unlocked" so she could breathe more freely and to ease 
back pain that, she said, had given her a panic attack on court.

"I had to unlock my rib, which was causing my back problem," she said. "The 
trainer said: 'We have to go off court to treat that.' I didn't really want to 
take off my dress on the court. I had been struggling a little bit throughout 
the whole match and it just kept getting worse.

"I should have called the trainer a little bit before that, when I got to the 
point that I couldn't really breathe. The timing, yeah, it was my bad. The game 
before that when I lost my service game, it kept getting worse. I thought I 
would have to play through it and keep calm. What can I do? Is it my fault the 
doctor took that long to evaluate?"

However, in the on-court television interview immediately after the match, the 
former British player Sam Smith asked her specifically why she had left the 
court and she prevaricated. With a restless crowd still buzzing about the 
incident, she said: "I had nearly the worst choke of the year." She spoke of 
"anxiety" but did not mention a sore rib or being unable to breathe.

She claimed this was the first time she had suffered such a problem and "that 
was freaking me out, that I never felt something like that before."

Agnieszka Radwanska, whom she beat in the quarter-finals here last year, 
complained after a match against her in Dubai last February that Azarenka had 
repeatedly hobbled and winced between rallies, although she recovered well 
enough to win the match.

"I was angry because I don't think this is the great image for the women's 
tennis, what was going on there," Radwanska said at the time. The Pole had also 
criticised her for grunting during theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> a month earlier.

Stephens, though, said the delay of nearly 10 minutes before she 
unsuccessfully served to stay in the match had not bothered her. "I did lose 
the next game," she said, "but I wouldn't say that's because of the medical 
timeout. I love Vika and we share the same agent. We actually are pretty good 
friends. I'm sure I'll see her and we'll talk about it. I hope she wins the 
final. It's happened before. I've had it in the last match, medical breaks, go 
to the bathroom, the whole showdown. It was just something else, but it didn't 
affect anything."

The charitable interpretation of the young player's response was that she is 
relatively new to the tour and did not want to cause a fuss. She added: 
"There's a certain thing in the locker room that tells you, like, if you take 
more than six a year or something that they'll start charging you. That's a 
good rule. But the whole time I've been on the WTA Tour I've never had a 
medical timeout, so I don't know how it feels. I don't know what they do. I 
don't even know what you say. Honestly, I don't even know how you would call 
the trainer to the court."

Azarenka said she did not think the rules about timeouts were being abused 
generally. "I'm being really honest here. When I play and somebody takes a 
medical timeout, I don't doubt them."

There was fevered discussion among commentators and journalists, and there was 
little consensus. Some point blank did not believe her, others were less sure.

"There were two ways she could respond," the former world No1 Lleyton Hewitt 
said later on the host broadcaster Channel7, "disappointment that people are 
questioning her morals, but she doesn't take a backward step on court and she 
could go out there and say: 'No, I'm going to prove you all wrong and take the 
title.'"

It was always asking a lot of Stephens to embarrass the best player in the 
world, Serena Williams, then back up in the Melbourne heat 24 hours later and 
do the same in her first (but surely not last) grand slam semi-final to the 
player officially rated No1, but now derided for gamesmanship.

At the end, Stephens, who had shown her cool in handling a similar, and 
genuine, break against Williams the day before, pushed tentatively at a 
backhand, which slid long and wide. Stephens left the scene of her greatest 
triumph – and then curious defeat – waving to an audience who celebrated her 
departure with more fondness than they afforded the winner.

Stephens played, as expected, with the fearlessness of youth, smiling through 
good patches and bad, but she struggled to recapture the killing power and 
consistency with which she had cut down the stricken Williams in three sets. 
The packed arena cheered her every winner – of which there were 14, nine on her 
devastating forehand, some of them superb, – and moaned at her 19 errors, 
forced or not.

In the earlier match, on a day when the temperature on the main court flirted 
with the "wet bulb" cancellation reading, Li Na brought Maria Sharapova's 
gilded run here to an emphatic halt, winning 6-2, 6-2 in a little over an hour 
and a half. It was the Russian's longest stint in six matches, after having 
conceded a record low nine games to put herself within one win of a rematch for 
the title with Azarenka.

It was an uneventful and disappointing conclusion to the Russian's tournament, 
after her seamless progress.
 