
Smeared in blood and loitering in a meat van, the predatory butcher played by 
Adam Levine inMaroon 5’s video for Animals was deemed so disturbing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/02/womens-group-condemns-maroon-5-stalker-fantasy-video>
 this week that the largest anti-sexual assault group in the US condemned it as 
“a dangerous depiction of a stalker’s fantasy”. Amassing 6m views in the past 
four days, the US group’s video is exactly the kind of content thatDavid 
Cameron hopes to prevent children from watching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/18/online-music-videos-age-rating-october-david-cameron>
 with a new protection scheme which comes to fruition tomorrow. As of Friday, 
videos hosted on YouTube and Vevo in the UK will come with an age rating in a 
bid to stop children witnessing the “graphic content” that often appears online.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsY3l2Alf9oo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsY3l2Alf9oo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsY3l2Alf9oo&media=>
In its purest sense, the scheme has good intentions, but realistically its 
powers may only apply to members ofWestboro Baptist Church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/24/pastor-fred-phelps-westboro-baptist-church-louis-theroux>
 and the tiny percentage of children who, when confronted with an age 
verification pop-up, would shrug resolutely and tick the correct box. In the 
same way that online pornography or violent video games continue to be consumed 
by the under-18s, it’s likely that videos deemed too offensive will, too.


Cameron and co should be prepared for a lot of work ahead, however. Ever since 
Billboard officially recognised YouTube streams in its US Charts, there has 
been an influx of artists willing to push the boundaries in the past year; 
videos such asNicki Minaj’s Anaconda 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LDZX4ooRsWs>, Miley Cyrus’s Wrecking Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/sep/10/miley-cyrus-wrecking-ball>
 andRobin Thicke’s Blurred Lines  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/13/blurred-lines-most-controversial-song-decade>
have found viral appeal because of their sexual content and, unfortunately for 
the prime minister, the draw of the forbidden has pulling power. “Take a 
massively hyped new video from one of the leading provocateur pop artists and 
slap an 18 label on it, and it is arguably only going to make it even more sexy 
and dangerous in the eyes of the young audience,” says James Lees, a Los 
Angeles-based director who has made videos for the likes of Sinéad O’Connor, 
Bloc Party and One Republic. “With the open nature of the internet it is nigh 
on impossible to prevent anyone from finding a way to watch something.”
 Miley Cyrus’s Wrecking Ball. Photograph: Google 
Nabil, a leading director whose weird and wild imagination has been put to 
good use by the likes of Kanye West, Nicki Minaj, Frank Ocean and Arctic 
Monkeys, also agrees that this new restriction may simply add to the hype 
surrounding a new video: “As with R-rated movies [certificate 18 in the UK], 
there will always be a way for anyone to see the videos, it will just make it 
harder, and maybe even more alluring for most. I’d be more worried about Fox 
News or CNN rather than an artful visual interpretation of a song.”

There will always be a way for anyone to see the videos, it will just make it 
harder, and maybe even more alluring - Nabil

As sponsors and advertisers slowly capitalise on this resurgent art form – 
recently enforced inthe wake of Universal’s deal which integrates new adverts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/30/universal-deal-adverts-mirriad-existing-music-videos>
 into existing music videos – brands are becoming more desperate to affiliate 
themselves with any artist whose video may invite young, influential eyes. “I 
envision that this will become more focused, and we will see brands gain even 
more power and control over the creative process by forcing the label to ensure 
the content adheres to certain guidelines from the censors and not jeopardise 
the brand association,” adds Lees. “We are already seeing some music videos 
basically turned into extended commercials for brands, so this would definitely 
be a worrying development for anyone interested in the artistic integrity of 
the music video form.”

 Chris Cunningham’s vision for Aphex Twin’s Windowlicker 
Throughout the history of pop music, the dangerous, debauched, often horrific 
videos have been the ones which loiter on the mind and contribute to the 
cultural landscape the most – from Chris Cunningham’s nightmarishdepictions for 
Aphex Twin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h-9UvrLyj3k>, to Madonna’s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Np_Y740aReI> exploration of BDSM, to the 
Prodigy’s gender gotcha in Smack My Bitch Up. Liz Adams, co-founder ofDe La 
Muerte Films <http://delamuertefilms.tumblr.com/> believes that clever quality 
isn’t as prevalent in many of the videos deemed controversial following the 
demise of music TV, and that quick and fleshy clickbait currently overrides 
cerebral art form. “I think there are so many gratuitous videos that use NSFW 
imagery to up their views, and I’m so tired of it,” she says.

Dan Sully, who has directed videos for Elbow, the Maccabees and Will Young, 
agrees that the increase of recent music videos that aim to maximise views by 
relying on titillation “or straight up flirting with pornography” are impacting 
on the general quality of video. He hopes that Cameron’s new scheme refines the 
current quality of music videos. “Artists are reduced to prostitution and 
pimping their wares instead of relying on the intrinsic value of the music 
itself – pandering to the eyeballs of horny teenage boys rather than people’s 
ears. If this is what happens when nothing is policed, then bring on a bit of 
policing. In light of the thudderingly dull porny music videos that emerge 
these days, it could be argued that the old-school MTV restrictions made 
directors more creative, not less, a bit like theHays code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/mar/05/features3> did for cinema.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DPF_pWIy3w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DPF_pWIy3w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DPF_pWIy3w&media=>
 The Prodigy’s Smack My Bitch Up.  