 Antonio Carluccio is best known for his chain of Italian cafes and his cookery 
books. What people generally don't know about him is that he is also a serious 
whittler. Weekends are often spent hunting for just the right hazel branch to 
carve into shape, and he thinks nothing of working for days at a time on the 
same stick. Carluccio likes a bifurcation, or forking of the branch, into which 
the thumb can settle and you can say, "This is my stick".
A branch came to me recently in a way that made me feel destined to own it. 
Walking the dog one bitter night in the mistral, this stick blew out of the 
vineyards and clattered into my ankles, alerting me to its strength, weight and 
rigidity, not to mention causing me considerable pain. It appeared to be a 
lightly carved stake of seasoned oak, crudely honed at one end, but still with 
loose bark on other parts.

What struck me about it - apart from its sides against my ankles - was its 
graceful taper and curve, like a samurai sword. The bark came off with my bare 
hands, but there were several nubs of cut branches that needed to be smoothed. 
Foolishly, I rushed into cutting them off too quickly with a small fret saw, 
too close to the main stem, resulting in permanent blighting. With whittling, 
when in doubt, wait before you cut. The French for whittling is "réduire", as 
in "J'ai réduit le baton", to which they would probably reply, "Pourquoi?"

Carluccio describes whittling as "an addiction", and the same is true for me. 
Though, granted, he does do other things as well. The dog certainly takes me 
more seriously when I'm carrying my stick which, without a bifurcation, is 
ideal for, er, swishing through the air, practising golf swings and, when 
you're sure no one is looking, re-enacting scenes from Enter The Ninjas III.
 