
Wondrously, divinely and sublimely, Stephen Green, the head of protest 
movement Christian Voice, hascomplained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jan/09/atheist-bus-campaign-asa> to the 
Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.asa.org.uk/asa/> about the atheist 
bus ads now adorning buses throughout Britain and the London Underground. His 
motivation is,as ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jan/11/broadcasting.bbc1>, perfectly 
clear. It is first to insist that God exists and that we should all do what his 
Bible tells us, and, second, to bollock into silence anyone dissenting from 
this view for their own good and everybody else's.

I don't share Green's perspective on life, or indeed death. Yet I'm glad he 
expresses it with such portentous certainty and deep devotion to 
self-publicity. As an atheist and secularist who considers the recent 
resurgence of religion-bashing to be boring, trite, self-indulgent distraction 
from more important things, I welcome Green's dramatic demonstrations of the 
difference between fundamentalist agitation and the infinitely more rich, 
varied and ambiguous relationships the vast majority of those who "do religion" 
have with whichever faith they follow.

At this time of heightened politicking by an array of Britain's religious 
leaders, Green's brand of believing is a useful reminder to the nation of why 
his like are bad news. Even Melanie Phillipsspotted 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/columnists/article-333528/Yes-defend-beliefs-But-foolish-goal.html>
 that Christian Voice made an arse of itself with its attempts to intimidate 
the BBC over its screening of Jerry Springer: The Opera. Not only did Green's 
gang come across as dangerous and deranged, it either didn't notice or didn't 
care that the show was a satire about the exploitative nature of junk 
television, rather than an attack on Christ.

The organisation did itself few favours last November either when it succeeded 
in spooking aCardiff branch of Waterstones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2008/nov/20/religion-atheism> 
into cancelling the launch of a new collection by poet Patrick Jones. I'm not 
convinced thatDarkness Is Where The Stars Are 
<http://www.cinnamonpress.com/darkness/> has much more to offer on the subject 
of religion than angry polemic, but it took a mere five minutes listening to 
Jones and Greenarguing on the radio 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/wales/7725790.stm> to confirm that the latter is an 
unreachable egomaniac.

Denouncing Jones's work as obscene and blasphemous is one thing, an opinion 
even moderate believers might share. Attacking it on the grounds that it 
rubbishes "my saviour" who is "closer to me than a brother", is something else, 
suggesting that Green's self-importance is of truly cosmic proportions.

He even accused Jones of fomenting national destruction by, Green claimed, 
advocating an open-door immigration policy. This glimpse of a more earthly 
agenda beneath the pulpit rhetoric was fleeting yet revealing, whatever your 
position on the issue in question. Those who attack religion for being a form 
of superstition that always impedes reason fail to recognise that observance 
provides a store of values or metaphors that inform the conduct of all kinds of 
political or personal struggles. These can be generous and liberal or narrow 
and fearful. Guess which category Stephen Green fits best. I'm pleased he's 
taken his fight to the ASA. It's just the latest bit of proof that he and his 
kind of Christian are one-eyed, freedom-hating absolutists who deserve our 
wholehearted ridicule.
 