
What’s the name of this show? Voltron: Legendary Defender 
<https://www.netflix.com/title/80075595>.

When does it premiere? All 13 episodes stream on Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> starting on Friday 10 June.

Isn’t Voltron an old show? Since Hollywood can no longer create original 
products, this is a remake of the most popular cartoon of 1984.

That’s the one about the giant robot, right? Yes. Just as in the original, 
five young men go to an alien planet and each pilots a different colored 
mechanical lion. Invariably, by the end of each episode, those five lions 
combine to create Voltron, an unstoppable giant robot with a sword and limbs 
made out of lions’ heads. And you wonder why this ever appealed to small boys?

Didn’t they reboot that already? There was a sequel that aired on Nicktoons 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NBr1wEL0QKE> in 2011, but it was canceled 
after one season due to poor ratings.

What happens in the first episode? In the Earth’s far future (shockingly, the 
planet has not been destroyed by climate change or a Trump presidency), four 
young cadets at a military academy go to the aid of a fellow student who was 
captured on a mission to one of Pluto’s moons.(Yes, in the future, Pluto is a 
proper planet again.) 
<http://www.universetoday.com/13573/why-pluto-is-no-longer-a-planet/> While 
there, they feel a strange energy and are drawn to the blue lion, one of the 
five animals that create Voltron. Thanks to a wormhole, they are transported to 
the planet Arus, where they awaken Princess Allura from a 10,000-year sleep. 
King Zarkon is threatening to destroy her planet if she doesn’t give him 
Voltron so that he can use the weapon to enslave the galaxy. Once on Arus, they 
have to find the other four lions and defeat Zarkon before the planet is 
destroyed by Zarkon.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNXW1waqRCb0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNXW1waqRCb0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNXW1waqRCb0&media=>
Um, that sounds pretty crazy. Dude, it’s a cartoon about robot lions that turn 
into a giant fighting machine. What were you expecting?

Who are these guys? Shiro (Josh Keaton) is the leader, who was kidnapped while 
on Pluto; Lance (Jeremy Shada who voices Finn on Adventure Time) is the cocky 
jokester; Keith (The Walking Dead’s Stephen Yeun) is the hot-headed rebel; 
Pidge (Bex Taylor-Klaus) is the kindly nerd; and Hunk (Tyler Labine) is the 
comic relief who is alternately always eating and throwing up from airsickness 
– which might be why he is always eating.

They’re all dudes? Yes. There have been some lineup changes. In the original, 
there was a pilot named Sven who was sidelined after a bad injury, and Princess 
Allura took his place piloting the blue lion. In that version, Keith was the 
leader and Shiro didn’t exist. Sorry, Shiro.

So in 20 years, they still haven’t been able to get a woman on the roster? 
We’ve come a long way, baby, but not that far. Maybe Allura is going to get to 
take over in the future, but if they were going to create a whole new 
character, there is no reason it couldn’t have been Shira, with one extra X 
chromosome.

Is it good? Yeah, it is. 

Is that your nostalgia talking? Maybe a little bit. I was a huge fan as a kid 
but don’t remember many of the particulars. I still enjoy watching the odd 
animated show that is intended for children (as opposed toThe Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>, Family Guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/family-guy> or BoJack Horseman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/03/bojack-horseman-to-avoid-another-show-about-a-white-dude-make-him-a-horse>
), and Voltron: Legendary Defender is a pretty good one. The executive 
producers, Lauren Montgomery and Joaquim Dos Santos, veterans of the truly 
excellentAvatar: The Last Airbender  
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0417299/reference>and The Legend of Korra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/23/legend-of-korra-same-sex-relationship>
, have found a way to keep the best things about the original and add a little 
bit of extra oomph for the short attention spans of the iPhone generation.

The first episode, an hour long, is action-packed and it doesn’t lag as our 
five guys go from mission to mission exploring strange worlds and discovering 
the wonders of teamwork and individuality along the way. Even the copious 
amounts of exposition inherent in setting up a whole alien world don’t seem too 
slack thanks to the jokes from Hunk and Allura’s aide Coran (Flight of the 
Conchords’Rhys Darby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/24/rhys-darby-comedy-review-flight-of-the-conchords-london>
), a bumbling, mustache-twirling caricature of a major-domo.

Only the premiere was available for review, so I’m curious to see if 
subsequent episodes will be as satisfying and how the battle against Zarkon 
will play out over time, but this is the sort of cartoon that will be engaging 
for kids and the adults forced to sit next to them while they watch it on an 
iPad.

How does the animation look? It’s the typical Japanese-style anime, with cool 
creatures, colorful surroundings and one seriously kick-ass robot. However, the 
lines around the characters are fuzzy in a way that’s hard to explain. It’s 
sort of like trying to read an eye chart 10 minutes after an Ambien kicks in. 
This makes the animation look a little bit cheap, but not as cheap as the old 
Voltron cartoons look today.

What is the worst part of the show? Just as He-Man is nothing without Skeletor 
and the Thundercats are nothing without Mumm-Ra, a cartoon of this sort is 
really dependent on having a really cool and colorful villain. As of episode 
one, Zarkon isn’t quite there yet. While there is a cameo appearance by the 
witch Haggar (Cree Summers), Zarkon’s evil son Lotor is nowhere to be found. 
These baddies are really going to have to step up their game if the show is 
going to be truly compelling.

Should I watch this show? Fans of the original will be drawn in by the clever 
update and young kids will love lasers shooting out of robotic lions’ tails. If 
you’re in either of those groups, you won’t find anything more engaging than 
Voltron, which, just like its namesake, is better than the sum of its 
considerable parts.
 