
"My first introduction to rockabilly was early Elvis, Buddy Holly, Eddie 
Cochran and Gene Vincent, then later I heard a song called Fujiyama Mama by
Wanda Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/wanda-jackson>. I just loved 
it. Later, I realised she'd toured with Elvis and did some stuff with Gene 
Vincent as well, and the puzzle fitted together.

"There's old footage on YouTube of her doing Hard-Headed Woman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pzJ3hiqsi0U> at the Town Hall Party, and it's 
fantastic. She just freaks out. It was very unusual for a woman to be letting 
it rip like that in the 50s, and also singing a lot of 'male' songs. It put a 
different take on it. Other rockabilly women like Alis Lesley dressed up like 
men, but Wanda put on an absolutely fabulous figure-hugging frock, took out a 
guitar, put on her lipstick and really rocked it. She was the only woman to do 
that at the time, and I love her for it. She must have had it hard as a woman, 
but you never hear her whingeing.

"She disappeared for a while. She got pregnant and stayed at home and looked 
after the kids, then she became a born-again Christian and would only sing 
gospel and religious stuff. Eventually she returned to rockabilly and everyone 
went mental when they heard her again. She was only recently inducted into the 
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 
<http://www.cleveland.com/rockhall/index.ssf/2009/03/rock_and_roll_hall_of_fame_ind_8.html>
 in 2009 after a lot of big celebs had been pushing for a long time. She's 
finally getting recognised now after all these years.

"I got to see her recently at the Forum in London. It was fantastic! She 
absolutely rocked it. She even did Riot in Cell Block 9, which is my favourite, 
with all that stuff about "two-gun Matilda" and "dynamite Molly". She sounded 
exactly the same. She just screamed into that microphone and I thought, 'Fair 
play to her.'

"She's definitely an inspiration. If you want to put on a frock, look fabulous 
and rock out, why not? A lot of people have said: 'You're rocking it like 
Wanda' and I think, 'Bloody hell, I am!' She's got under my skin without me 
trying to be like her.I was really chuffed when I discovered she was first 
signed to Decca, which is the label I'm on now. I used to sing Fujiyama Mama 
and Funnel of Love, but I haven't done any Wanda Jackson in ages. We'll need to 
get her back in the set. She's 100% rock'n'roll."

Key recording: Rockin' with Wanda (Collectables, 1960)
 