
Furious Al-Hilal officials claim Western Sydney Wanderers’ historic Asian 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> 
triumph is a “black spot in the history of Asian football” which raises the 
need to “ensure the absence of any effect of betting agencies” in soccer.

In a strongly-worded statement released on Monday night, the club’s board of 
directors urged Asian Football Confederation President Sheikh Salman Al Khalifa 
to “stop the blunders” and said doubts had been raised about the 
confederation’s integrity and fairness.

The Wanderers scratched their way to a controversial 0-0 draw in Riyadh on 
Sunday morning, and were crowned champions of Asia courtesy of their 1-0 
victory in Sydney a week earlier – a result that Al-Hilal said “looted the 
rights of an entire nation”.

The dramatic upset led to ugly scenes immediately after the match, with 
Al-Hilal striker Nasser Al-Shamrani appearing to headbutt and later spit on 
Wanderers defender Matthew Spiranovic.

It seems the anger has not yet subsided, with the club insisting they were 
denied six fair penalties across the two-leg final – two in the first leg at 
Parramatta, and four in Riyadh.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F04%2Fthousands-of-wanderers-fans-welcome-team-home-at-sydney-airport&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F4%2F1415059688219%2FWSW-Sydney-Airport-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Western%20Sydney%20Wanderers%20fans%20cram%20into%20airport%20to%20welcome%20home%20Asian%20champions%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F04%2Fthousands-of-wanderers-fans-welcome-team-home-at-sydney-airport>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Western%20Sydney%20Wanderers%20fans%20cram%20into%20airport%20to%20welcome%20home%20Asian%20champions%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F04%2Fthousands-of-wanderers-fans-welcome-team-home-at-sydney-airport&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F4%2F1415059688219%2FWSW-Sydney-Airport-001.jpg>
Wanderers players, who returned to a heroes’ welcome at Sydney Airport late on 
Monday night, admitted they had enjoyed the rub of the green in the second-leg 
stalemate – particularly surrounding penalty claims, involving Ante Covic and 
Anthony Golec, either side of halftime and a later claim in which Brendan 
Santalab appeared to handle the ball in the box.

All three decisions were criticised by TV commentators, but waved away by the 
Japanese referee, Yuichi Nishimura.

“Al-Hilal’s management stressed that President Sheikh Salman Al Khalifa’ 
should bear the responsibility and stop the blunders that were witnessed in the 
two matches,” the Al Hilal statement read. “[Decisions] that appeared 
suspiciously and tarnished the reputation of the AFC, which raised many 
questions about the AFC Championships and the integrity and fairness of its 
competitions, and the need to ensure the absence of any effect of betting 
offices scattered among football by assigning the competent authority in the 
Asian Confederation to start investigating seriously.”

Nishimura’s controversial World Cup performance earlier this year, in which he 
awarded a widely-criticised penalty to host nation Brazil in their opening 
match, was also referenced by Al-Hilal.

“It is surprising to appoint a referee for the second leg who was deported 
from refereeing in the last World Cup as a result of his mistakes during the 
tournament as well the end of his refereeing career at the end of this game,” 
the statement continued.

“What happened in the second leg of the AFC Champions League final is a black 
spot in the history of Asian football, and looting of the right of an entire 
people who has been waiting for happiness and enjoyment of fair competition.”
 