
It’s often said that university is as much about what you do outside of your 
degree as it is what you do for it. Maybe it’s that sort of cavalier attitude 
that leads to some of the best and worst decisions of our lives – shots from 
belly buttons and nights out you don’t remember with people you’ll never forget.

But joining societies in your free time can be as productive as studying, if 
not more so. University needn’t be a bubble, so here are some examples of 
societies that might make all the difference to your CV, your life – and even 
others’ lives.

Student politics

It may not have the best reputation, but getting involved in your student 
union can be life-changing. And your student days are a good time to get into 
the habit of holding representatives to account.

Why we all need student politics | Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/student-politics-campus-students>
The role of unions at university is mainly to give students a voice in how 
their experience is delivered, and their remit covers issues big and small: 
from the common room PS4 to organised political activism. You don’t need to 
have one eye on a green seat to be political at university; you just need to 
care about the welfare of others around you.

As Kallum Taylor, former student union president for the University of York, 
puts it: “Students are increasingly important stakeholders within their 
universities. Student activities and lobbying can make a life-changing impact 
on their campus constituents, as well as the wider local community.”

Student media

Even if Fleet Street isn’t your long-term aim, your campus rag is a great 
platform. Not satisfied with your seven hours’ contact time a week? Here’s a 
chance to explain why and say what you want done about it.

And if you do want to be a journalist, this really is the place to start. 
Pulling late nights, chasing stories and meeting deadlines – with maybe just 
enough time for a few crammed-in mouthfuls of pizza – student journalism can be 
the most fun you can possibly have at university. Especially going undercover.

Josh Boswell, a philosophy, politics and economics graduate from the 
University of York, is now a reporter for the Sunday Times. He says: “I don’t 
think I’d be where I am today if I hadn’t joined my student newspaper,Nouse 
<http://www.nouse.co.uk/>. It was there I began to learn the basics of 
journalism, sniffing out stories, and running a team of reporters when I was 
deputy editor.

“If you’ve worked on a campus paper, you will have worked into the wee hours, 
raced for deadlines and hunted desperately for news. I think media 
organisations still have a strong respect for anyone who has juggled their 
degree, like we all did, to put together a ballsy paper for their fellow 
students.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwant-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8988da227a6a9f0207ddbb47b59b64952a1ccbda%2F0_239_5256_3153%2F5256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Want%20to%20make%20a%20difference%20at%20university%3F%20Join%20the%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwant-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Want%20to%20make%20a%20difference%20at%20university%3F%20Join%20the%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwant-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8988da227a6a9f0207ddbb47b59b64952a1ccbda%2F0_239_5256_3153%2F5256.jpg>
 ‘If you’re one to shy away from rowdy activism, student-run think tanks are a 
behind-the-scenes part of politics that needs major players.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Charities and community work

What do you care about? The refugee crisis? The environment? Social mobility? 
Whatever the cause, there is an opportunity at university to raise awareness as 
well as the funds for it.

Anuradha Damale, a physics student and member of Durham University Charity 
Kommittee (Duck), describes her experiences as life-affirming. “As someone 
whose idea of charity work was limited to the odd bit of volunteering, 
university-style charity events were completely new to me,” she says. “Little 
did I know that two months in I would find myself on a highway in the middle of 
France at 2am in the rain, hoping to hitch-hike a ride to a nearby city to 
raise money for the NSPCC.

“I’ve realised that after these experiences I need to be in a career where I 
can help and communicate with people.”

Student think tanks

Bored of party politics on campus? Think about thinktanks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/16/bored-of-party-politics-on-campus-think-about-thinktanks>
If you’re one to shy away from rowdy activism, student-run think tanks are a 
behind-the-scenes part of politics that needs major players. And they’re 
growing in popularity across UK campuses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwant-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe06e8063426e7d4db75d501c748c05589eea298d%2F0_98_1504_902%2F1504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Want%20to%20make%20a%20difference%20at%20university%3F%20Join%20the%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwant-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Want%20to%20make%20a%20difference%20at%20university%3F%20Join%20the%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwant-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe06e8063426e7d4db75d501c748c05589eea298d%2F0_98_1504_902%2F1504.jpg>
 Umang Khandewal is director of policy at Cambridge University’s student-run 
think tank 
Umang Khandelwal is director for policy at the Wilberforce Society 
<http://thewilberforcesociety.co.uk/> at the University of Cambridge, which is 
the largest student think tank in the country. “What we do essentially is 
recruit students to produce research and policy papers on different topics,” 
she explains. “They’re written over a couple of months, and then we publish 
them with our society. Once the paper has been published, we then see how we 
can make and influence policy.”

Khandelwal has most recently worked on House of Lords reform 
<https://www.google.com/url?hl=en-GB&q=http://thewilberforcesociety.co.uk/reforming-the-house-of-lords-the-way-forward-2/&source=gmail&ust=1474540137459000&usg=AFQjCNGtdyH3eUkMLeyfmyKiUgeOek6loQ>
 with several other students. “We’re hoping to make a presentation to a Lords 
committee to have real-world impact by creating a dialogue between students and 
policy makers.”

Why I started an LGBT club at my all-girls school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/25/why-i-started-an-lgbt-club-at-my-all-girls-school>
The Wilberforce society – and others like it – discuss all kinds of real-world 
issues, from Brexit and the NHS to sexual assault policies and artificial 
intelligence.

“We’re a non-partisan society, so we try to keep individual political views to 
a minimum. We sometimes do have our differences in the way we approach the 
paper, so can be a difficult balance to strike. But students put it all to one 
side, and for the most part it’s worked pretty well.”

When it comes to student-run organisations like these, there’s no such thing 
as ideas above your station: it’s your future you’re talking about after all.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.



 