
Most year 7 boys weren’t sure about attending the fashion show put on by 
Plymouth College of Art students in their school last summer. But after 
experiencing the pulsing music, extraordinary outfits and sheer theatre of the 
event, they changed their minds, says Andrew Brewerton, principal of the 
college.

“Suddenly, they were in this environment they would only have seen in pop 
videos or in snatches on TV,” he says. “And it’s not a threat to their identity 
any more, it’s really exciting.” As for the year 1s, they could hardly be 
restrained from getting up on the catwalk themselves.

Brewerton says the event was one of many ways the college has enriched the 
experience of pupils at Plymouth School of CreativeArts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/arts>. The college set up the free 
school for children aged four to 16 in 2013 with the aim of establishing “a 
progressive continuum of creative learning and practice from age four to 
master’s level study and beyond”.

David Cameron: Tories would open 500 new free schools if we win election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/09/david-cameron-tories-would-open-500-new-free-schools-if-we-win-election>
Interest in the model has already come from France, China, South Korea and 
America – links that Brewerton, aware his students will be graduating into a 
global employment market, is keen to exploit. He acknowledges that deciding to 
set up a free school was risky, but argues that, as an endangered species, art 
and design colleges have to seize all opportunities. “The biggest risk was not 
to take the risk.”

Around half of England’s higher education institutions have some kind of 
sponsorship arrangement with schools, mainly backing academies or university 
technical colleges, but so far there have been only around 10 university free 
schools. These range from specialist maths sixth forms set up by the University 
of Exeter and Kings College London, to a primary school and planned sixth form 
set up by the Liverpool Institute of Performing Arts. Birmingham and Cambridge 
universities have set up secondary and primary schools respectively, while the 
latest tranche of free schools announced in January included a proposal by the 
University of Brighton to open a secondary school run by the University of 
BrightonAcademies <https://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> Trust, 
which already runs an infant school.

The government wants to see many more. The Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills pushed the idea in its recent grant letter to the Higher Education 
Funding Council for England, arguing that university-run free schools could 
help widen participation, as well as supporting the government’s free schools 
policy. David Cameron has pledged to open500 more free schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/09/david-cameron-tories-would-open-500-new-free-schools-if-we-win-election>
 in the current parliament. Hefce will publish a guide on the subject in May.

Nick Timothy, director of the New Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Network, which supports free 
schools, says: “When criticised about fair access for students from poorer 
backgrounds, universities reasonably say the problem is caused by inequality in 
the school system. By setting up free schools, universities can help to improve 
the quality of schools in England and improve access to higher education for 
disadvantaged students.”

But Nadia Edmond, principal lecturer in the school of education at the 
University of Brighton, who has researched different university-school 
interactions, says these exclusive relationships can be damaging. “They talk a 
lot about partnership with the community but it’s undermining those 
partnerships because it is privileging particular relationships with particular 
schools and not others,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fwanted-universities-sponsor-free-schools-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49ad6c36c5100582b8d49db3c247fdad0cb1ef7a%2F0_266_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wanted%3A%20more%20universities%20to%20sponsor%20free%20schools%20in%20England%20%7C%20Harriet%20Swain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fwanted-universities-sponsor-free-schools-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wanted%3A%20more%20universities%20to%20sponsor%20free%20schools%20in%20England%20%7C%20Harriet%20Swain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fwanted-universities-sponsor-free-schools-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49ad6c36c5100582b8d49db3c247fdad0cb1ef7a%2F0_266_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 David Eastwood, vice‑chancellor of Birmingham ­University, says sponsoring a 
free school is part of a ‘civic duty’. Photograph: Sam Frost 
She argues that it is all part of higher education institutions becoming 
transformed into businesses and looking for marketing and revenue-generating 
opportunities that stretch beyond their core activities of teaching and 
research.

Howard Stevenson, professor of educational leadership and policy studies at 
the University of Nottingham, which set up a free school in 2014, says 
universities have long been involved in successful projects in schools to 
promote widening participation, many of which have suffered cutbacks because of 
government policy.

He questions to what extent people who run a good university might be able to 
run a local school and whether sponsored schools become a distraction from a 
university’s core purpose.

“I see this as part of an increasingly incoherent school system which is 
leading inexorably to a marketised and privatised system,” he says. “It signals 
the determination of the government to proceed with an agenda despite the fact 
that there is very little evidence to support any significant benefits.”

There is no guarantee that involvement with a university guarantees success. 
UCL academy school in Camden, the first school in the country to have a 
university – University College London – as sole sponsor, was told by Ofsted it
required improvement 
<http://www.camdennewjournal.com/news/2014/jun/ofsted-rules-ucl-academy-requires-improvement>
. Thomas Ferens academy in Hull went intospecial measures 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/Hull-s-Thomas-Ferens-Academy-special-measures/story-22908916-detail/story.html>
 in 2014, two years after opening with sponsorship from the University of Hull. 
It has been taken over by a neighbouring school and renamed.

But David Eastwood, vice-chancellor of Birmingham University, which opened a 
secondary school last September, insists the potential benefits of university 
free schools are huge. Indeed, the university will consider over the next year 
whether to open another school or university technical college.

Its decision to open a school, he says, was part of a commitment to improving 
opportunities for local children. “We saw it as a beacon for training 
outstanding teachers who would work for schools in the city and in the region … 
and an opportunity to place emphasis on character education,” he says.

Sponsoring a school with an admissions system that ensures it is genuinely 
comprehensive but which pursues an academically challenging curriculum is also 
seen as playing an important part in the university’s widening participation 
agenda. “Of course, some of those students will come through to the University 
of Birmingham,” says Eastwood. “But it’s not there as a recruitment initiative, 
it’s part of our civic duty.”

This was also what prompted Kings College London’s Mathematics school, 
according to its head, Dan Abramson. He says opening a free school was “an 
enormous challenge” but also rewarding, and the school benefited from the link 
with the university: 97% of its first cohort achieved an A in AS maths.

Eastwood agrees that opening these schools is not easy – demanding 
considerable resources, a dedicated project team and careful consideration of 
how it will fit into the broader ecosystem of its locality.

Chris Millward, Hefce’s director of policy, says that for universities “there 
is a real issue of management stretch – getting into an area of business that 
is not traditionally theirs”. There is also the potential risk to a 
university’s reputation of becoming associated with an underperforming school.

Such are the stresses involved that delegates to a Hefce event held last year 
to share experiences of university-school relationships described it as a 
“therapy session”. Yet, Millward says, none regretted their relationships. He 
expects more to follow, including more free schools if existing models prove to 
be a success, something he says is still too early to measure.

Brewerton says one challenge is being involved in a government policy that is 
so controversial. When other art colleges learned of Plymouth’s plans, he says, 
some opposed the idea merely on the grounds that it was a free school.

He argues that if instead of 35 faith groups setting up free schools, 35 art 
schools had followed the Plymouth model, there would now be a national network 
of schools pursuing creative education.
 