
A successful artistic director of a large producing house once said to me: “I 
have five people I go to when I need to find out who the next hot young talent 
is that I should be developing.” I asked who those five people were. He named 
five white men who were all as successful as him, based in London and operating 
in what one might call a theatre bubble.


The recent debates about the lack of development opportunities for actors from 
non-traditional backgrounds seem to miss the crucial issue that if we keep 
having the same conversations about developing talent with the same people, 
then we’ll keep throwing up the same kind of artists and they will, on the 
whole, reflect ourselves. The old adage “if you want a different answer, ask a 
different question” seems it should also be accompanied with “and ask a 
different person”.


A Nation's Theatre: explore the UK's dramatic landscape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/24/a-nations-theatre-battersea-arts-centre-bac>
It confuses me when artistic leaders talk about spotting the hottest new 
talent from a scratch night at a hip venue or in Edinburgh, but they don’t go 
to their own youth theatre or local amateur companies to see where the new 
talent is. We need to make more connections with this local environment in 
order to develop and diversify the sorts of artists who make work for our 
stages. Artistic directors should not just be attending the youth theatre or 
community work but also collaborating with others, such as outreach directors, 
to develop that talent on our doorsteps.


At Derby theatre, where I am artistic director, we’ve approached it another 
way too through our Brian Weaver fellowship – an apprenticeship for actors from 
Derbyshire who either haven’t had the chance to train formally, perhaps due to 
socio-economic reasons, or who have trained but then not had the opportunity to 
take on that unpaid fringe work. Our first recipient,Adam Horvath 
<http://www.derbyshirelife.co.uk/people/rising_derbyshire_actor_adam_horvath_1_3866305>
, was a leading light in the amateur community but drama school didn’t work out 
for him. He was holding down some part-time jobs and trying to break into the 
business the old-fashioned way – sending hundreds of letters to directors who 
were too overstretched to respond or take a risk on an unknown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fwant-to-develop-and-diversify-artists-start-on-your-doorstep%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435756502970%2F55adb603-e693-426b-826b-d459d35aa49b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Want%20to%20develop%20and%20diversify%20artists%3F%20Start%20on%20your%20doorstep&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fwant-to-develop-and-diversify-artists-start-on-your-doorstep%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Want%20to%20develop%20and%20diversify%20artists%3F%20Start%20on%20your%20doorstep&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fwant-to-develop-and-diversify-artists-start-on-your-doorstep%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435756502970%2F55adb603-e693-426b-826b-d459d35aa49b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Derby theatre’s production of Kes, which included a company of actors from the 
region. Photograph: Robert Day 
Our fellowship gave him two equity contracts with Derby theatre, allowed him 
to engage in training and development with us and has now resulted in him 
forging his own professional career – securing a contract withNottingham 
Playhouse <http://www.nottinghamplayhouse.co.uk/> and a return contract with 
us. And yes, he brings with him that audience from the community who know him 
as a local boy. But this is just one annual contract – I know we need to get 
better at opening up other pathways too and we need to tackle head-on 
increasing the diversity of both artists and audiences. I’m interested in the 
workArts Emergency <http://www.arts-emergency.org/> are doing in this area and 
I know we must engage in this debate.

It used to be that artist development and audience development sat on two very 
different sides of a theatre’s business plan – the latter sat squarely under 
the remit of marketing, while the former was strictly the artistic director or 
associate’s domain. It’s now time to see the link between the two. Certainly at 
Derby we’ve witnessed an increase in audience numbers for studio-based, more 
contemporary work as we’ve engaged more with a greater diversity of artists. As 
the city’s producing house, we have a responsibility to support small-scale 
companies and independent artists, as well as those who will one day appear on 
our main stage. We want, and need, a thriving artistic ecology. To nurture 
that, we offer residencies, scratch nights, masterclasses and business support 
– whatever is needed. In turn, these artists bring with them a network of 
people ready to be introduced to us.

Our more mainstream programme is benefiting too, as artists seek to understand 
the wider landscape of what we offer. They now see us as relevant to their 
surroundings and want to hear what we have to say through our larger scale 
projects too. So artist development becomes audience development.


The most burning issue for us all right now, as Darren Henleyput it in his 
first speech as Arts Council England’’s chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/28/arts-council-england-increase-ratio-funding-outside-london-darren-henley>
, is that “creative talent is everywhere but opportunity is not”. I’d like a 
conversation about this where those working in our outreach teams are joined by 
our artistic directors, our creative producers , our programmers, our marketing 
directors and our artists, and all are listened to on an equal platform. It’s 
time to step out of our silos and look to our own communities for the answers.


 * Join Sarah Brigham and Lyn Gardner at Derby theatre for a Nation’s Theatre 
event on Friday 24 July entitled Developing Artists and Audiences: Are We 
Getting It Right? 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/a-nations-theatre-developing-artists-and-audiences-are-we-getting-it-right-17427035733>
Tickets cost £3.
 