
Ithaca, New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, is home to 
lot of academics. Education is the bedrock of Ithaca’s economy, with two major 
universities operating in the town of 30,000. It has kept the unemployment rate 
low and made Ithaca wealthy for the region.


What Ithaca is also home to is a lot of drug users. Like much of the country, 
the city is suffering from aheroin epidemic 
<http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/pdf/2015-07-vitalsigns.pdf>. Overdoses from 
heroin across the regionhave quadrupled 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/07/health/heroin-deaths-quadruple/> in the past 10 
years, mirroring data across the country. You can easily buy heroin from men 
selling it in the streets or in bars. There are needles clustered in empty lots 
and there are corners where women sell sex for drugs.

The two facts, taken together, lend themselves to progressive drug policies. 
Like many university towns, Ithaca is politically liberal, offering an array of 
programs focused on drug prevention, as well as treatment and harm reduction. 
This includes rehabs, health clinics, a well-maintained homeless shelter, daily 
free meals, and a clean needle program.

Still, heroin use in Ithaca keeps growing, users keep getting thrown in jail, 
and people keep dying from overdoses.

Frustrated, Mayor Svante Myrick recently announced the Ithaca Plan 
<http://cityofithaca.org/DocumentCenter/View/4224>, a more progressive proposal 
that addresses illegal drugs as a public health problem rather than a crime, 
and focuses on treatment rather than incarceration.

Central to the plan is a program to funnel people caught for certain petty 
offences, including low-level drug possession and sales, directly to social 
services by passing the usual sequence of arrests, courts, jails. It’s a 
program started in Seattle that has so far been successful.

Spurred by three deaths 
<http://www.ithacajournal.com/story/news/public-safety/2014/11/04/ithaca-fatal-drug-overdoses/18462107/>
 from overdoses in one week last year, it also calls for a greater effort at 
harm reduction by proposing a supervised injection facility – or bluntly, a 
place where users can shoot up in front of a nurse and not be arrested. These 
facilities exist in other countries and have decreased deaths from overdoses, 
but are not legal in the US.

Harm reduction is always controversial and easily attacked by those who see 
addiction as a weakness. In the 1980s, the policy of giving out free needles 
needed to overcome intense opposition, despite the rapid increase in HIV. This 
part of the plan is facing similar pushback, including from Ithaca’s police 
chief, John Barber, who when asked, wrote to me: “I firmly support the 
exploration of a Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion (Lead) program for Ithaca, 
but I am wary of supervised injection sites. As police chief, I took an oath to 
uphold the law and will not condone the illegal use of heroin, supervised or 
not.”

For Myrick, the plan, all of it – including a safe injection site – is not 
just about good public policy, but it is also personal. The mayor is the child 
of an addict who kept going on and off drugs and eventually abandoned the 
family.

Like many children of addicts, he talks about his past with a studied 
detachment, not because it isn’t emotional for him, but probably because it has 
once been too emotional for him. When I ask him where his father is now, he 
answers quizzically, as if reminding himself, “I don’t know. I mean, could be 
in rehab, or could be out. I don’t know.”

His embrace of harm reduction, including allowing a government-sponsored 
shooting gallery, is a result of that past, shaping how he views addiction. 
“When you’re a child that close to addiction, you can’t be unrealistic about 
it. I mean, when your father loses his job and you ask why? Drugs. When your 
father passes on buying food and you ask why? Drugs. That isn’t rational, not 
even to a five-year-old, and so you learn something isn’t right.Drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> isn’t a crime, it is a disease.”

Once you see addiction as something more than a failing, it demands harm 
reduction, but also raises the question, what can we do to stop the epidemic? 
For Myrick and many others, it means trying to address the root causes that are 
social and economic: “What we see is lot of people locked out of the economic 
mainstream. We see mental illness, anxiety, boredom, alienation and isolation. 
Drugs are a coping mechanism for that, and we need to find other ways to help 
people cope.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4748d96fe205b3d3e16cd28ae964a60b36693bc%2F0_367_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20against%20harm%3A%20Ithaca's%20mayor%20is%20leading%20the%20charge%20against%20the%20heroin%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20against%20harm%3A%20Ithaca%27s%20mayor%20is%20leading%20the%20charge%20against%20the%20heroin%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4748d96fe205b3d3e16cd28ae964a60b36693bc%2F0_367_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Jodi. Photograph: Chris Arnade for The Guardian 
Jodi and John are a lot like many of those using heroin in Ithaca, and across 
the country.They are young, white and poor 
<http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/pdf/2015-07-vitalsigns.pdf>, and without any 
college education. Jodi is 19, and grew up in a small town 40 miles from 
Ithaca. She came to Ithaca because there was nothing for her in the town of 
5,000: “Ithaca is where everything is – restaurants, bars, live music – and you 
don’t need a car.”

She was quickly surrounded by heroin. “I resisted at first, but then I did a 
friend a favor, and they paid me in drugs, and well, I liked the feeling. Then 
I got a habit, and I needed more to stop being sick.” She eventually was 
shooting 12 bags a day, earning money by panhandling. Now she is three weeks 
clean, but she admits she will probably start again.

She met John, 27, soon after arriving. He also came to Ithaca from a nearby 
small town. “There was nothing going on in my town, no jobs, no excitement, and 
Ithaca had both.” He started using as a substitute for a prescribed pain 
medication. “It was cheaper to buy heroin on the streets than try and get a new 
prescription.”

Boredom was also as a reason for him using, although he mentions family 
history as explanation: “My dad was a trucker, was gone all the time, really 
had no father figure I guess. Without any real reason to stay around back home 
I came here, and everyone uses here except the college kids.”


Neither of Jodi or John’s families had much money, bouncing between poverty 
and lower middle class, depending on how the economy was doing.


There are college kids using heroin, and some using a lot 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/01/21/heroin-addiction-sent-me-to-prison-white-privilege-got-me-out-and-to-the-ivy-league/>
, but Ithaca is largely divided into a college scene and a local scene, and the 
heroin is mostly part of the local scene. Like John and Jodi, many of locals 
came to Ithaca for the social life around the college – the night life, the 
concerts, the excitement – but don’t have the background to attend one of the 
schools, get a job, or fit in with the students. Jodi explained: “The college 
kids are cool, sometimes they smoke weed with us, but nobody really hangs with 
them. They’re kind of snobby.”

How to address the root causes of people like Jodi and John isn’t directly 
clear. Neither claims to have suffered undue trauma as a child; rather they, 
like many others I have spoken to across the country, talk about boredom and 
feeling left behind.

Still addiction isn’t always about the large traumas, the violent child abuse 
I see in the Bronx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/25/by-understanding-why-people-use-drugs-i-now-know-why-i-dont-use-them>
 and other places. Poverty, and the hardships it brings, is itself a trauma. As 
is feeling left behind. As more emphasis is based on success through education, 
people who struggle with school are being left behind. It has created a society 
where we sort, economically and socially, by the number of degrees someone has.


Moving between the two worlds is possible, in both directions. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce38ea9073e59e4eef6dbd4f874bd3c79e72d89%2F0_374_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20against%20harm%3A%20Ithaca's%20mayor%20is%20leading%20the%20charge%20against%20the%20heroin%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20against%20harm%3A%20Ithaca%27s%20mayor%20is%20leading%20the%20charge%20against%20the%20heroin%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce38ea9073e59e4eef6dbd4f874bd3c79e72d89%2F0_374_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 James, left, and a friend. Photograph: Chris Arnade for The Guardian 
James, 25, was supposed to go to college. His dad was a professor and James 
had it good. “I went to an all-white upper class school and I was straight as 
an arrow, but my friends wanted me to show them the ‘ghetto’. They figured 
since I was black I would know. So, I tried to show them around and ended up 
getting caught up in the bad side of things. Then my father died, and the 
people I used drugs with replaced my family, and my other friends turned from 
me.”

The mayor also moved between the two worlds, but in the other direction. He 
grew up poor in a very small town, and came to Ithaca to attend Cornell. When I 
asked him if he was running from drugs, he laughed: “Not to the degree I should 
have. I never abstained until late in college, when I started getting lots of 
responsibilities, and smoking and drinking just got in the way of them.”


That is perhaps another reason his plan emphasizes root causes, rather than 
incrimination. He knows, from his own life, that where you start out matters 
but is a hurdle that can be overcome with the right policies.


Targeting root causes of addiction can only go so far. No matter how “fair” 
our society is, there will be people who will use drugs. For these people, harm 
reduction is necessary to save lives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aee66d8bf8b8882cd0d1bcf17076424b869ccf8%2F0_0_7195_4852%2F7195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20against%20harm%3A%20Ithaca's%20mayor%20is%20leading%20the%20charge%20against%20the%20heroin%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20against%20harm%3A%20Ithaca%27s%20mayor%20is%20leading%20the%20charge%20against%20the%20heroin%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fheroin-epidemic-ithaca-new-york-mayor-svante-myrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aee66d8bf8b8882cd0d1bcf17076424b869ccf8%2F0_0_7195_4852%2F7195.jpg>
 Michele. Photograph: Chris Arnade for The Guardian 
On my last day in Ithaca I ate at a small restaurant filled with college 
students and professors. As I left I noticed three people standing in an empty 
lot, arguing. Adjacent to the lot was a house where people shot up, and across 
the street was a nonprofit that offered free needles.


They had been walking to the house to shoot up but had stopped to fight. 
Michele , 38, was crying, claiming one of the men had just slugged her. She had 
come to Ithaca 15 years before and has been using heroin almost all of her 
life. “I started when I was young, real young.”

They were fighting over who would get the extra bag of heroin; they heard a 
rumor someone had recently overdosed on the batch and were excited to try it. 
It is one of the warped realities of addiction that a batch of heroin linked to 
an overdose is sought after, because it means it is “really good shit for the 
money”.

Without the supervised injection site, Michele and her friends will get their 
free needles on one side of the street, walk across the lot and shoot up in an 
abandoned house, or a locked store bathroom on the other side of the street.

And if the heroin is “really good shit”, too good, they will overdose. If they 
are lucky, one of their friends will have someNarcan 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naloxone> to spray in their nose to save them. 

If they are not lucky, they will die.

 