
Julian Assange's remarkable service to truth, transparency and democracy are 
appreciated on the ground in Afghanistan. Yet there was little in theWikiLeaks 
revelations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/afghanistan-the-war-logs> 
that came as a surprise to Afghans and the local media mostly refrained from 
commenting, limiting their effort to reporting news of the publication of 
secret files.

Only a few papers tried to take a clear stance in reaction to the story. This 
silence could be interpreted in different ways. Given that theWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> revelations primarily compromise 
Afghanistan's key ally in Washington by showing that the US army has little 
regard for civilian casualties, the papers might have feared backlash by the 
Kabul administration and hence refrained from comment to avoid confrontation. 
Alternatively, the silence might have a mundane explanation: nothing in the 
published secret files was news to Afghans.

If anything, the WikiLeaks files substantiated Afghan authorities' 
much-repeated concern that the neighbouring states played a key role in 
systematically undermining Nato's efforts inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

In the words of presidential spokesman Wahid Omer, "the sheer number of the 
reports might be surprising, but not so their content". Thespokesman added 
<http://da.azadiradio.org/content/article/2110528.html>: "There are two issues 
that appear repeatedly in the secret files and that are a matter of concern to 
us: the issue of civilian casualties and the role of the Pakistani intelligence 
ISI in actively undermining stability in Afghanistan."

Echoing his words, the pro-government Hewad daily 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/persian/afghanistan/2010/07/100727_k02-kabul-press.shtml> 
said the WikiLeaks revelations substantiated the Afghan authorities' views that 
the root-causes of terrorism were not Afghan, but lay elsewhere, outside of the 
country. The paper added that the reports prove President Hamid Karzai right 
that little has been done to protect Afghan civilians' lives and property.

Among the few papers that commented was the independent daily Hasht-e Sobh. In 
an editorial entitled "The secrets that were not so secret after all", the 
paper said: "Despite much international uproar, hype and fuss, there is hardly 
anything in the reports that we have not yet known about." Islamabad's active 
and determined support for the Taliban and other terrorist groups that create 
horrific violence in Afghanistan; the fact that the Taliban have now gained 
access to advanced weaponry or that the ISI staff attend terrorists' meetings 
and provide them with logistic, financial and moral support are issues that 
ordinary people and Afghan authorities have long suspected and known about it. 
In the words of Hasht-e Sobh: "If anything, Pakistani authorities have hardly 
tried to conceal all this."

For Afghans, the more pertinent question that arises from the WikiLeaks 
revelations is the degree in which Kabul's international allies have been aware 
of Pakistan's involvement in actively undermining Nato's success in 
Afghanistan. Hasht-e Sobh was sceptical about Washington's innocence: "To 
assume that by carrying out such secret activities Pakistan has been trying to 
fool Washington is naive if not downright silly."

But what about the rest of the Nato countries whose troops are currently based 
in Afghanistan?In the words 
<http://www.8am.af/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=13482:1389-05-04-17-29-42&catid=90:1387-08-17-17-39-04&Itemid=489>
 of Hasht-e Sobh: "Bearing in mind that throughout the many years of the jihad 
against the Soviets the international community has been working together and 
sharing intelligence, and the fact that they had chosen Pakistan to act on 
their behalf and fight the Soviets on the ground in Afghanistan, we find it 
hard to believe that the revelations have taken them fully by surprise."

Like Hasht-e Sobh, the Afghan daily, Khedmatgar, suspected that contrary to 
all appearances, the publishing of the secret files was in fact approved by 
Washington and represented an attempt to pressurise Islamabad, forcing it to 
cut ties to terrorist groups. The paper said that prior to the WikiLeaks 
revelations, US secretary of state Hillary Clinton had publicly announced that 
the leaders of al-Qaida and the Haqqani network were hiding in Pakistan.The 
paper insinuated 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/persian/afghanistan/2010/07/100727_k02-kabul-press.shtml> 
that such announcements were a preparation for the subsequent WikiLeaks 
revelations. In other words, Washington's public denunciation of WikiLeaks was 
only a cover for a US publicity campaign to morally undermine Pakistan, forcing 
it to come clean about its game of double standards.

Given that of late the Afghan government and the Afghan people in general have 
been held singularly responsible for the failure of democracy in Afghanistan, 
the WikiLeaks reports are both a source of concern and relief for most Afghans. 
Concern because the reports show that the outcome of the war is likely to be 
shaped largely by hostile regional powers with little interest in a stable 
Afghanistan supported by the international community. Relief because the 
reports show evidently that the idea it is the Afghans' warrior-like nature and 
their culture of extremism that is solely responsible for the violence doesn't 
stand scrutiny.

Such cultural-relativism theories were increasingly gaining ground, 
particularly in leftwing and liberal press in the US and European countries. 
But as WikiLeaks reports show, the truth is that though Afghan corruption is 
certainly undermining stability, the financial and logistical support that has 
led to the killing of foreign troops and disillusionment of the public in the 
west comes from states who have strategic reasons for turning Nato's mission in 
Afghanistan into a failure. In other words, even though Afghans play a role in 
their own misery, the active support for the war comes from elsewhere.

Perhaps the most important aspect of the WikiLeaks revelations is that they 
show the Afghan conflict is still international in character and the success or 
failure of Nato's mission is likely to be determined by powers that operate 
outside of Kabul. Afghanistan has always paid a high price for its strategic 
geo-political position, and this, too, is old news to Afghans.
 