
One of my all-time favourite works of political art is a demonic photograph of 
Richard Nixon, made byAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> in 1972. Nixon, who was 
running against the Democrat George McGovern, has been turned a sickly shade of 
blueish green, made worse by a background of lurid orange. Scrawled underneath, 
in capitals, is the message: “Vote McGovern.”

I think of this wonderfully understated – and prophetic – piece of propaganda 
whenever I seeDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. 
The seemingly inevitable prospect of Trump becoming the Republican candidate is 
terrifying. But it does at least offer the prospect of some angry, hard-hitting 
art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9002bdc88f0ddb3d9e16616e23cf834d782290c%2F0_0_4717_4714%2F4717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warhol%20demonised%20Nixon.%20Heartfield%20took%20on%20Hitler.%20Where%20is%20Trump's%20artistic%20mauling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warhol%20demonised%20Nixon.%20Heartfield%20took%20on%20Hitler.%20Where%20is%20Trump%27s%20artistic%20mauling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9002bdc88f0ddb3d9e16616e23cf834d782290c%2F0_0_4717_4714%2F4717.jpg>
 Vote McGovern by Andy Warhol (1972) Photograph: Christie's Images/Corbis 
Politics has been the stuff of visual satire ever since William Hogarth 
painted his 1754 masterpieceAn Election Entertainment 
<http://www.historytoday.com/peter-quennell/hogarth%E2%80%99s-election-series>, 
showing a riotous Whig banquet where all manner of horrors are unfolding. 
Shepard Fairey’s famousHope poster 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barack_Obama_%22Hope%22_poster> of 2008, which 
captured the excitement of Barack Obama’s candidacy, is all well and good – but 
the best political art (like, some would argue, the most powerful political 
campaigns) is never positive. It is resoundingly, unashamedly negative.

Surely liberal and leftwing artists won’t be able to resist pointing out the 
monsterish qualities of Trump? We have, after all, already had the appearance of
HP Lovecraft’s terrifying monster Cthulhu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/01/could-cthulhu-trump-other-super-tuesday-contenders-hp-lovecraft>
, who is apparently running for office, in a pulp-horror parody of America’s 
nightmare scenario.

Will others now follow? I am not sure Jeff Koons has ever expressed a 
political opinion but – with his German ancestry, orange face and super-kitsch 
hair – Trump would make a wonderful model for the Bavarian woodcarvers Koons 
has often employed. In fact, if he chose Trump as the subject of one of his
polychrome statues 
<http://whitney.org/Exhibitions/JeffKoons?&artwork_id=652&filter_id=6>, the 
result would make a fine decoration for Democrat rallies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61bf24ed3f405dd62bcd24f54b5f3782f47e9ab4%2F0_0_5921_4722%2F5921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warhol%20demonised%20Nixon.%20Heartfield%20took%20on%20Hitler.%20Where%20is%20Trump's%20artistic%20mauling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warhol%20demonised%20Nixon.%20Heartfield%20took%20on%20Hitler.%20Where%20is%20Trump%27s%20artistic%20mauling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61bf24ed3f405dd62bcd24f54b5f3782f47e9ab4%2F0_0_5921_4722%2F5921.jpg>
 An Election Entertainment by William Hogarth (1754). Photograph: Lordprice 
Collection/Alamy 
Perhaps Chuck Close <http://www.pacegallery.com/artists/80/chuck-close> could 
do one of his colossal closeup paintings of Trump’s face, as a Democrat poster. 
The sheer strangeness of Trump practically makes him a living work of art. What 
about some slowed-down videos of him ranting? Some photocollages touching on 
his surreal life and opinions – there’s so much material.

In Weimar Germany, the great dada satirist John Heartfield 
<http://www.johnheartfield.com/John-Heartfield-Exhibition/john-heartfield-art> 
used photomontages to denounce Adolf Hitler. If Trump’s assault on democracy is 
as dangerous as it seems – talking about refusing Muslims entry to the US, 
failing to distance himselffrom the Ku Klux Klan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
 – then America needs a Heartfield and quick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8d421f70620e36be2af68307fd9925e60649f7%2F0_0_2598_3624%2F2598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warhol%20demonised%20Nixon.%20Heartfield%20took%20on%20Hitler.%20Where%20is%20Trump's%20artistic%20mauling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warhol%20demonised%20Nixon.%20Heartfield%20took%20on%20Hitler.%20Where%20is%20Trump%27s%20artistic%20mauling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-where-is-political-art-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8d421f70620e36be2af68307fd9925e60649f7%2F0_0_2598_3624%2F2598.jpg>
 ‘Have no fear, he’s a vegetarian’ ... photomontage by John Heartfield, 1936. 
Photograph: Photo 12/UIG via Getty Images 
Or does it? There is just one problem with Warhol’s mockery of Nixon and 
Heartfield’s visceral images of Hitler. Neither made much impact. Nixon got 
re-elected in 1972 and it would take a lot more than photomontage to stop the 
Nazis. Warhol’s Vote McGovern poster has an added pertinence in this US 
election year. We all remember Nixon – but who was McGovern?

He was the Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/super-tuesday-results-bernie-sanders-campaign>
 of the 1970s, a radical candidate supported by enthusiastic students and young 
idealists. It was easy for Nixon to defeat a candidate seen as way to the left, 
however many artists rallied to support his opponent.

Art does not win elections. Candidates do. That Hope poster was only effective 
becauseObama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> was such a 
great candidate. So if Trump is to be stopped, this is no time to mourn for the 
utopian Sanders. If I were an artist, I would not be satirising Trump just yet. 
I would be making a poster ofHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>. And the message? Last 
best hope.
 