
An unpatched security flaw in Adobe Flash, discovered then kept secret by 
Italian cyber-surveillance firmHacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/hacking> Team, is now being used by 
malware developers to hack victims’ computers following the leak of over 400GB 
of data from the company’s servers.

Adobe, which says 
<https://helpx.adobe.com/security/products/flash-player/apsa15-03.html> it 
expects to publish a patch for the vulnerability at some point on Wednesday, 
warns that “successful exploitation could cause a crash and potentially allow 
an attacker to take control of the affected system”.

Symantec warned on Tuesday that “it can be expected that groups of attackers 
will rush to incorporate it into exploit kits before a patch is published by 
Adobe”. And, sure enough,it appears 
<http://malware.dontneedcoffee.com/2015/07/hackingteam-flash-0d-cve-2015-xxxx-and.html?view=classic>
 that virus writers are already using the security flaw to deliver cryptolocker 
software, which encrypts a users’ data and demands payment to unlock it, on to 
unsuspecting computers.

The Hacking Team hack, which saw a BitTorrent file of the massive data dump 
posted to the company’s public twitter feed, contained emails, presentations 
and source code for its software.

The initial effect of the leak was an embarrassing number of revelations about 
the actions and clients of the firm, which largely provides software for law 
enforcement and national security to hack into the computers and mobile devices 
of targets.

But the leak also included the code for much of the company’s hacking 
software, and now virus writers are incorporating the code into their own 
malware. While many of the security holes used in the company’s “remote control 
service” (the name for its hacking software) were already publicly known and 
patched, there were a few vulnerabilities the company had managed to keep 
secret.

Known as “zero-day” vulnerabilities – because the affected companies have had 
zero days to release a patch – they are now being used by the wider community 
of malware authors, as well as Hacking Team itself. The new vulnerabilities 
were even accompanied by readme files, intended for internal use at Hacking 
Team to explain how to deploy them, which likely further reduced the time until 
the virus authors were able to use them in their own software.

Until the Adobe Flash patch is published, web users should be wary of visiting 
untrusted websites, and may want to enable “click to play 
<https://security.berkeley.edu/content/how-do-i-enable-click-play-google-chrome>
” to prevent untrusted Flash files from activating.

Questions in Brussels

Meanwhile, Dutch MEP Marietje Schaake has asked pointed questions 
<http://www.marietjeschaake.eu/2015/07/written-questions-on-the-italian-company-hacking-teams-potential-violations-of-eu-sanctions/>
 in the European parliament about the revelations contained within the Hacking 
Team data dump. The documents suggest that two of Hacking Team’s clients 
include Russia and Sudan, two countries covered by EU sanctions.

Schaake asked of the commission whether it believed that the company “has 
violated EU sanctions regimes”.

She also asked the commission whether it knew of “any prior authorisation 
given by the Italian authorities that would allow Hacking Team to export its 
products to Sudan or Russia”, and whether or not the company asked the 
commission explicitly about export controls to those two countries.

In one document leaked from Hacking Team, which listed a number of nations as 
either “active” or “expired” clients, Sudan and Russia were both marked out as 
“not officially supported”.
 