
Jonathan Trott <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonathan-trott> had to come 
to terms with a failure on his return to competitive cricket four months after 
his abrupt departure from England's Ashes tour, falling in single figures to a 
left-arm seamer, albeit one bearing little resemblance to his winter nemesis, 
Mitchell Johnson.

Trott, sporting a severe No1 haircut, spent most of the first day of 
Warwickshire's pre-season fixture againstGloucestershire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucestershireccc> in the field, bowling 
three tidy overs and pulling on a bright yellow bib to serve drinks to his 
team-mates when it was his turn to take a break after lunch.

The event that attracted an unusually large media interest to Edgbaston on 
April Fools' Day, in addition to a couple of hundred county cricket diehards as 
opposed to curious onlookers, occurred midway through the evening session when 
theWarwickshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> opener 
Varun Chopra chopped on to his stumps in the 15th over of their reply.

Trott walked to the crease for the first time since that sultry Queensland 
evening on 23 November when he holed out to long leg off Johnson after an 
inexplicably skittish innings of nine from as many balls. An explanation was to 
emerge two days later when England announced that Trott had flown home because 
of a "stress-related illness".

The circumstances at a near-deserted county ground could hardly have been more 
different, other than the angle of attack presented by David Payne, a tall 
23-year-old from Dorset. After taking the usual irritating age to prepare 
himself, painstakingly scratching out his leg-stump guard and fiddling with the 
straps on his pads, Trott flicked his first ball, a friendly leg-stump 
half-volley, crisply through mid-wicket for two.

There were only two more scoring shots, both singles, in the next 17 balls he 
faced spread over eight overs and more than half an hour. Gloucestershire even 
posted a deep square leg as well as a long leg, the same field Michael Clarke 
had given Johnson when bowling at Trott at the Gabba. But this time he ducked 
the only bouncer he received, from Payne, to knowing applause from the members.

Then he shouldered arms to the last ball of the 23rd over, which was to be 
Payne's last, and was struck on the pad as it swung in significantly. Payne and 
his Gloucestershire team-mates appealed loudly â€“ sympathy only goes so far, as 
Trott would be the first to appreciate. It looked out from the press box. 
Finally the umpire, Mansoor Qureshi, raised his finger, and Trott returned 
whence he had come, head down all the way.

Warwickshire had already let it be known that he would not be offering any 
interviews during this game however many runs he scored, so Chopra, who toured 
with England Lions in the winter and is captaining the team in this game, was 
left to field the inevitable questions on a 19-ball innings. "It's hard to tell 
on one day but I'm sure he's fit and ready to go and in a good space right 
now," said Chopra of Trott. "It's been refreshing, all the lads enjoy his 
company. For those guys who have seen Trotty bat over the years, you can see 
him in his zone, and there's been no difference in the last few weeks. He was 
full of energy going in so it's a shame he didn't get so many."

Trott, who has set himself the target of regaining his England place before 
the first one-day international of the summer against Scotland on 9 May, is 
likely to have another bat on Wednesday when Warwickshire will begin a new 
60-over innings under the peculiar format of this two-day fixture, provided the 
grimmer weather forecasts are not proved correct.

He is then planning to play in the three-day, first-class match against Oxford 
University at The Parks next week, before Warwickshire begin their County 
Championship campaign against a Sussex team likely to include Matt Prior and 
Chris Jordan at Edgbaston on Sunday week.

Prior continued his preparations for the season with a breezy 43 off 44 balls 
before falling to the Loughborough student Basil Akram at Hove. But the most 
striking performance of the first day of the first-class season came at Fenners 
from Stuart Meaker, who took six for six from six overs as Surrey skittled 
Cambridge MCCU for 54, after being dismissed themselves for 218.

Warwickshire said Ian Bell and Chris Woakes might not be released by England 
to play at Oxford next week after returning from the World Twenty20, even 
though neither made an appearance in Bangladesh. Boyd Rankin, a significant 
absentee from this game after suffering a back injury on the county's 
pre-season trip to Barbados, is also unlikely to play at The Parks, although 
they hope he will be fit for the championship opener against Sussex.
 