
If this isn't a matter of national security, what is? When 13 people end up 
dead at a US military base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/washington-navy-yard-mass-shooting>
, that surely crosses the threshold – putting America's problem with guns into 
the category reserved for threats to the mortal safety of the nation. At its 
narrowest, Monday's massacre at the Washington navy yard is a national security 
issue because it involved hostile entry into what was meant to be a secure 
military facility. Plenty will now focus on how a man twice arrested in 
gun-related incidents was able to gain such easy access to the nerve centre of 
the US navy. There will be inquiries into the entry-pass system, use of 
contractors and the like.

But that would be to miss the wider point. America's gun sickness – which has 
turned massacres of this kind into a fairly regular, rather than exceptionally 
rare occurrence – endangers the US not solely because it can lead military 
personnel to lose their lives, nor even because it can lead to the murder of 
schoolchildren, as it did atSandy Hook elementary school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/16/sandy-hook-classroom-massacre> 
last year, or the death of young movie-goers, as it did in Aurora, Colorado, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/22/aurora-shooting-suspect-planned-deliberation>
 also last year – dreadful though those losses are.

The foreign policy experts who gather in the thinktanks and congressional 
offices not far from the navy yard often define national security to encompass 
anything that touches on America's standing in the world. That ranges from its 
ability to project military force across the globe to its attractiveness, its 
"soft power". For decades, this latter quality has been seen as one of the US's 
primary assets, central to its ability to lead and persuade other nations.

But America's gun disease diminishes its soft power. It makes the country seem 
less like a model and more like a basket case, afflicted by a pathology other 
nations strive to avoid. When similar gun massacres have struck elsewhere – 
including in Britain – lawmakers have acted swiftly to tighten controls, 
watching as the gun crime statistics then fell. In thedecade after the rules 
were toughened in Australia 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2012/08/02/did-gun-control-work-in-australia/>
 in 1996, for example, firearm-related homicides fell by 59%, while suicides 
involving guns fell by 65%.

But the US stays stubbornly where it is, refusing to act. When President Obama 
last tried, following the deaths of 20 children and six staff at Sandy Hook at 
the end of 2012, his bill fell at the first senate hurdle. He had not proposed 
banning a single weapon or bullet – merely expanding the background checks 
required of someone wanting to buy a gun. But even that was too much. The 
national security pundits who worry how a US president is perceived when he is 
incapable of protecting the lives of innocent Syrians abroad should think how 
it looks when he is incapable of protecting the lives of innocent Americans at 
home.

On guns, the US – so often the world leader in innovation and endeavour – is 
the laggard, stuck at the bottom of the global class.Bill Clinton perfectly 
distilled the essence of soft power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/28/uselections2008.democrats20085> 
when he said in 2008, "People the world over have always been more impressed by 
the power of our example than by the example of our power." He was right. But 
every time a disturbed or angry individual is able to vent his rage with an 
assault weapon, killing innocents with ease, the power of America's example 
fades a little more.

@Freedland
 