
Pressure to overhaul vetting procedures for US government contractors grew on 
Thursday after one of the largest US security providers admitted that it 
carried out background checks on Navy Yard gunmanAaron Alexis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aaron-alexis>.

USIS, a Virginia-based company owned by private equity group Providence, had 
previously denied conducting background investigations into Alexis, according 
to areport by Bloomberg 
<http://go.bloomberg.com/political-capital/2013-09-19/usis-navy-yard-shooters-background-check-wasnt-ours-others-silent/>
. Alexis had been arrested three times, including two suspected offences 
involving guns, although he was not charged or convicted. On Thursday USIS 
issued a statement in response to mounting questions over how Alexis received 
the "secret" level clearance that allowed him access to military facilities 
such as Navy Yard. "Today we were informed that in 2007, USIS conducted a 
background check of Aaron Alexis for OPM," said a company spokesman in a 
statement provided to the Guardian. "We are contractually prohibited from 
retaining case information gathered as part of the background checks we conduct 
for OPM and therefore are unable to comment further on the nature or scope of 
this or any other background check."

USIS, formerly known as US Investigations Services, was also involved in 
background checks on National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden, but 
subsequently defended its role. In a statement to the Wall Street Journal last 
month 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324324404579041350132655752.html>
, the company said the federal government did not raise any concerns at the 
time about its work in February 2011 on the five-year "periodic 
reinvestigation" of Snowden. The company said the NSA, not USIS, was ultimately 
responsible for approving or denying Snowden's security clearance.

Snowden's leaks of classified material revealing the extent of the NSA's 
surveillance activities in the US and abroad prompted a review of vetting 
procedures for contractors by the Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence.

On Tuesday, the White House also announced a separate review by the Office of 
Management and Budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/white-house-aaron-alexis-washington-navy-yard>
 to examine "standards for contractors and employees across federal agencies".
 