
He hit them in the gloves, he hit them in the arms and he hit them in the head 
but mostly Mitchell Johnson hit South Africa in the wicket column.Twelve of 
them all told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/15/mitchell-johnson-australia-south-africa-match-report>
.

This bowling of his is such a fiery, compelling and visceral event that it 
almost relegates other happenings to the stuff of mere sideshow. Ray Robinson 
once spoke of the way Jeff Thomson could “turn a thigh pad into Vienna 
schnitzel,” but right now Johnson is aiming higher, more likely to tenderise 
ribs and drive up sales forAlbion C&D <http://www.cdhelmets.com/history.html>. 

He’s also now an event himself, which is an astounding thing to achieve over 
the course of six Tests. It’s Mitch as appointment television. It’s Mitch as 
default headliner and Mitch as TV news bulletin place-setter. You find yourself 
rushing back with a drink in time for the first ball of his over. It’s a cage 
fight and we’re all clamoring for a better look. For opponents it’s more about 
endurance and survival than winning or losing. In those six Tests he’s taken 49 
wickets at 13.14 with a strike rate of 27.1, a rare case of numbers doing 
justice to what you’re seeing with your own eyes.

We know that Johnson buried a demoralised England on his own home turf, 
pressing down his thumb on flattened batsmen and scaring the life out of 
tailenders, but it’s another thing to do that to the likes of Hashim Amla and 
Graeme Smith in their own backyard. Johnson’s second-innings welcome to Amla 
was the stuff of batting nightmares – a searing, spiteful ball that hemmed back 
one of the great back-foot technicians in cricket and then climbed through 
every conceivable method of defence to crash into his face.

Side-on and in slow motion the Amla bouncer looked like something only a crash 
test dummy should be subjected to. It’s hard to fathom how the batsman managed 
to brush it off; I nearly dry-retched just watching the replay. He must have 
been in a meditative trance. How else could you cope?

In his first innings Smith handled the Johnson bouncer badly, forced to recoil 
like he’d just seen the world’s largest spider and then thrusting his bat and 
gloves out to provide a second layer of protection for his head. At 33, Smith 
has seen virtually everything in his 115 Tests but he aged years over the 
course of that delivery. It was as sorry a sight asRicky Ponting being yorked 
off his feet by Jacques Kallis <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f97jPHb53XA> 15 
months ago and no more dignified.

The Proteas skipper trudged back to the pavilion and then sleep-walked through 
captaincy duties when it was Australia’s turn to bat again. If he wasn’t 
already aware of how tough Alastair Cook’s lot was over the last four months 
he’s got a better idea now. The second time around Smith was outfoxed by 
Clarke’s canny field placement and it served as a reminder that Johnson was not 
the only man who had bested him in the game. Later he blamed the pitch, which 
was like attributing the casualties of D-Day to the beach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fwatching-mitchell-johnson-is-now-event-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F16%2F1392530931013%2Fe61e5465-b506-479f-a6ae-8bb252af09c7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watching%20Mitchell%20Johnson%20is%20now%20event%20television&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fwatching-mitchell-johnson-is-now-event-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watching%20Mitchell%20Johnson%20is%20now%20event%20television&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fwatching-mitchell-johnson-is-now-event-television%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F16%2F1392530931013%2Fe61e5465-b506-479f-a6ae-8bb252af09c7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Australia players help Ryan McLaren after he was hit by a Johnson delivery. 
Photograph: Morne de Klerk/Getty Images 
Still, at times we were reminded of a way forward for South Africa. Most of 
those moments belonged to AB de Villiers. There are still things beyond 
Johnson’s control. De Villiers played the most impressive knock of the year so 
far in South Africa’s first innings. His 91-run resistance might be considered 
a classic of its kind; a counter-punching innings of such class and composure 
that it made his team-mates look even worse. In the second innings he was 
dismissed attempting and nearly succeeding in crashing Johnson through cover 
but by then he’d run out of allies.

Both De Villiers and Ben Stokes before him 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/cricket/article-2526258/The-Ashes-2013-14-Andy-Flower-praises-Ben-Stokes-century-fed-performing-stars.html>
 found success attacking where others defensively prodded or merely hoped to 
survive. South Africa boast better-rounded batsmen than Stokes but they’ll need 
to be at their absolute best to redress the balance. Even that barely qualifies 
as a strategy.

In any case, South Africa did not help themselves. In the first innings Alviro 
Petersen had barely digested what had befallen his skipper when he jumpily 
edged behind and the second time around he was only good enough to stab at the 
ball and send another catch to Haddin. It was the kind of showing that may 
sting the selectors into action.

Faf du Plessis was perhaps unfortunate in receiving unplayable balls in both 
innings, including a grubber from Peter Siddle, who perversely shaped as a kind 
of relief for Proteas batsmen; the same ones he almost single-handedly defeated 
on day five in Adelaide. JP Duminy showed he could hang around but not much 
else and all-rounder Ryan McLaren had a savage re-introduction to Tests with 
the bat in his hands. When he was bowled through the gate by Johnson’s swerving 
in-ducker in the first innings you felt like he was actually lucky. He was less 
so in the second, cracked across the ear and no doubt thankful for advances in 
the protective qualities of modern helmets.

Both that bouncer and the one Amla received recalled the helmet-rattlers that 
often used to befall their countrymen Gary and Peter Kirsten. These seemed more 
hand-crafted and sinister though, the result of bowling malevolence rather than 
dicey pitches. The otherwise genial Johnson has never particularly seemed like 
the vicious type but his intimidation factor comes from physiological pressure. 
He’s a mobile catapult and doesn’t seem to mind whether it is stumps or skulls 
that he cracks in the procession of Australian wins.

Until this week Vernon Philander held a mystique built upon effortlessly 
taking wickets. Here he could only manage one, as did Morne Morkel, on a 
surface from which Johnson extracted 12 batsmen. They’re bowlers of class but 
the Australian seemed to be on a different planet, not to mention playing 
surface. Michael Clarke says Johnson is the best bowler in the world. On 
current form it’s hard to make a case against that.

Those Australian victories now tally six on the trot against opposition 
thought to be superior in most ways. They’ve come after a change in back-room 
atmosphere and a renewed application among the batsmen, but they’ve only been 
so emphatic and bracing because of Johnson’s deeds. Rack ‘em up and he’ll knock 
‘em down.
 