
Christian evangelicals in America have lost the cultural dominance they once 
enjoyed 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2015/05/how-low-will-it-go/>, but 
they’re still a formidable political force, especially in Republican primaries 
where their votes are eagerly courted. Withthe number of atheists steadily 
growing 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2014/08/the-coming-secular-era/>, 
it is conceivable that there could come a day when atheists gain clout. Then, 
politicians could end up flattering non-believers and competing for our support 
the way they currently do with church-goers.

Until a few years ago, the suggestion that politicians might actively court 
atheists’ support would have been ludicrous. Atheists were rare, isolated and 
widely despised. What’s more, even among ourselves, we had a reputation for 
being fractious and quarrelsome, impossible to organize.

But the landscape has shifted. In the last decade, the non-religious 
demographic has seen dramatic growth all across the country, to the point where 
they now outnumber every individual Christian denomination in America and are
comparable to the number of white evangelicals as a whole <>. 

Of course, even if atheists are more numerous, it doesn’t mean much if all we 
do issquabble and argue with each other 
<http://polyskeptic.com/2013/04/28/the-deep-rift-in-atheism-picking-a-tribe/>. 
Unless we can organize and act in concert, we won’t be a political force. But 
here, too,non-theist 
<http://atheism.about.com/od/Atheist-Dictionary/g/Definition-Nontheist.htm> 
groups are betting that that the picture is starting to change and that there 
can and will be an identifiable “atheist vote <>” in 2016 and beyond.

The Secular Coalition for America <https://www.secular.org/>, an umbrella 
organization of 17 non-theist groups, has made it their mission to represent 
nonbelievers in the halls of power. They put out action alerts and voter 
guides, set upstate chapters <> across the country and hold an annual Lobby Day 
<http://www.lobbyday.us/> during which non-believing Americans meet with their 
senators and representatives to talk about the issues that matter to them. So 
far, nine sitting members of Congress have attended, and the SCA only expects 
that number to grow.

In May, American Atheists, the venerable secular organization founded by the 
late Madalyn Murray O’Hair, announced that they’re opening a Washington, DC 
office and shifting their mission to emphasize “voter engagement, political 
action and legal advocacy <http://news.atheists.org/2015/05/27/reorganize/>”. 
According to the new national program director, Nick Fish:

Religiously unaffiliated people make up 20% of the nation’s electorate, but in 
the most recent election, they only made up 12% of those who voted. There’s a 
huge segment of voters who aren’t being engaged by anyone ... political parties 
aren’t reaching out to them. We’re trying to show politicians that they need to 
fight for our votes.

No matter how organized we get, there will never be an atheist pope decreeing 
how to vote, nor should there be. Most atheists are staunch individualists, and 
our deserved reputation for fierce debate and healthy disrespect for authority 
means we’re highly unlikely to succumb to group-think when it comes to 
politics. But as long as atheists remain diffuse and disorganized, we’ll be 
outmaneuvered and outmuscled by religious sects thatdo move in lockstep and can 
exert pressure on politicians with no one to counterbalance them.

If atheists are able to organize politically, we’ll find areas of broad 
agreement on which we can cooperate to advance causes that most of us value, 
even without a hierarchical authority handing out marching orders. The obvious 
“atheist issue” is defending the separation of church and state, from fighting 
creationism in public schools to Ten Commandments monuments on courthouse lawns 
and tax giveaways to churches. Likewise, almost all atheists are strong 
supporters of marriage equality and LGBT rights, since the opposition to those 
causes is mainly driven by religion. And while there are a few exceptions,
atheists are by far the most pro-choice demographic in America 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2012/06/the-atheist-progressive-alliance/>
 and should be a bulwark against fundamentalist efforts to control everyone’s 
sex lives.

Especially as the non-religious community broadens and diversifies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/03/finally-atheists-are-no-longer-just-old-white-men>
, there are other promising causes for us to take up. Atheists, who ought to 
understand better than anyone the vital importance of science and the necessity 
of a well-educated, scientifically literate population, should support 
investment in high-quality public education and research funding.The 
non-religious also tend to be more peaceful and less supportive of violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/06/peace-on-earth-atheism>. 
Defending the separation of church and state is a fine and necessary goal – but 
I hope that one day we’ll also see atheist scholarships, atheist peace marches 
and atheists speaking out on the floor of Congress.
 