
One of the strangest things about living in Washington DC yesterday was how 
normal the day felt to many of us not living or workingnear the Navy Yard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/washington-dc-gunman-aaron-alexis-live>
. The metro service remained no more interrupted than we expect from the metro, 
restaurants still had a bustling Monday evening dinner service. And on a day 
when shootings began at 8:20am just two blocks away from the baseball stadium, 
the Washington Nationals waited until 3:27pm to announce on Twitter that their 
evening game would be postponed.

In light of today's tragedy, tonight's #Nats 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Nats&src=hash>-#Braves 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Braves&src=hash> game has been postponed. More 
details to follow athttp://t.co/KuwgOfqtcm <http://t.co/KuwgOfqtcm>

— Washington Nationals (@Nationals) September 16, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Nationals/statuses/379688059652300800>


It begs the question, do we run the risk of becoming a nation that too readily 
accepts yet another mass shooting as just a part of life?

When 12 people were senselessly murdered at their workplace in the nation's 
capital, what did we do? Did we rally on Congress to demand more funding for 
mental health services and long-needed action oncommon sense gun control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/11/lawmakers-enact-gun-control>
? Or did we check in on the folks we knew that worked near the Navy Yard, 
breathed a sigh of relief when we heard back, asked ourselves how many more 
times can this happen, and then went about our evening plans of dinner with 
friends or catching up on television shows? Are we already so desensitized to 
mass shootings in our country that our routines are no longer disrupted, or are 
we simply at a loss as a nation about what to do about it – unsure what we as 
individuals or as part of a community can do to change this dangerous pattern 
in America?

As I walked to the metro at Union Station – in view of the US capitol building 
– after work last night, I tried to think for a few minutes what it must feel 
like to be the wife/husband/mother/father/sibling/child of someone who left for 
what they thought was a normal workday this Monday, but weren't going to return 
from it. What is it like looking at your cell phone waiting for the call to 
hear their voice and that they're OK, and then slowly realizing the call is 
never coming? And I imagine those loved ones in Washington DC felt like parents 
in Connecticut did when they understood their child would not be walking out of 
the Newtown elementary school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newtown-shooting> alive. And I imagine those 
loved ones in Connecticut felt like the friends and siblings inAurora, Colorado 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aurora-shooting>after a gunman opened fire 
in a movie theatre.

It seems that the question we each need to ask ourselves is: which side am I 
on? Do we stand with victims' families and try to honor their loved ones by 
passing legislation in an effort to prevent future killings, asmany Newtown 
families begged Congress to do 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/a-day-after-navy-yard-shooting-newtown-activists-again-lobby-congress-to-enact-gun-control/2013/09/17/61c1a122-1fab-11e3-9ad0-96244100e647_story.html>
? In fact, some rallied again today, holding signs such as "Congress: it's your 
turn".

Or we remain more concerned about having "my guns"? Do we stand up and demand 
that members of Congress quit caving to a special interest group that does not 
represent the majority of the American public? And if Congress does cave again, 
have the courage to hit the pavement and throw them out of office when their 
time comes?

Last month at the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the March on 
Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/28/martin-luther-king-barack-obama>
, we were reminded that change is hard, even in America, and is often won 
through struggle. As with many of the challenges of our past, it is up to the 
American public to demand change of their elected representatives and continue 
marching, making phone calls, writing letters, knocking doors and holding signs 
until that change has come.
 