
It’s entirely fitting that the first appearance since the 1960s of the 13th 
Floor Elevators should come at the annual psychedelic festival in their home 
city of Austin, Texas. Without the 13th Floor Elevators, there would surely be 
no Austin Psych fest. In fact without the Elevators, there would probably be no 
psych. If not quite the first band to have the now seemingly ubiquitous P-word 
applied to their music, their debut album, 1966’sThe Psychedelic Sounds of the 
13th Floor Elevators <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QEQBfJwYlLY>, delivered a 
manifesto for better living through chemistry that no previous act had so 
explicitly set forth. Few acts appearing at this festival over the years can 
have been totally untouched by the band’s extraordinary, if too-brief, output. 
The two groups topping the bill the previous night –the Jesus and Mary Chain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=buEGBtLsc1k> and Primal Scream 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ve6t-RElEOc> – have both recorded Elevators 
cover versions. Sean Lennon, whose band The Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger has 
seemingly little in common with the Elevators, was keen earlier in the day to 
express his delight in sharing a bill with them. So significant, indeed, is the 
Elevators’ appearance here on 10 May that this year, in their honour, the name 
of the festival has been changed toLevitation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PVePUYzC34k> – a track from the band’s second 
album.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvv3CZFWB8EU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvv3CZFWB8EU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvv3CZFWB8EU&media=>
 13th Floor Elevators – Earthquake, live at Levitation 2015 
Really, though, it’s astonishing that the 13th Floor Elevators are here at all.
Singer Roky Erickson has endured a series of legal, financial and health 
problems <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jun/08/popandrock2>, while 
lyricist and jug player Tommy Hall 
<http://www.houstonpress.com/music/ex-13th-floor-elevator-tommy-hall-is-still-psychedelic-6586955>
, who in the band’s heyday advocated a daily LSD regimen, has spent decades 
holed up in San Francisco working on a unifying maths-based theory of 
everything.Drummer John Ike Walton 
<http://www.texaspsychedelicrock.com/2011/11/john-ike-walton-interview-with-myth.html>
, meanwhile, has kept the rust off by playing in an Elevators tribute band 
(latterly named after him), which has also provided one of the two guitarists 
who tonight take the place of the night’s most significant absentee – guitarist 
Stacy Sutherland, shot dead by his wife in 1978.Bassist Ronnie Leatherman 
<http://larecord.com/interviews/2015/05/07/the-13th-floor-elevators-ronnie-leatherman-interview>
 completes the quartet of original members.


Levitation: the past, present and future of psychedelic music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/11/levitation-past-present-future-psychedelic-music>
The Elevators’ appearance is met with a mixture of awed reverence from 
devotees and curiosity from the youngsters who just wanted to bag a good spot 
for headliners, the Flaming Lips. The set is drawn solely from the band’s first 
two albums, eschewing numbers both from the band’s fake live album – the 
misleadingly-titledLive <http://www.allmusic.com/album/live-mw0000624913> – and 
their last, the excellentBull of the Woods 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/bull-of-the-woods-mw0000114404>, on which 
Erickson’s contribution was severely restricted by his incarceration in a 
psychiatric hospital.


Roky Erickson: The man who went too high
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jun/08/popandrock2> 
On stage with the Elevators now, Erickson is understandably rickety, sometimes 
struggling to recall Hall’s complex, poetic words, but so little of this 
material has featured in his live sets since the original group disbanded that 
he can be forgiven for three times repeating the same verse in the epic, 
lyrically denseSlip Inside This House 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwSA0Tckwbk>. The band deal with the 
unpredictability well, while Roky’s energy seems so devoted to making it 
through that he has none to spare for even a word to the audience all night. On 
finishing his part of a song, he stands still at the mic, waiting for the band 
to catch up, totally devoid of stagecraft or artifice. Only twice his eyes 
wander, once to an inflatable toy bounced around the audience, and once to a 
low-flying plane on its way to the nearby airport. And yet he’s hard to look 
away from. Who knows where he is in his head?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgHK9vj0VE7w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgHK9vj0VE7w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgHK9vj0VE7w&media=>
 13th Floor Elevators – You’re Gonna Miss Me 
Fire Engine <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wGOGyUoJiFk> and Levitation are 
ramshackle and thrilling,Splash 1 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B97ZhagHSmw> 
is moving and immaculate, and the curdled acid yawp ofRoller Coaster 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EsKny8WnktI> heralds a departure from the 
stage so sudden and understated that the audience barely have time to register 
the band have gone before they’re back to drive throughYou’re Gonna Miss Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0OytJYBfwUk>, the garage classic that 
18-year-old Erickson brought with him on joining the Elevators from his first 
group, the Spades. A wave to the audience from Erickson and Hall, and they’ve 
gone again.


Then, as Flaming Lips’ more-is-more version of hallucinogenic rock sees the 
stage filled with cartoon mushrooms, rainbows and light, Austin’s mythic 
psychedelic originators fade back into the Texas night.


Setlist: She Lives (in a Time of Her Own) / Fire Engine / Earthquake / Tried 
to Hide / Slip Inside This House / (I’ve Got) Levitation / Splash 1 / Kingdom 
of Heaven / Nobody to Love / Reverberation / Roller Coaster / You’re Gonna Miss 
Me.
 