
The question: Does civility matter? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/jan/17/arizona-shootings-civility>

The opening lines 
<http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/kn/dhp/dhp.01.budd.html> of the 
Buddhist classic theDhammapada <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dhammapada> are 
"Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are all 
mind-wrought. If with an impure mind a person speaks or acts suffering follows 
him like the wheel that follows the foot of the ox." Thought precedes words, 
words precede deeds. DoesSarah Palin precede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/17/tucson-shooting-survivor-arrested-threat>
 the terribleshootings in Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arizona-shooting?INTCMP=SRCH>?

Arguably anyone who answers that question by saying "yes" could be accused of 
creating a climate which legitimises the assassination of Palin herself. 
Incivility is a vicious spiral. It is a continuation of war by other means. The 
point of attack speech is not to convince but to defeat by humiliation or other 
means. It proceeds from the conviction that our rightness, the rightness of our 
cause is more important than the mere persons of those who disagree with us. If 
our opponents are not people but "wing-nuts" or "lifestyle gays" then it 
doesn't really matter what we say. If they are cut they do not bleed.

It seems to me that for a Christian the starting point should be Christ. Not 
so much "what would Jesus do?" as "why did Jesus suffer?". I have never met a 
person that Jesus did not die for, I have never spoken about a person that 
Jesus did not love. When I am thinking about my best friend's best friend then 
I think differently than if I am thinking about some warmongering hockey-mom 
that wants to nuke Iran. And that should be reflected in how I write, how I 
speak, how I act.

Back in 1984 the IRA exploded a bomb in Brighton 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/october/12/newsid_2531000/2531583.stm>
 that very nearly killed Margaret Thatcher. Over the course of the next few 
days I lost count of the number of people I heard saying, on the street, in 
buses, at supermarket checkouts, how much they regretted that the IRA had 
failed to achieve its aim. These were not Republican sympathisers, these were 
people who hated Thatcher and without willing the means, terrorism, willed the 
end, assassination. And that at a time when dialogue had not been coarsened and 
brutalised in the way that appears to have happened since the culture wars 
began in the US. Which brings us back to thoughts preceding words preceding 
deeds. Unexpressed hatred is no less dangerous than its expressed variety, 
arguably it is more so. The supreme incivility does not consist of calling 
someone less than human. It consists in believing that someone is less than 
human.

In debate and discussion I usually (actually always) start from the assumption 
that I am right and that those who disagree with me are wrong. It seems 
pointless to argue from a point of view otherwise. What I do not begin with is 
the assumption that my correctness makes me a superior form of creature to 
those whom happenstance has placed in the camp of error. Being right is not the 
same as being better. And if I am not better than my interlocutor, why act as 
if I was? Civil discourse does not proceed from respecting your opponents' 
beliefs, which in the case of atheists are ludicrous tosh, but in respecting 
your opponents' humanity. Once you do that, your finger never tightens on the 
trigger.
 