
Every parent wants to be the most powerful proponents that she or he can be 
when it comes to their children’s health. As a pair of moms who also happen to 
be longtime public interest advocates – both of us fighting to stem the rise of 
antibiotic resistance – we can’t help but have our children in the front of our 
minds when we go to work each day.

Much like climate change, antibiotic resistance seems invisible until it 
affects us personally – at which point it becomes all too real. For Lena, this 
reality hit hard in the early years of her older daughter’s life. Whether her 
daughter was battling bacterial infections in her ears, sinuses or throat, all 
too often the first-line antibiotic would fail just days after treatment ended, 
and symptoms would return and persist. Sometimes it would take three or four 
rounds of treatment before she was on the mend, even for something as seemingly 
easy-to-treat as strep throat.

Burger King and KFC called out for lagging behind on antibiotic-free meat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/20/burger-king-kfc-mcdonalds-antibiotic-free-meat>
For her part, Sasha – the mother of a one-year-old boy – wants antibiotics to 
remain a viable treatment option should her son ever get sick and need them.

That’s why we are encouraged to see the progress made by US chicken producers 
inreducing the use of antibiotics 
<http://www.tysonfoods.com/media/position-statements/antibiotic-use.aspx> 
important to human medicine. This shift has enabled restaurant chains such as 
McDonald’s, Chick-fil-A, Subway and Wendy’s to commit to sourcing chicken that 
was either raised without any antibiotics or without any medically-important 
antibiotics, a term for describing drugs developed for human use. At the 
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), we estimate that roughly 40% of the 
US chicken industry has either eliminated or pledged to eliminate the routine 
use of medically-important antibiotics.

Meat producers routinely feed animals antibiotics to make them grow faster, 
and to help them survive the crowded, stressful, unsanitary living conditions 
that are typically found in factory farms. A whopping 70% of all 
medically-important antibiotics 
<http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Reports/UserFeeReports/FinancialReports/ADUFA/UCM447958.pdf>
 are sold in the US for use in livestock. The excessive and often unnecessary 
use of these so-called miracle drugs leads to bacteria developing resistance 
and weakens the effectiveness of antibiotics in treating humans.

According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2 million 
Americans contract antibiotic-resistant infections 
<https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/> every year, and 23,000 die as a result. 
And these are conservative estimates: as Reuters recently reported, it’s likely 
that we’re significantly undercounting the human toll of superbug infections 
<http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/usa-uncounted-surveillance/>
.

Chicken raised without the routine use of antibiotics is now one of the 
fastest growing segments of the poultry industry. Producers in this category 
include some of the biggest players in the industry: Perdue Farms, Tyson Foods 
and Foster Farms. After about a decade of trial and error in some cases, 
chicken companies are showing that raising animals without reliance on 
antibiotics is not only possible, it’s profitable.

While the majority of the chicken industry still needs to reduce antibiotic 
use, chicken suppliers are ahead of other meat producers. Their headlong leap 
into antibiotic stewardship is a result of two main factors. First is the 
industry’s production model – chickens have shorter lifecycles and likely fewer 
chances to contract infections than other types of livestock. Second, the vast 
majority of chickens produced in the US are raised by companies that own all or 
a significant part of their supply chains, making it possible for them to 
dictate specific farming practices across their entire operations.

In-N-Out Burger beefs up its promise of antibiotic-free meat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/05/in-n-out-antibiotic-free-meat-pledge-fda>
The popularity of chicken with many Americans as a healthier protein 
alternative may also be a factor. The largest chicken companies and their top 
buyers – restaurant chains such as McDonald’s, Chick-fil-A, Subway, Wendy’s and 
Taco Bell – are responding to consumer priorities about how antibiotics are 
used in the chicken they grow or sell. Consumers are holding meat companies 
accountable for cleaning up their drug use practices. A case in point: in 
August, NRDC and our alliesdelivered petitions signed by more than 350,000 
people to KFC 
<https://www.nrdc.org/experts/lena-brook/over-350k-urge-kfc-change-chicken-antibiotics-policy>
 headquarters, calling on the iconic chicken restaurant chain to establish a 
strong antibiotics policy for its chicken supply.

We need companies that produce pork, beef and turkey to rise to the occasion. 
Though slower in coming, there are signs of progress. Perdue now also raises 
about half its turkeys without antibiotics. This year, Tyson announced the 
launch of a new line of pork raised without antibiotics 
<http://www.takepart.com/article/2016/02/25/tyson-antibiotic-free-pork>, and 
Cargill announced <http://www.cargill.com/news/releases/2016/NA31934263.jsp> it 
was reducing its use of medically-important antibiotics in its beef production 
by 20%, a move that impacts approximately 1.2 million cattle.

The government now needs to catch up with industry leaders by swiftly enacting 
mandatory restrictions on the routine use of antibiotics across the livestock 
industry. Despite having known for decades that the misuse of antibiotics in 
livestock threatens our health, the Food and Drug Administration has almost 
entirely failed to act to stop it 
<https://www.nrdc.org/experts/jonathan-kaplan/nrdc-urges-fda-curb-livestock-antibiotic-overuse-again>
. All we’ve seen to date from the agency are loophole-riddled guidelines.

Millions of parents like us serve as powerful advocates for the health of 
their families each time they purchase meat at a grocery store checkout or a 
restaurant counter. But we cannot simply lay this problem at the feet of 
consumers. The government and food industry must do more. If most meat 
producers continue to use antibiotics as a substitute for good animal 
husbandry, then it’s our children who may end up paying most dearly.

Sasha Stashwick is a senior advocate of the food and agriculture program at 
the Natural Resources Defense Council. Lena Brook is a food policy advocate in 
the food and agriculture program at the Natural Resources Defense Council.
 