
Where can we get the facts about the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>? This refrain from voters can be 
witnessed in TV interviews, on radio vox pops and in newspaper letters pages.

It was the question I asked in the London Evening Standard on Wednesday 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/roy-greenslade-baffled-by-brexit-here-s-where-to-get-facts-ahead-of-the-eu-referendum-a3199681.html>
. So here’s the rest of my column...

Over the last couple of weeks, the public who must vote in the EU referendum 
on 23 June have been been subjected to a barrage of propaganda from each side 
of the argument.

The Brexiteers, notably London mayor Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, have asserted that life outside 
the EU will enable Britain to prosper by regaining its sovereignty, negotiating 
new trade deals and controlling migration.

Those who wish to remain in the EU have claimed, with equal passion and 
apparent sincerity, that David Cameron’s reform deal has improved Britain’s 
position in relation to the other 27 states. Sovereignty is assured. Trade 
deals will be imperilled outside. Migration is handled best through Brussels.

Each side has talked of scaremongering by the other. Cameron says leaving the 
EU is a “leap in the dark.” Johnson replies by asserting that the Government is 
running Project Fear.

But who, if anyone, is telling the truth? Where can people sort the facts from 
the fiction? Must we rely on instinct alone when we cast our vote? Not 
according to the group of academics running a project calledThe UK in a 
Changing Europe <http://ukandeu.ac.uk/>. 

Through their website, they claim to offer evidence-based research in order to 
provide people with impartial information about the EU. “We were set up for 
that purpose,” says the group’s spokesman, Ben Miller.

“We regard ourselves as the only independent, impartial non-partisan 
organisation offering EU-specific advice. It’s open to politicians, 
journalists, civil servants, trades unionists and, of course, the public.”

Funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), and based at King’s 
College London, the group boasts an impressive list of “explainers” who provide 
unbiased insights and analysis about UK-EU relations.

Several of them have written articles on range of topics that have emerged in 
the debate so far, such as security, media coverage, migration and even the 
emotional turmoil surrounding the debate.

The group, led by Professor Anand Menon, is also staging a number of events 
across Britain. One at lunch time in King’s College on Thursday (10 March) will 
consider what people in other member states think about Britain’s referendum.

Another website, Full Fact <https://fullfact.org/>, is also offering a 
fact-checking service on the referendum. The EU is only part of its work, but 
there is already plenty of material, particularly about immigration, to read.

There are, of course, “factual” sites that are very partial indeed. One of the 
most notable isInFacts <http://infacts.org/>, a journalistic enterprise with a 
mission statement proclaiming that it is “making the fact-based case for 
Britain to remain in the EU.”

It was set up by Hugo Dixon, the former Financial Times staffer who created the
Breaking Views <http://www.breakingviews.com/> website that was acquired by 
Thomson Reuters. His fellow founders include several former editors, such as 
The Guardian’s Alan Rusbridger, The Sun’s David Yelland and The Observer’s Will 
Hutton.

Three other high-profile members are the former BBC economic editor Stephanie 
Flanders <https://www.theguardian.com/media/stephanie-flanders>, the Reuters 
blogger Anatole Kaletsky and the Pulitzer Prize-winning author Anne Applebaum.

They claim to be “pushing for a referendum campaign that is not marred by 
inaccuracies and twisted logic.” Well, they would, wouldn’t they?

But it is transparent in its objective and it is the kind of resource that 
could provide information (or ammunition, if you prefer) which could be useful 
for either side during what looks likely to be an increasingly fractious 
campaign.
 