
 When you look at the political map of the UK it shows Brighton as a tiny 
speck of green next to a tiny speck of red, all drowning in a sea of blue. 
Brighton, with itsgreen female MP 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/politics/2015/feb/28/caroline-lucas-im-not-playing-about>
, is an alternative universe. Last week, a naked bike ride went past me, waving 
flags for the independent republic of Brighton and Hove.


Originally from Chester, I studied in Newcastle and then at Chelsea College of 
Art in London. After an artist residency at the now sadly defunct Artsway in 
the New Forest, I moved toBrighton <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/uk/brighton>. 
Half of my friends from the art department of Northumbria University also moved 
here because it’s warmer. But it’s expensive to live here and it’s going up. My 
friends with kids have had to move away. I’m lucky: I managed to get a big 
discount on my place because it’s near Brighton’s oldest, biggest brothel, but 
this comes with its own set of problems.

Victoria Melody: 'Dog shows were much more hostile than beauty pageants'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/23/victoria-melody-dog-shows-beauty-pageants-major-tom>
It’s also hard to find a job. My friend beat 150 other applicants to get a 
minimum wage position in an art shop. There’s not much industry here. Most of 
the time I am not sure what people do for work inBrighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>. Yet the coffee shops are always full.

Although it has seemed impossible for me to live here at times the allure is 
strong. And it’s by the sea. If you are anywhere in town you probably can’t go 
for half an hour without seeing somebody you know. It feels like a city and a 
village.

When my career moved out of art galleries and more into theatres, finding 
spaces to work in became an issue. Venues in Brighton very often want to 
facilitate you but don’t have the resources. This is frustrating and results in 
artists making work outside the city. There is a distinct lack of young makers 
here that I think is down in part to the expense of Brighton and the draw of 
London. I know funding is short but there need to be more developmental 
opportunities to encourage emerging artists to stay.

However there are some brilliant venues and festivals that bring the best of 
national and international theatre to our doorsteps. I am optimistic about the 
arrival of theAttenborough Centre <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/acca/> and a new 
creation space calledThe Spire <http://thespirearts.org/> is about to open.

The Marlborough theatre <http://www.marlboroughtheatre.org.uk/> is the closest 
thing Brighton has to a sort of Byker Grove for artists. The building is always 
full of artists doing residencies or performing in the theatre. But I worry 
about the Marlborough’s sustainability as they need funding otherwise we are 
going to lose a Brighton gem.

There is a generosity of spirit between makers, producers, audiences and the 
arts industry in Brighton. It’s the people that make it – and it’s by the sea.

 * Scratch performances of Victoria Melody <http://www.victoriamelody.co.uk/>
’s new show Hair Peace are at Battersea Arts Centre, London, on 26 June and 3 
July. The show is at the Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, 5-31 August.
 