
Arsène Wenger insists he has no concerns that the constant speculation over 
the futures ofAlexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> and Mesut Özil will 
have an impact on their form for Arsenal.

Both players have just 18 months left to run on their current contracts and 
reports in recent weeks have suggested the pair want parity with the Premier 
League’s top earners if they are to sign extensions at the Emirates Stadium. 
There has been increased speculation over Sánchez, with claims that a huge 
offer from theChinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chinese-super-league> for his services is 
imminent.

Newspaper reports on Friday morning claimed the former Manchester City manager 
Manuel Pellegrini is ready to make a move for his fellow countryman, with wages 
as high as £500,000 a week apparently on offer. Pellegrini, now in charge of 
Hebei China Fortune, is quoted by the Sun as saying: “If Alexis wants to come, 
we have a club for him right now. He can come to join us in China immediately.”

But Wenger, who was once again prickly when pushed further on contract news 
for the key duo, remained unmoved when asked if the situation could affect 
Sánchez and Özil on the pitch as Arsenal look tobounce back from defeat at 
Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 when they travel to face Manchester City on Sunday afternoon.

Asked if he had concerns that lengthy contract talks could have an impact on 
the players, the Frenchman replied: “There is no concern, not at all. There is 
no concern, I answer you straight away.

“You waste your time because these players have 18 months [left on their] 
contract and I don’t see why there is any urgency in every press conference to 
have that question.

“Maybe you lack a bit of creativity in the newspapers and you always come up 
with the same subject. I don’t see why that should turn up in every press 
conference.

“If people want to go to China, they go to China. You can understand that I 
have completely different worries than China today ahead of the Manchester City 
game.”

Arsenal have the financial ability to pay Sánchez and Özil what they are 
asking for, even if it means breaking the club’s wage structure, after years of 
being unable to compete with Europe’s richest teams. In the past, Wenger has 
lost some of his top talent to City, with Samir Nasri, Emmanuel Adebayor, Gaël 
Clichy, Kolo Touré and Bacary Sagna all moving to the Etihad Stadium asArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> looked to balance the books 
following their move to the Emirates.

Wenger joked that City had been “good clients” for Arsenal in the past but now 
insists his team are not as vulnerable as they once were. “It has reduced but 
it is still there,” the manager said, when asked if the financial gap between 
the two clubs had lessened. “We are not [as vulnerable] because today I feel we 
can give financial satisfaction and support ambitions and values that can make 
the players happy at this club.

“Before, perhaps the financial gap was too big a difference to keep our 
players. We could not compete, we had to sell players.”

Arsenal travel to Manchester having lost on Tuesday for just the second time 
in the league this season, beaten 2-1 at Everton, who took all three points 
through Ashley Williams’s late header. Wenger will have the same squad at his 
disposal but he did reveal that Aaron Ramsey should return to training next 
week following a hamstring problem, and Danny Welbeck is closing in on a return 
having not featured since the2-2 draw at City in May. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>

“Danny Welbeck is one week away from completing normal training to be back in 
the squad,” he added. “But of course that will take some time because now he 
hasn’t played for a long, long time.”

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/16/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Arsène Wenger warns no player is bigger than the club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/mesut-ozil-alexis-sanchez-will-not-be-sold-early-insists-arsene-wenger-arsenal> 