
If you've ever dozed off before the hidden track being on Ash's debut album 
1977, it's a fair bet you might have awoken in terror as possibly the most 
rancid five minutes of pissing, retching and spitting in the history of 
recorded sound kicks in. Sick Party,  which consists purely of bassist Mark 
Hamilton evacuating his body, was a brazen declaration of adolescence in all of 
its sticky-fingered lunacy.

Those for whom this five minutes of adolescence were never enough may find 
that new film Teenage Wildlife – released with their new Best Of and charting 
the band's sudden shot to fame following 1977's release – might fill that 
nagging hole. Narrated by Ewan McGregor to a savage script by the late NME 
journalist Steven Wells, it captures the trio of Hamilton, singer Tim Wheeler 
and drummer Rick McMurray as they embark on a gruelling world tour in their 
teens, delicate souls blasting out emphatic sounds in a musk of soupy sweat and 
stale socks.

Despite a throng of hysterical girls screaming at them wherever they go, Tim, 
Mark and Rick consistently betray their age. They remain unable to wake up, 
stay sober or walk past any kind of construction sign without stealing it. 
Pubic hair is set alight, while regular bollockings from their manager about 
their attitude towards industry big wigs ("Try and work with people rather than 
telling them to fuck off") are sandwiched in-between live shows that are both 
frenetic and ecstatic.

It's not all belching and knob gags though; like any snapshot of teenage life, 
things get gritty. The treadmill of interviews, gigs and journeying across the 
world in a van that constantly breaks down all eventually adds up. As Lost In 
You chimes over the top of a lonesome travel sequence, Tim's longing desires of 
"wanting to call you/ but it is late at night" suddenly sound intended for 
someone more maternal, rather than the receiver of a booty call that I used to 
imagine.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9mnP2iWl44k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9mnP2iWl44k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9mnP2iWl44k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
What the film truly illustrates is the stubborn, feckless and vulnerable 
traits of teenagerdom. It's difficult to think of any new artists who celebrate 
and illuminate this same chapter of life so perfectly, warts and all. Teen 
tunes seem to have become terribly introspective, terribly go-getting, terribly 
… dull. My Chemical Romance are grown men making music for gawky outsiders, 
it's scientifically impossible to smoke an apple bong along to Mumford & Sons 
and Ed Sheeran singing about a heroin addled prostitute ain't exactly a one-way 
ticket to LOLcity.

Surely the pre-20s are all about avoiding the imminent life of constant 
scrutiny, stress and striving that's yet to come?Ash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash> made brilliantly frenzied hits about 
love, sicking up and occasionally feeling a bit lonely. No emo. No banjos. No 
loop pedalling, anti-drug anthems. There's something realistic and raw about 
that.

The Best Of Ash is out now (Warner)
 