
So how were the 80s for you? Mine, certainly, were nothing like the BBC's 
version of them 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/may/23/royal-wedding-worried-about-boy>
. FromAshes to Ashes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/may/21/ashes-to-ashes-final-episode>
 andWorried About the Boy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/may/14/worried-about-the-boy>
 toRoyal Wedding 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/may/18/royal-wedding-nelsons-hospital-time-team>
 and an adaptation ofMartin Amis' Money 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/may/24/money-martin-amis-nick-frost-adaptation>
 – the corporation's portrayal of the decade has only underlined the difference 
between how "Tellyland Britain" spent the 80s and what the rest of us were 
really doing.

The iconic images of TV's 80s, of street parties decked in union flag bunting, 
Charles and Diana crockery, boys in dresses and day-glo blusher, girls in power 
suits with Boeing 747 shoulders, didn't quite make it to East Kilbride, where I 
became a teenager in 1984. The frenzied media interest in Charles and Di 
bemused us. No one I knew in Scotland had a union flag, and the idea of 
alfresco buffets – or bunting! – was anathema. Was it different outside 
Scotland, I wonder? Did the national spirit really match that of the royal 
wedding? Did you attend a street party?

Similarly, while I was aware of men who'd lost their jobs in manufacturing, I 
never met a ScottishGordon Gekko <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Gekko>. I 
read Martin Amis's Money and Bret Easton Ellis's American Psycho and loved 
both, but if anyone had actually flashed an "eggshell with Romalian type" 
business card at any of the Glasgow pubs I faked ID to get into, they'd have 
been severely reprimanded,John Smeaton  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Smeaton_%28born_1976%29>style.

There might have been some kids sporting the flamboyant, androgynous hallmarks 
of the new romantic look, but I never saw any while we were hanging around in 
Burger King. What we did have were leather-bound goths and pock-marked 
metallers being harassed by malevolent teenagers in Celtic and Rangers shirts. 
I belonged to the first group. We didn't dance to Culture Club, we sulked to 
the Cure. (Two of our brethren turned into the Jesus and Mary Chain, so the 
moody corner-hanging wasn't a complete waste of time.)

A quick ring-round of friends and acquaintances confirms that my version of 
the 80s was not entirely a result of being a gloomy, plain teenager living 
under a gothic Scottish rock. Ian in Edinburgh says that Charles and Di had 
"never even been a tea towel" in his life.

Lisa, who grew up a Catholic in Northern Ireland in the middle of the 
Troubles, had little time for symbols of British oppression – but she says her 
granny still loved the royals, just as she loved the pomp and ceremony of the 
Horse of the Year Show. I couldn't find a single person who'd attended a royal 
wedding street party, though Julian, who grew up in Nottingham, had a friend 
who had a sideboard filled entirely with royal memorabilia, and Stuart, from 
Hertfordshire, did drink his tea out of a Charles and Di mug. Perhaps this is 
closer to your experience of the 80s?

Stuart is the only person I speak to who knew a man who'd "gone up to the 
City" and returned wearing pinstripes and braces and flashing his cash 'n' 
Champers in the local pub, although he admits said chap came close to being 
assaulted a number of times. No one knows any boys who wore make-up or frilly 
blouses but Martin from Barrow does recall once being stared at when he walked 
down the high street with a friend who'd painted aZiggy Stardust flash upon her 
cheek <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJU595na-0w&feature=related>.

Lisa feels that her memories of frosted pink lipstick, outsized hoop ear-rings 
and turquoise Chelsea Girl leggings had been relatively well served by Ashes' 
Alex Drake but she did think the 80s we've been watching on TV were more 
informed by a collective nostalgia than the actual reality of the decade. TV 
80's were more nostalgic for TV than reality. Martin agrees. "That whole Boy 
George blitz scene, just like Charles and Di mania — two years into Thatcherism 
and the widening of the north/south divide, it already felt very southern, very 
far away. I think I thought that anyway – it's possible I just remember some 
kid on TV thinking it. It's easy to confuse the two."

So how has BBC2's 80s season been for you – and how much of it do you 
recognise and relate to? Was the decade different if you lived in London or the 
south-east? Let us know your experiences (and where they took place) below.
 