
More than a decade on, Sideways, the most successful wine movie of all time, 
is very much alive in the minds of those visiting the tasting rooms ofCalifornia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, and its effects are still 
being felt by wine producers from Santa Barbara in the south to Sonoma in the 
north.

“We reckon Sideways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jan/28/paul-giamatti> will be mentioned 
between five and 10 times a week,” Steve Fennell, winemaker and custodian of 
Sanford & Benedict, one of America’s most famous vineyards, says.

Saidoweizu: the Japanese remake of Sideways and other unlikely films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2014/apr/27/saidoweizu-japanese-remake-sideways>
The film, a 2004 hit for director Alexander Payne who adapted it from a book 
of the same name, is an engaging tale of a pair of feckless slobs on a stag 
trip in wine country. Its latest interpretation will see it move to the stage 
in a play directed by David Grindley (Daytona, Journey’s End, The American Plan
) inLondon in May <https://www.stjamestheatre.co.uk/theatre/sideways/>.

In the film, Paul Giamatti’s character Miles’s love of pinot noir is matched 
only by his implacable hatred of merlot. This simple juxtaposition of the two 
grapes had a seismic effect on the production of pinot noir in California 
following the film’s release, and a lesser, negative effect on merlot.

In 2008 the American Association of Wine Economists published The Sideways 
Effect: A Test for Changes in the Demand for Merlot and Pinot Noir Wines 
<http://www.winesandvines.com/template.cfm?section=features&content=61265>, 
establishing with terrifyingly complex equations the “precipitous” increase in 
pinot noir sales. Nielsen, the marketing firm, reported a 16% jump against the 
previous year, while the Austrian glassmaker Riedel said sales were up 45% in 
the US, mainly due to demand for its pinot noir glasses. Merlot sales suffered 
a similar, though not so dramatic, drop.

Sideways is set in the Santa Ynez Valley, a beautiful, unspoilt stretch of 
wine country with farmsteads, paddocks and fruit trees. The influence of the 
Pacific is felt on two sides of this boxy promontory: the hills – uniquely for 
this part of the coast – run west to east, funnelling cooling wind and fog 
inland.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS9ocP6FNvM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS9ocP6FNvM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS9ocP6FNvM&media=>
 Sideways trailer 
“In the early 2000s in Manhattan you would never have seen a man with a glass 
of wine in his hand, let alone pinot,” winemakerJamie Kutch 
<https://kutchwines.com/> recalls. “It was all cocktails and spirits. Then I 
started seeing the transition to pinot noir. When I went back to New York in 
’08, ’09, I’d ask every sommelier, ‘How are pinot noir sales’, and the answer 
would be, ‘Incredible. We can’t keep the stocks.’”

Fast-forward eight years and the film’s effects remain, but not all vineyard 
owners have welcomed its influence. Jim Clendenen, who founded hisAu Bon Climat 
<http://www.aubonclimat.com/> winery in 1982, quickly forged a reputation as a 
producer of great pinot noir in the Burgundian style.

“What the movie really did was open up a category of pinot noir that was not 
pinot noir,” he says. “When people like sweet, bold, flat wines, you can’t give 
them lighter coloured, elegant wines they’ve never had the like of before. You 
can’t take someone from zero to 100 in one move.”

It still reverberates around the industry… [the film] created a mania around 
pinot noir
Mike McEvoy, VP Joseph Phelps 
He is not alone. Four hundred miles north, on the windswept Sonoma coast, 
Jasmine Hirsch <http://www.hirschvineyards.com/>, whose family has made pinot 
since 1980, accusesSideways of being “a contributing factor to the growing 
volume of massive, high-alcohol, clunky pinots produced in the world”.

It’s certainly true there was a bandwagon effect. Increased demand in the 
tasting rooms drove many producers to release pinots in a style calculated to 
appeal to those who liked their wines big and bold. “This is the pinot I make 
for merlot lovers,” one winemaker says.

But it also inspired a new generation to head to the coast to craft wines in 
the Burgundian style. Kutch, whose label is favoured by pinot lovers, was a 
commodities trader with a serious wine habit a decade ago. “Sideways had an 
impact on me. I was in Manhattan when it was released, trading Nasdaq stocks 
and thinking of going into wine. Without a doubt that movie was a boost.”
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/california-winelands/giv-27167tngvBBeijD3o/>
“It still reverberates around the industry,” says Mike McEvoy of Joseph Phelps 
<http://www.josephphelps.com/>, one of the Napa valley’s great cabernet 
sauvignon producers, which was already developing land on the Sonoma coast for 
pinot production when the film came out. “Our schedule wasn’t influenced by the 
film but it certainly created a mania around pinot noir at a time when we had 
no product. We could have benefited more in the short term.”

Nowhere is the reverberation felt more keenly than at the Hitching Post II, 
the restaurant in the town of Buellton where some ofSideways’ most memorable 
scenes were shot. “People still talk about it, they request the table where 
Miles and Jack sat, they revisit all the wineries in the film,” manager Angel 
Carmona says.

Sideways, which took $100m in its first six months and was garnered with 
awards, including the Oscar for best adapted screenplay, made the career of 
Giamatti, now one of Hollywood’s most bankable character actors. Payne has seen 
a similar career trajectory, going on to direct George Clooney inThe Descendants
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/29/descendants-george-clooney-review>
 to critical acclaim.

As for Rex Pickett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/feb/01/fiction.features>, author of the 
original novel and the stage version (he had no hand in the film’s screenplay), 
he has written a sequel calledVertical. In 2012 he said he was disappointed 
that Payne was not interested in filming it. “There are 13 million people out 
there who want to see this,” he said. “It’s a no-brainer.”

Sideways: The Play opens in May at St James Theatre 
<https://www.stjamestheatre.co.uk/theatre/sideways/>, London, for an initial 
eight-week run.

WHAT IS IT ABOUT PINOT?

Pinot noir is notoriously the most difficult variety of grape to grow. 
Thin-skinned, early-ripening, prone to rot and disease, it thrives in only a 
handful of places. It must be constantly nurtured and picked when acidity and 
sugar are in perfect balance. Get it right and it is sublime, leave it too long 
and it turns to jam.

In Burgundy, where pinot is the only permitted black grape, it produces wines 
of astonishing complexity and depth – and price: one of Domaine de la 
Romanée-Conti’s top wines has just been released at around £2,000 a bottle.

Parts of California, particularly the wind-cooled Pacific coast, are fine 
pinot country, as are the cooler regions of Oregon, New Zealand and Chile. At 
its best, pinot noir is a sensual experience, richly fruited, perfumed and 
mouthwatering. As Miles says in the movie: “Its flavours, they’re just the most 
haunting and brilliant and thrilling and subtle and ancient on the planet.”
 