
A fly lands on Evan Rachel Wood’s lovely face, but she doesn’t swat it away 
because she is a robot called Dolores, one of the automatons in HBO’s 
Westworld. “A place with unlimited possibilities,” is how she describes the 
bubble she calls home, a carefully rendered cowboy town, designed for the 
pleasure of human visitors, who can shoot and shag at will, safe in the 
knowledge that the inhabitants are all pleasure-bots. Forgers forge, sheriffs 
police and barmen serve whiskey from behind amazing moustaches. Welcome to
Westworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>, where 
everything is fine and dandy. For now.

Westworld was originally a 1973 sci-fi movie starring Yul Brynner as a 
malfunctioning robot gunslinger who runs amok in a wild west theme park. 
Basically, for writer-director Michael Crichton it was a dry run for his later 
franchise Jurassic Park. The guy really hates theme parks. What the movie did 
in 88 minutes, this 10-part series plans to chew over for longer. Which means 
there is more to it than a tech malfunction when things start to go wrong. 
Westworld the series goes beyond merciless killer droids and ponders – like 
Blade Runner and Channel 4’s Humans – the possibility of sentience and the 
nature of memory. And, given the lack of rules in the wild west, the show 
pulses with baseness and boobies in the same way Game Of Thrones does. It’s 
just a different fantasy world this time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJctIuZfSsa4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJctIuZfSsa4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJctIuZfSsa4&media=>
Anthony Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> is Robert 
Ford, architect-in-chief with an obvious god complex, who insists on updating 
the bots with “reveries”, hints of an interior life based on memories of old 
interactions. He dwells in a basement in the park’s nerve centre, alongside all 
the decommissioned “hosts” (a polite euphemism for the droids) and is tolerated 
by management as the eccentric genius behind it all. Borgen’s Sidse Babett 
Knudsen (the best prime minister Denmark never had) works there too, as head 
naysayer. Whenever something glitches, she shakes her head, stubs out a fag and 
warns her colleagues to take the rogue host out of circulation. Do they listen? 
No, because they’re too busy sneaking a cheeky snog with one of the 
powered-down fembots. Is it OK to kiss someone if they’re on standby?

The story’s focus is good-hearted, sweet Dolores, a host whose primary 
function is to be rescued by punters harbouring a knight in shining armour 
fantasyhero complex. Or it seems that way until the appearance of Ed Harris. As 
“The Man in Black” he makes it immediately clear how he sees these lumps of 
latex, nylon hair and motherboards. Camp doesn’t even begin to cover it and I 
suspect Westworld the TV series is entirely funded by and has been made 
specifically for Harris to ponce about in in a big, black coat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwestworld-westeros-anthony-hopkins-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9b29921c1cec9453fcc38d42a5166e2411811a0%2F196_111_5386_3231%2F5386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%3A%20is%20it%20Westeros%20with%20lassos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwestworld-westeros-anthony-hopkins-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%3A%20is%20it%20Westeros%20with%20lassos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwestworld-westeros-anthony-hopkins-hbo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9b29921c1cec9453fcc38d42a5166e2411811a0%2F196_111_5386_3231%2F5386.jpg>
 Anthony Hopkins as Robert Ford in Westworld. Photograph: HBO 
Of course, in our world, where folk willingly spend hours driving around Grand 
Theft Auto beating up call girls, it’s not much of a leap to imagine a 3D 
future gaming environment in which jaded punters can use their listless trigger 
fingers on fleshy avatars with beautiful eyes. It’s The Crystal Maze experience 
with blood bags and realistic orifices. The main purpose of Westworld is, 
seemingly, to offer an outlet for man’s worst urges. Otherwise contained 
accountants can shoot baddies and bed prostitutes, knowing it’s all pretend. 
But the one bum note is the presence of children. It’d be stag party central 
and yet some families bring their kids which seems totally unbelievable, given 
that banditos are getting their faces shot clean off their heads by vengeful 
escort-bots every five minutes.

The trouble with brutalising a bunch of robots on a daily basis, though, is 
what happens when they start to remember what you did. Thanks to Ford and his 
“reveries”, we are about to find out how they “feel” about their treatment. 
Clue: ticked off and a bit killy. In a lumpen bit of exposition, several bots 
are asked if they could ever hurt another living thing, to which they, of 
course, answer: “No sir”. But the oft-repeated shot of a fly landing on a bot’s 
cheek takes on new horror by the end of the episode, and suggests their 
attitudes might change.

Yes, there are a lot of breasts and, so far, the women are either robots at 
the mercy of punters or professionals not listened to by their colleagues. But 
otherwise, this is an impressive opening that ponders the qualities that make 
us human without bludgeoning us over the head with the differences between man 
and machine. And the cast is terrific. I’m jumping aboard the stagecoach, 
heavy-handed fly motif and all.

 * Westworld begins on Tuesday 4 October, 9pm, Sky Atlantic
 