
From the opening minutes and the relatively recent phenomenon of laser beams 
in the eyes to the final moments and the much older practice of spitting, and 
the 90 minutes in between, Al Hilal threw everything at Western Sydney 
Wanderers in the 2014 Asian Champions League final. Yet, the A-League team, 
leading 1-0 from the first leg a week previously,stood firm to draw 0-0 in 
Riyadh in front of 65,000 fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/02/western-sydney-wanderers-win-asian-champions-league-title>
.

It is surely the football story of the year. The Wanderers are champions of 
Asia. Three years ago, people would have claimed you were crazy to say such a 
thing – and they would have been right. Three years ago, there was no such 
thing asWestern Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers> yet here they 
were on Saturday evening, driving millions of Saudi Arabian fans mad with 
frustration before lifting the biggest prize in the world’s biggest continent.

The Red and Black rode their luck. Japanese referee Yuichi Nishimura probably 
should have given Al Hilal three penalties but the official, perhaps mindful of 
his performance in this year’s World Cupwhen he gave the Brazilian hosts a soft 
spot kick <http://www.bbc.com/sport/0/football/25285029>, was in no mind to 
give the Riyadh club the same treatment. Croatia fans will sympathise. Aussies 
won’t care, especially the 14 who managed to get visas and travelled all the 
way from Sydney, a trip of almost 13,000km, the longest ever in Asian club 
history.

More than the referee however, Ante Covic and Tony Popovic deserve the focus. 
The goalkeeper was great in Sydney and godlike in Saudi Arabia with a late save 
from Yasser Al Qahtani particularly memorable for the visitors and 
heartbreaking for the hosts. The coach got it exactly right, for the second 
time in seven days. At the age of 41, he has pulled off one of the greatest 
ever achievements in Asian football. There was luck in the final, as there has 
been along the way, but there has been plenty more besides.

Regardless of the result in Riyadh, the Wanderers had already made Asia sit up 
and take notice. Dismissed after that opening game defeat at home to Ulsan 
Horang-i and then playing some of the really big boys, the A-League club’s 
adventures looked like they were about to end more times than Peter Jackson’s 
Return of the King. Sanfrecce Hiroshima were coming off successive Japanese 
championshipsand went out on away goals 
<http://www.goal.com/en-au/match/sanfrecce-hiroshima-vs-western-sydney-wanderers/1674229/report>
. Fine, but Guangzhou Evergrande was different – holders and far more besides. 
Yet the Chinese powerhousewas also run over by this Aussie express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/01/western-sydney-wanderers-through-to-asian-champions-league-final>
 and a meek FC Seoul, 2013 runners-up,were overcome in the semi-finals 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-10-01/western-sydney-wanderers-through-to-asian-champions-league-fina/5784098>
. It was like beating the English, Spanish and German champions on the way to 
the European final. Nobody can argue that the Wanderers didn’t deserve to take 
the King Fahd field.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwestern-sydney-wanderers-are-kings-of-asia-and-the-football-story-of-the-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F1%2F1414880157216%2Fd81faf63-d742-41ac-a8e1-7eb5beab2f8c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Western%20Sydney%20Wanderers%20are%20kings%20of%20Asia%20-%20and%20football%20story%20of%20the%20year%20%7C%20John%20Duerden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwestern-sydney-wanderers-are-kings-of-asia-and-the-football-story-of-the-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Western%20Sydney%20Wanderers%20are%20kings%20of%20Asia%20-%20and%20football%20story%20of%20the%20year%20%7C%20John%20Duerden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwestern-sydney-wanderers-are-kings-of-asia-and-the-football-story-of-the-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F1%2F1414880157216%2Fd81faf63-d742-41ac-a8e1-7eb5beab2f8c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Wanderers fans celebrate victory in Parramatta. Photograph: Mark Kolbe/Getty 
Images 
Only the Wanderers know if they have surprised themselves but they have 
certainly amazed Asia though it remains to be seen what effect the success has 
on the perception of theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>
 on the giant continent. These exploits have deepened respect for the 
traditional Aussie football strengths without, perhaps, changing any opinions.

As Sydney FC captain Alex Brosque told the Guardian of his time with two past 
Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> winners Urawa 
Reds and Al Ain, the Wanderers’ style reinforces existing stereotypes – they 
play pretty much how people expect Aussie teams to play. “With my time both in 
Japan and the UAE I’ve noticed that the general feel for Australian footballers 
is that we’re hard working, physical players. And that Australian teams are 
also very physical but well organised.” Brosque believes that perceptions about 
the strength of the A-League will change only with sustained and regular 
success in Asia.

What has changed (apart from, it is to be hoped, Australia’s view of the Asian 
game), is how Asia sees Australian football off the pitch. Empty seats are a 
Champions League staple in many countries but not in Western Sydney. More than 
that, the Red and Black provide passion and spectacle that have captivated many 
a television commentator or reporter from China, Japan and Korea and now wider 
afield. The Wanderers have improved the image of the A-League more with what 
they did off the field than what they did on it, impressive though that was. 
All knew that Australian teams were usually tough to play against but few knew 
about theRed and Black Bloc <http://www.redandblackbloc.org/> and what had been 
happening in the country’s biggest city. Looking down under from Asia, 
Australian football seems to be buzzing and booming.

What all in Asia did know, and the Wanderers are finding out, is that poor 
domestic form is another tradition observed by those teams that achieve 
continental success. Guangzhou Evergrande are the only team in recent years to 
claim both domestic and continental titles but had the squad to wrap the 
Chinese league up long before defeating FC Seoul in the ACL final. The Koreans 
had no such luxury and reaching the final led to the club dropping out of the 
K-League title race. That had nothing on the sorry tale of Urawa Reds in 2007. 
The Japanese giant won the Asian crown and then, so exhausted were Holger 
Osieck’s men that they let a 10-point lead at the top of the J-League slip. 
That’s bad enough, but that cushion only had to last for five games.The 
Wanderers have lost both their games so far this season, conceding seven goals 
<http://www.a-league.com.au/ladder>, not enough to cause serious worries but 
enough to remind that success in Asia comes at a price, even if it is one worth 
paying.

And it is definitely worth paying. Nights such as this don’t come around very 
often. Al Hilal with all their millions have yet to win the Asian Champions 
League and as was clear, are pretty desperate to do so. Yet here are Western 
Sydney Wanderers, with a salary cap that is less than 10% of the Riyadh club’s 
broadcasting deal, heading to the Fifa Club World Cup. It could be Real 
Madrid’s turn to tear their hair out when faced with this red and black wall 
but whatever happens in December, the Wanderers are already the football story 
of the year, anywhere.

 

 