
It started in 2005 with a double-sided DVD, found by a friend in the bargain 
bin of a local discount shop. On one side was The Independent, a Jerry Stiller 
comedy about a B-movie director (“excruciatingly unamusing” – The Miami 
Herald). The other side didn’t look terribly promising, either: the film’s 
title, Wet Hot American Summer, sounded like top-shelf smut. On its sleeve was 
what looked like a crudely drawn knock-off of a National Lampoon poster. It 
seemed at best like it would be a bawdy, brainless comedy in the manner of the 
80s cult favourite Porky’s, and at worse its sequel, Porky’s Revenge.

Wet Hot American Summer is back – but did it typecast its comedy all-stars?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/03/wet-hot-american-summer-cast-reunited>
Early impressions weren’t exactly auspicious. The only remotely famous people 
among the cast were Janeane Garofalo and David Hyde Pierce, who played Niles in 
Frasier. The rest were comic actors who I vaguely recognised from bit-part 
roles in other films and TV shows: Paul Rudd, Amy Poehler, Bradley Cooper,
Elizabeth Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabeth-banks>. Set at the 
last day of summer at a rickety looking place called Camp Firewood, the film 
parodied the knockabout camp comedies of the 1970s and 80s (Meatballs, 
SpaceCamp, National Lampoon’s Vacation), but done in such an unerringly 
accurate way, that it was hard to distinguish it from the thing it was mocking. 
Its cast, largely made up of adults dressed rather creepily as teens in shorts 
and pop socks, traded dick jokes and banal snippets of dialogue; “I don’t want 
this summer to end”, that sort of thing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRByrRpURS5s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRByrRpURS5s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRByrRpURS5s&media=>
But gradually things began to get weird, in a good way. The camp’s chef, a 
shell-shocked Vietnam vet, started taking advice from a talking can of 
vegetables. A camp helper let a kid drown and then covered it up by driving 
witnesses out into the woods and leaving them there. And, then there was the 
film’s funniest scene, a cheerful montage where the camp’s teen supervisors 
drove into town for a wild afternoon, which began with them buying cigarettes 
and beer and escalated to them shooting up heroin in a desolate squat, before 
returning to the camp as fresh-faced as they were when they left.

By the time the film reached its bizarro climax, with one half of the camp 
preparing for the big talent show, and the other half trying to stop a piece of 
falling NASA satellite from hitting the camp, I was a Wet Hot American Summer 
convert. I wasn’t the only one. A quick Google search revealed that the film 
had a loyal following on message boards and fansites. “It became this sort of 
secret thing, says David Wain, who along with Michael Showalter wrote and 
directed Wet Hot American Summer. “‘Hey hey, there’s this film you’ve never 
heard of. Take a look.’ And little by little by little over the years, people 
started to find out about it.”


A lot more people are about to find out about it now. Fourteen years after the 
first Wet Hot American Summer, Wain and Showalter have returned to Camp 
Firewood for a prequel series called Wet Hot American Summer: First Day Of 
Camp, which Netflix has snapped up. And, in an act of casting that would make 
Scorsese jealous, they’re bringing a sizeable chunk of Hollywood with them: all 
of the original campers are returning – even the now A-list quartet of Rudd, 
Poehler, Cooper and Banks – along with newcomers Michael Cera, Chris Pine, 
Kristen Wiig, Weird Al Yankovic and roughly half the cast of Mad Men.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fwet-hot-american-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437576300332%2Fb994d3fc-40ae-417f-be18-4b2cffd035d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wet%20Hot%20American%20Summer%3A%20the%20obscure%20cult%20favourite%20is%20about%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20reboot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fwet-hot-american-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wet%20Hot%20American%20Summer%3A%20the%20obscure%20cult%20favourite%20is%20about%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20reboot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fwet-hot-american-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437576300332%2Fb994d3fc-40ae-417f-be18-4b2cffd035d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jocks away: the cast of Wet Hot American Summer. Photograph: Saeed Adyani 
Paul Rudd on Ant-Man, being Hollywood’s go-to nice guy and growing up with 
English parents in Kansas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/paul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas>
Getting this murderer’s row of comic talent together wasn’t the arduous task 
you might have thought. “The main tool we had was enthusiasm on everyone’s 
part,” Wain says. The original WHAS was what Poehler has described as “a 
non-stop party”; cast members used to film their anarchic scenes during the day 
and retire to their rickety bunks to get wasted in the evenings. (Garofalo, who 
has since stopped drinking, has spoken of being “drunk 90% of the time” on 
set.) Reliving this hedonistic moment of their pasts – though perhaps without 
the levels of bacchanalia in the original shoot – proved irresistible for those 
involved. “We quite simply called up everyone on the phone and said: ‘We want 
to do this, are you in?’” Wain recalls. “And everyone said: ‘Sure, tell me 
where to go.’”

Perhaps the most surprising thing about First Day Of Camp isn’t who’s 
appearing in it, but that it’s happening at all. Wet Hot American Summer bombed 
spectacularly on its release in 2001, and received savage critical notices. 
Roger Ebert hated the film so much that he wrote a review in the style of Allan 
Sherman’s novelty song Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh (“Oh, Muddah Faddah/ Life’s 
too short for cinematic torture”). For a company like Netflix, looking for 
surefire hits in the streaming wars, there were surely more reliable sources 
for adaptation.

That said, the streaming network has previous in reviving cult properties, 
having saved Arrested Development, and Wet Hot American Summer certainly fits 
that description. Several years after its initial flop, Wain and Showalter 
noticed that university campuses were hosting midnight screenings of the film, 
or got wind of fancy-dress parties, with college students dressing as Gene the 
troubled chef, or Rudd’s feckless biker boy Andy. It was even making, and 
breaking up, relationships.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fwet-hot-american-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437576155601%2F25e9a7b8-61d1-46bd-a017-58468d2ff164-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wet%20Hot%20American%20Summer%3A%20the%20obscure%20cult%20favourite%20is%20about%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20reboot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fwet-hot-american-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wet%20Hot%20American%20Summer%3A%20the%20obscure%20cult%20favourite%20is%20about%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20reboot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fwet-hot-american-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437576155601%2F25e9a7b8-61d1-46bd-a017-58468d2ff164-1020x612.jpeg>
 Wet Hot American Summer co-creators Michael Showalter (left) and David Wain. 
“I’d hear about people who would go on a date and whether or not the person 
who they went on a date with liked Wet Hot American Summer was some sort of 
litmus test about their personality,” says Showalter. “If you got it, it meant 
that you were a certain kind of person, and if you didn’t get it, then that 
meant you were done.”

It was that divisive quality which both buried WHAS in the first place and 
ensured its cult status further down the line. Wain says that a common response 
was to hate the film the first time and then love it on second viewing. “It 
became their favourite movie,” he says.

“That idea that it starts out feeling conventional and then becomes very 
crazy, a lot of people aren’t prepared for the absurd part,” adds Showalter. 
“They want it to stay in that more conventional place, so when the comedy 
becomes, for a lack of a better word, more ‘meta’, where we’re deconstructing 
genre, I think a lot of audience members just checked out.”

If Wain and Showalter are worried about people checking out again, they 
certainly haven’t let it affect the end product. If anything, First Day Of Camp 
doubles down on the first film’s self-referential quirkiness. The small, 
self-enclosed story that made up the original spirals off into new tangents in 
the prequel: there’s a daft thriller subplot involving lethal green goo and Jon 
Hamm as a contract killer, and – finally – we learn the origin story of that 
talking can. Also disconcerting is the fact that people who, in Wain’s words 
were “13 years too old to play teenagers in the first place” are now, in many 
cases, in their 40s and playing characters two months younger than they were in 
the first film. The costumes are a little bit tighter, the frown lines a bit 
more pronounced.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW6tyKjNsyns&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW6tyKjNsyns>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW6tyKjNsyns&media=>
Equally, though, there’s a sense that in the time between WHAS and it’s 
prequel-sequel, comedy has caught up with Wain and Showalter’s way of thinking. 
TV has embraced the sort of highly attuned parody first foisted upon us by 
WHAS, from Garth Marenghi to Will Ferrell’s Spoils Of Babylon. Meanwhile, gonzo 
comedy channel Adult Swim has made a killing from the same sort of slapstick 
stoner surrealism seen in Wain and Showalter’s work.

Appreciation for the sort of strange, self-referential humour that Wain and 
Showalter specialise in has grown in the years since WHAS. Might First Day Of 
Camp actually be a hit? The pair are cautiously optimistic. “I hope that, this 
time around, the larger audience will be ready to embrace that meta stuff too, 
because that’s a big part of what we do,” says Showalter. And even if it tanks 
again, there’s always the chance that someone might find it in a bargain bin 
and pass it on to a friend.

Wet Hot American Summer: First Day Of Camp is on Netflix from Friday 31 July

• This article was amended on 28 July 2015 to correct the Michael Showalter 
and David Wain picture caption.
 