
I adore chocolate desserts, but I can never find much time to prepare them. Do 
you have any recipes for a quick chocolate pudding that I could whip up for 
after dinner?

Gavin Brammall, Leicester

Real chocolate puddings take only minutes to prepare, but will need time to 
set. A reliable and easy recipe for a chocolate mousse is the 6-5-4 method: 
6 yolks, 5oz (140g) of sugar and 4oz (125ml) of water. You'll also need 225g of 
dark chocolate (70% cocoa solids), 550ml double cream and 3 egg whites.

Gently melt the chocolate (give it 15-second blasts in the microwave) and whip 
the cream into soft folds. Boil the sugar and water until the sugar has 
dissolved and whisk this into the egg yolks. Continue whisking over a pan of 
simmering water until the mixture falls in thick, hot ribbons. Transfer to an 
electric mixer and whisk until cool. Manually whisk in the melted chocolate, 
then gently fold in the whipped cream. Whip the egg whites to the same 
consistency as the chocolate mixture and fold them in. Refrigerate for around 2 
hours, or until set. Once it has become firm, the mousse will stay glossy in 
the fridge for 2-3 days.

Another quick pud I love is pancakes. They freeze brilliantly, so you can keep 
a stack in the freezer and defrost them as and when you fancy a treat. Here, 
the chocolate comes in the form of a rich ganache filling. You'll need 
125ml double cream, 200g chocolate (70%) and 60g unsalted butter, melted.

Gently melt the chocolate, stir in the butter then mix in the cream. This 
chocolate cream can be flavoured with grated orange zest, finely chopped 
crystallised ginger, or a shot of your favourite liqueur. Spread it over the 
pancakes and either roll or fold them. I always add a spoonful of fresh fruit, 
such as pears, pineapple or raspberries.

• Sonya Kidney is a chef and the owner of Soda delicatessen, Oxfordshire
 