
We produce drone shoots of luxury properties, and I would like to edit the raw 
footage and add graphics in-house. Please can you suggest which software is the 
easiest to use and most intuitive to create professional videos on both Windows 
and Mac? Paul Coleman

Bad news I’m afraid. No serious video editing program is intuitive or easy to 
use, and the more power you need, the harder things get.

Worse news still. There are dozens of options, but there is no “best”. Or at 
least, the best option depends on the video file formats you are trying to 
edit, the hardware you have available, what you need to do, how skilled you 
are, and your personal taste in software.

There is good news, though. Most video editors are free, or offer free trial 
periods, or have limited free versions with paid upgrades to the full versions.
Software <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/software> houses expect you to 
try a few programs before you find one that suits you.

Pick a simple editing operation and try it with the most likely options using 
the same 60-second video. If you can’t manage a simple operation in a 
reasonable time, you won’t have much luck with the complicated ones.

Training wheels

If you are new to editing video, start with a simple program to learn the 
basics. Microsoft’sMovie Maker 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/14220/windows-movie-maker-download> 
is the obvious choice for Windows users, and Apple’s iMovie for Mac users. Both 
can produce videos you could put on YouTube. I wouldn’t recommend them for your 
website, which already includes some very professional videos, but the 
experience should help you to choose a more advanced program.

Movie Maker has not been updated since 2012 and is not officially supported on 
Windows 10, though you can still download and run it. The many alternatives 
include open sourceAvidemux <http://fixounet.free.fr/avidemux/> and the VSDC 
Free Video Editor <http://www.videosoftdev.com/free-video-editor>. I think 
VSDC’s interface is more attractive, but Avidemux has a betteruser guide 
<http://www.avidemux.org/admWiki/doku.php?id=build:doctop>. VSDC pushes its 
paid-for ($29.99 lifetime) upgrade, but you can actually use it – look for the 
“Continue” button.

You could also try Wondershare’s Filmora <http://filmora.wondershare.com/> 
(Mac and Windows), which has an “easy mode”, and/or the cloud-basedWeVideo 
<https://www.wevideo.com/sign-up>. Both have the same drawback: the free 
versions watermark your videos. However, both are cheap if they do what you 
need. Filmora costs $49.99 for a lifetime of personal use or $99.98 for 
business use. Unlimited WeVideo costs $69 per year.

Another easy alternative is GoPro Studio 
<https://gopro.com/software-app/gopro-studio#description>. This is aimed at 
GoPro owners who are new to editing videos, but it’s free to everyone. If you 
are not using a GoPro camera, you may have to convert yourvideo files 
<https://gopro.com/support/articles/what-type-of-media-files-can-i-add-to-a-gopro-studio-20-project>
 to a compatible mp4 format. If this fails, GoPro has a help page:Video Fails 
to Import into GoPro Studio 
<https://gopro.com/support/articles/video-fails-to-import-into-gopro-studio>.

Advanced editing

The premier PC video editing software is Adobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> Premier Pro, which runs on both 
Macs and Windows PCs. This is the best choice for most professional purposes. 
It has the most hardware and software support, and the most official and 
unofficial help in the form of tutorial videos, books and online articles. It’s 
the editor most professionals know, so you can always hire someone for a 
difficult project, or pass your unfinished in-house project to an outside 
studio.

You can buy Adobe Premier Pro as a standalone program or rent it as part of 
Adobe’sCreative Suite <https://www.adobe.com/uk/creativecloud.html>. You may 
already use other CS programs such as Photoshop. Lightroom, Illustrator, 
InDesign, and Audition. It’s not cheap, but professional tools rarely are.

Apple’s Final Cut Pro is an alternative for Mac users, and it’s the best 
choice for home/small business users who already know iMovie. However, if you 
don’t have a high-end Mac, I’d be cautious about buying one to run it.

Final Cut Pro X upset a lot of professional video editors 
<http://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/01/video-pros-apple-needs-to-acknowledge-the-pro-industry-and-fast/>
 because Apple “consumerised” it and changed their workflows. Some were already 
abandoning Macs because of the lack of an easily upgradable tower system, which 
hasn’t been helped by Apple’s failure to upgrade the Mac Pro for three years. 
Professional video editors always want more speed, because time is money. They 
often want to upgrade their processors and graphics cards when new technologies 
arrive, and big PC towers enable that.

Of course, you don’t need either Adobe Premier Pro or Final Cut Pro X to edit 
drone footage. However, you will have to invest a lot of time to learn video 
editing, and if you’re doing it for professional purposes, you should consider 
using professional software.

Mid-range to pro

Many other video editing programs can produce professional results, but there 
is no consensus about which is best.

The main contenders include Adobe Premiere Elements, Sony Vegas Pro and Vegas 
Movie Studio,Cyberlink’s new PowerDirector 15 <http://www.cyberlink.com/>, 
Corel Video Studio <http://www.videostudiopro.com/en/products/videostudio/pro/>,
Magix Movie Edit Pro 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Magix-MAGIX-Movie-Edit-Pro/dp/B01KA66OI0/>, 
Editshare’sLightworks <http://www.editshare.com/products/lightworks>, and 
Blackmagic’sDaVinci Resolve 
<https://www.blackmagicdesign.com/uk/products/davinciresolve>. Many programs 
come in several versions to cover the range from beginners to advanced users.

Adobe Premiere Elements 16 
<http://www.adobe.com/uk/products/premiere-elements.html> has only just come 
out, and would be a good choice if you think you might move to Premier Pro 
later. At the time of writing, it hasn’t reached Amazon.co.uk, but you could 
buy it from Adobe or pick up an earlier version at a lower price.

I have previously recommended Sony Vegas Movie Studio for its power and ease 
of use. However, in May,Sony sold most of its creative products to Magix 
<http://www.sonycreativesoftware.com/news/pressreleases/2016/sony-creative-software-sell-products-to-magix>
, including the six programs in the Vegas range and loads of audio and music 
software. The future is unpredictable, butVegas Movie Studio 13 Platinum 
<http://www.vegascreativesoftware.com/us/vegas-movie-studio-product-comparison/>
 still looks a reasonable program for a beginner, with the Vegas Pro range as 
an upgrade.

Corel Video Studio, Cyberlink PowerDirector, Magix Movie Edit Pro and other 
video editors also have their fans. I suspect most users are amateurs, but they 
should all be able to do what you need.

Finally, both Lightworks and DaVinci Resolve 
<https://www.blackmagicdesign.com/sa/support/family/davinci-resolve-and-fusion> 
are powerful professional programs with free versions, but I wouldn’t recommend 
either to beginners. The free Lightworks only works for videos up to 720p, but 
there’s a Linux version, so it appeals to people who can’t run Adobe or Apple 
software. DaVinci Resolve’s highlight feature is colour correction. In both 
cases, I’d suggest watching some introductory videos (Lightworks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gdPBe_nLjc8>, Resolve 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PgTRPXsgv-I>) and video tutorials before 
downloading them.

Keep it simple

I’ve never edited any drone footage, but I am sure that there are plenty of 
tips and tricks in the forums devoted to drone photography. There are also 
companies that specialise in this area, such asHexii Aerial Imaging 
<http://www.hexiiaerialimaging.com/cinematic-post-production/> (which says it 
uses Adobe Premier and After Effects, plus DaVinci Resolve for grading).

I suggest that you keep things as simple as possible, rather than trying to 
compete with Hexii orDigital Snowball 
<http://www.digitalsnowball.com/5-tips-on-drone-video-editing>. All the best 
video editing is done in the mind, by choosing the best clips and putting them 
in the most compelling order. If you can nail that, nobody is going to miss the 
fancy editing tricks.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 