
As a pastime, four-wheel driving used to strike me as pointless, if I ever 
thought of it at all. It seemed just a means to more interesting ends, such as 
hunting, fishing or tramping, rather than a pursuit in itself – isn’t all 
driving four-wheeled?

My lack of interest, coupled with the fact that I am a) intimidated by the 
outdoors and b) a woman, meant I fell squarely in the target demographic for the
Girls Got Grit package 
<http://www.australianoffroadacademy.com.au/#!ladies-weekends/c14mp> offered by 
the Australian Offroad Academy on Fraser Island – a two-day driver training 
course.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f9025772ba2d5d973748a05b2de9ceb58c48eb4%2F161_0_747_931%2F747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f9025772ba2d5d973748a05b2de9ceb58c48eb4%2F161_0_747_931%2F747.jpg>
 Guardian Australia’s deputy audience editor, Elle Hunt, with the keys to the 
‘Silver Surfer’. Photograph: Elle Hunt for the Guardian 
Billed as “a practical weekend of 4x4 skills and good times”, the idea is to 
make four-wheel driving accessible and fun for people like me – 
round-shouldered, tweet-happy desk jockeys whose idea of a good time is seven 
standard drinks and/or the new season of Orange Is the New Black.

In two days, I’d be taught tyre pressure, traction control, track assessment 
and vehicle recovery – with cheese platters, bottles of bubbly and resort 
accommodation thrown in. It’s an outdoorsy, practical alternative to the 
standard hens’ party or girls’ weekend itinerary, organisers suggest; all I 
needed was my driver’s licence.


You had me at “cheese platter”, if not “traction control”. But the real 
drawcard was a weekend on Fraser, a heritage-listed area 200km from Brisbane in 
the Great Sandy national park. The world’s largest sand island, it has no 
bitumen roads, meaning it is not suitable for conventional cars; even 
four-wheel drives with low ground clearance might struggle on some of its more 
roughly hewn tracks.

Fraser is perhaps best known for its dingo population, the purest in Australia 
because of its removal from the carnal temptation of mainland mutts. Their 
presence is signposted from the moment you step on to the dock at Kingfisher 
Bay – in the distinct impression of paw prints in the sand and on actual signs 
that warn you to walk, not run; to keep your food in the car; and to otherwise 
keep your distance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a69e30b6ef6ab8605e645f5fb3edba91954f9ac%2F0_0_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a69e30b6ef6ab8605e645f5fb3edba91954f9ac%2F0_0_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
 Tourists get their vehicle bogged in the sand on the world heritage-listed 
Fraser Island. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
Given the fact there are rarely any dingoes in sight, it seems like overkill – 
but their resemblance to dogs gives people a false sense of security around 
them and that can have tragic results for both dingoes and people. This year a 
dingowas put down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/02/dingo-put-down-after-lunging-at-11-year-old-girl-on-fraser-island>
 after it lunged at an 11-year-old girl and behaved aggressively towards other 
tourists.

 Dave Darmody, director of the Australian Offroad Academy and our instructor 
and guide for the weekend, tells our group a spate of“dingo selfies” 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/tourists-taking-selfies-with-dingoes-blamed-for-attacks-on-fraser-island/story-fnihsrf2-1227023510271>
 taken on Fraser are a reminder that tourists must be made aware they’re wild 
animals.

He also promises to take the “fear factor” out of four-wheel driving for 
greenhorns like me, while teaching us to respect the world heritage-listed 
area. The training program he runs in conjunction withKingfisher Bay Resort 
<http://www.kingfisherbay.com/>, where we spend our first night, is Fraser’s 
only practical, eco-accredited course.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb51ccfbcbeabf7f85c3877b935450d31871e403%2F0_158_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb51ccfbcbeabf7f85c3877b935450d31871e403%2F0_158_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
 A dingo at the freshwater Lake McKenzie. Photograph: Christian Valenzuela/PR 
image 
I think of this intersection of nature and technology hours later as I clamber 
into my vehicle – a new Toyota FJ Cruiser, promptly nicknamed the “Silver 
Surfer” by the drivers of the five other cars in our convoy. As we leave the 
resort behind us and venture into the bush, I’m removed from the rest of the 
world by the absence of real roads and mobile phone reception.

But it’s a hell of a lot of fun (especially while blasting Taylor Swift on the 
stereo and eating jelly snakes). It takes only a few turns around the 
purpose-built training track before I’m bouncing along full of confidence, 
testing out the tricks I’d had neither the recklessness nor the roads to 
indulge in in my Toyota Starlet when I was learning to drive. Dave politely 
asks me to slow down after I take a short jump too fast, earning me a jokey 
reputation as a young hoon that sticks for the rest of the weekend. Who’s a 
desk jockey now, I think to myself, a bit pleased.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3d62bbf6502975a65532ab82e20044020f1c7c9%2F0_0_3216_1929%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3d62bbf6502975a65532ab82e20044020f1c7c9%2F0_0_3216_1929%2F3216.jpg>
 Fraser is the world’s largest sand island and one of the rare places where 
rainforest grows on sand. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
But as much as I might fancy myself a bit of a girl racer, once we set out on 
the inland tracks that cover the island there’s next to no skill required – not 
in driving the Silver Surfer, at least. It’s as smooth a ride as its nickname 
implies, bouncy like a bumper car, handling the peaks and troughs of the track 
like a particularly robust bubble.

It’s as though it drives itself. In fact there’s a button called “crawl 
control” that engages that exact function, maintaing a steady, low speed when 
you need to concentrate on navigating challenging terrain. My old Starlet, 
which had no power steering, demanded much more muscle, even on municipal roads.

The other women, who are driving Toyota Hiluxes, remark on the difference in 
handling, the unspoken implication being that driving their “Crusty Cruisers” 
is more fun, more authentic. When one car gets bogged, necessitating a rescue 
mission by Dave, and when a passenger throws up – not from the drive per se, 
though riding roughshod at 20km/h can’t help with nausea – I believe them on at 
least the second count.

The delays are an opportunity to observe the landscape. In the 10-hour days 
we’ve spent speeding along the island, we’ve seen the winding, eucalyptus-lined 
sand tracks through the forest open up to the freshwater Lake McKenzie. It’s 
one of the cleanest in the world, boasting an aquamarine blue of an intensity 
surprising on a cloudy day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff17643c3940a7423598efc53d96e314533fc033c%2F0_58_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20on%20an%20all-girls%20four-wheel%20driving%20weekend%20on%20Fraser%20Island%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fwhat-happens-on-an-all-girls-four-wheel-driving-weekend-on-fraser-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff17643c3940a7423598efc53d96e314533fc033c%2F0_58_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Vehicles speed down Fraser’s ‘freeway’ – Seventy-Five Mile beach. Photograph: 
James Shrimpton/AAP 
After a break for a long black and a microwave pain au chocolat from a 
no-frills bakery on the “surf side” of the island – it’s only about 24km wide – 
we start out along Seventy-Five Mile beach, an expanse of golden sand that 
serves as the island’s highway. Speeding along in a line of six, we scan the 
horizon for dingoes after Dave tells us this is our best chance to spot them 
before we catch the ferry back to the mainland in a few hours’ time.

Then, as we approach the wreck of the SS Maheno, beached in a cyclone in 1935, 
there they are – two of them, burnt orange, rangy and trotting through the 
rocks and rushes that border the beach. Maintaining a respectful distance, we 
keep pace alongside them for a while. They seem unconcerned by the mob of 
vehicles with passengers hanging out the windows, their camera phones on full 
zoom.

The Girls Got Grit weekend 
<http://www.australianoffroadacademy.com.au/#!ladies-weekends/c14mp> includes 
expert, small-group four-wheel drive training, accommodation at the Kingfisher 
Bay andEurong Bay <http://www.eurong.com.au/> resorts, and all meals. It costs 
$635pp twin, $857 single

Guardian Australia travelled to Fraser Island care of Kingfisher Bay Resort, 
Tourism and Events Queensland and the Australian Offroad Academy
 