
After existing for more than a thousand years, the Mayan city of Tikal 
collapsed in the ninth century. At about the same time, halfway around the 
world, the city ofAngkor <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/668> was being founded. 
It would be the grand capital of the Khmer kingdom for six centuries before 
itself being abandoned.


The only contemporary account we have of Angkor is from a Chinese diplomat, 
Zhou Daguan, who arrived in 1296 and stayed almost a year. He tells us that the 
new temple of Bayon (all stone in what remains now, but still spectacular) had 
a gold tower, eight gold Buddhas, and a golden bridge flanked by gold lions 
leading to it. He writes of grand royal processions and firework displays, of a 
society with many slaves, open-air marketplaces with women vendors, and houses 
built of bamboo and thatch.


Angkor, the most extensive urban settlement of pre-industrial times, is now an 
archaeological park in northwesternCambodia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>. Buses and trishaws ferry tourists 
between the ruins of some of the largest and most elaborate Hindu and Buddhist 
temples ever built. Some are only heaps of laterite blocks, but many are still 
astonishing: the towering lotus buds of Angkor Wat, the haunting Ta Prohm, in 
the clutches of time and strangler figs. Only recently have we begun to piece 
together how this and other ancient cities thrived and declined – their stories 
offer some intriguing lessons for cities today.
 Modern analysis has shown the true extent of Angkor, the most extensive urban 
settlement of pre-industrial times. Photograph: Tang Chhin Sothy/AFP/Getty 
Images 
The true scale of Angkor as an urban settlement began to be confirmed around 
20 years ago. The size and number of its temples turned out to be matched by 
the extent of the city around them. It was spread out over around 1,000 square 
kilometres – composed of temple complexes, large residential clusters and paddy 
fields irrigated by a canny network of reservoirs, canals, ponds and 
embankments. At Angkor’s peak, in the 12th and 13th centuries, some three 
quarters of a million people lived there.

Angkor – a name thought to be derived from “nagara”, the Sanskrit for “city” – 
was a low-density urban settlement, its population spread out owing to 
agricultural land being part of the city. This was a pattern of urbanism found 
in several ancient metropolises, including the Mayan cities of central America, 
and Sri Lankan cities such asAnuradhapura <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/200> 
andPolonnaruwa <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/201>.


These cities all went into decline relatively soon after attaining their 
prime. Angkor was flourishing in the late 13th century when Zhou Daguan 
visited; a little over a century later, it was all but abandoned. Researchers 
are beginning to see similarities in how these ancient low-density cities 
failed – and this is of particular interest today because, even as our cities 
grow in extent and population,their densities are falling 
<http://www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/1834_The-Persistent-Decline-in-Urban-Densities>
.

“Almost all cities are dropping to extremely low density,” says Roland 
Fletcher, professor of theoretical and world archaeology at the University of 
Sydney. “For example, the middle of New York may be very crowded, but Greater 
New York is a vast, sprawling landscape with huge amounts of open land which 
are never out of sight of buildings.”

A similar pattern repeats with Greater Shanghai, Greater Tokyo, and the larger 
American and Europeanagglomerations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/mar/22/un-cities-mega-regions>. The 
phenomenon of urban sprawl has largely been seen as a consequence of 
industrialised urbanisation: the availability of cars, outrageous real estate 
prices close to city centres, suburban aspirations of the middle class. But as 
Fletcher points out, there is nothing new about low-density cities.


He recalls delivering a talk in 1996 about pre-industrial cities at the 
Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum in Washington DC. Someone asked him 
at the end of his talk if he’d seen radar imagery of Angkor taken from the 
space shuttle Endeavour. Fletcher had the image within a week, and the first 
thing he noticed was something that had been speculated to exist – “this 
whacking great canal coming down from the north”. The area with the temples 
proved to be just the centre of Angkor: “There were lines and patches and tanks 
and features all over the place. The immediate revelation was that this place 
was huge.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421229976580%2F9e3abdf1-b97b-469b-933e-c16fc8e0ad51-2060x1393.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421229976580%2F9e3abdf1-b97b-469b-933e-c16fc8e0ad51-2060x1393.jpeg>
 Monks in Angkor’s Ta Prohm temple. Photograph: Alamy 
Fletcher went to Cambodia in 1998 where he met Christophe Pottier of the École 
Française d’Extrême-Orient, riding around on a motorcyle to map Angkor. When 
Pottier pulled out his maps, says Fletcher, “If you didn’t know what it was, 
you’d think it was a Mayan city.”


The pair teamed up to form the Greater Angkor Project 
<http://sydney.edu.au/angkor/structure/current-projects.shtml>, a 
Cambodian-French-Australian initiative that aimed to produce a detailed map of 
greater Angkor and investigate the reasons for its demise. They used 
high-altitude remote sensing technology to find urban forms concealed by forest 
cover, and conducted surveys and ground excavations.


There had long been a debate about what led to the decline of Angkor and the 
southward move of the Khmer seat of power. Proposed explanations included the 
strain on theocratic rule of Hindu-Buddhist jostling; attacks by Thai armies; 
and changes brought about by maritime trade. But the Greater Angkor Project 
added a significant new possibility: extreme climate instability. Analysis of 
tree rings in neighbouring Vietnam showed long periods of droughts followed by 
periods of unusually wet monsoons in the 14th and 15th centuries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421165341251%2F0290bb59-4e2a-49be-98ff-1ac3b3075b8f-2060x1729.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421165341251%2F0290bb59-4e2a-49be-98ff-1ac3b3075b8f-2060x1729.jpeg>
 A remote sensing image of Angkor reveals how much of the surrounding city lies 
hidden. Photograph: Damian Evans/Khmer Archaeology LiDAR Consortium 
The upheaval caused by flooding during mega-monsoons is clearly visible in 
remote sensing images produced by the project: erosion channels show rapidly 
moving water breaching a dam, crashing into the wall of a reservoir, then 
tearing away the edge of a residential area, flowing at a high level through 
housing, and later damaging a bridge. Perhaps the scenes in Angkor were not 
very different from those seen in recent years in New Orleans or Fukushima.


Sand accumulated in Angkor’s canals, and parts of the water network were cut 
off from each other. Damage to an old, complex water management system meant 
the city became less resilient in intervening periods of drought. Angkor, with 
its large population and broken infrastructure, would have found it hard to 
sustain itself.


The pattern of urbanism at Angkor was hardly unique: the Mayan cities that 
Pottier’s maps of Angkor reminded Fletcher of have long been recognised as 
low-density agrarian settlements. The lack of the wheel and the absence of 
draught animals meant that large quantities of food could not be transported, 
and cities had to be largely self-sufficient, growing maize, varieties of 
beans, squash, manioc and other staples of the region.

The city of Tikal <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/64>, in present-day 
Guatemala, was one of the most important of these Mayan centres. In what is 
called its Late Classic Period, around 600 AD, there was a flowering of art and 
architecture: large plazas, palaces, pyramid temples, sculpture and painted 
ceramics (of the many structures still found in Tikal, a 65-metre high pyramid 
is one of the tallest man-made structures in all pre-Columbian America). 
Conservative estimates put the city’s population at around 45,000 during this 
period; the city extended over 160 square kilometres. Then, in the middle of 
the ninth century, Tikal collapsed.


Just how a large population was sustained, and then came undone, in the middle 
of a rainforest has been reconstructed in recent inter-disciplinary work bya 
team of researchers 
<http://www.artsci.uc.edu/departments/biology/fac_staff/lentz/tikal.html> from 
Mexico, Guatemala and the United States. David L Lentz, professor of biological 
sciences at the University of Cincinnati, says: “We now have empirical data to 
tell you what the landscape looked like.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421171469745%2Fa0eb1af0-ac0c-46ad-9b72-70c090fba88b-2060x1381.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421171469745%2Fa0eb1af0-ac0c-46ad-9b72-70c090fba88b-2060x1381.jpeg>
 The Mayan city of Tikal was abandoned in the ninth century. ‘Tikal serves as 
an excellent model of us today because we’re following the same trajectory,’ 
says David Lentz. Photograph: Getty Images 
Originally, the area of Tikal was around 70% upland tropical rainforest, and 
the rest swampy wetland. An extended family would build their houses in a 
cluster, with cultivable land attached. In all, the people of Tikal cleared 
around two-thirds of the rainforest to create their monuments and homes, and to 
fuel their fires. “In many ways they were managing the forest very 
effectively,” says Lentz. “But they weren’t aware that cutting down a forest 
reduces the amount of precipitation in the region. Then suddenly a horrible 
drought comes along, and they can’t figure out why they can’t supplicate their 
gods adequately to prevent it.”


It didn’t help that Tikal’s water management system had become increasingly 
reliant on collecting rainwater in reservoirs, at the cost of groundwater. “As 
Tikal grew and grew,” Lentz says, “they created all these pavements around the 
city, from which they’d divert water to the reservoirs. But this cut off the 
recharge capacity of the springs. When there was no longer any rainfall to fill 
up their reservoirs, the springs had dried up too.”

For centuries, the Maya at Tikal had been erecting stelae 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/maya3/hd_maya3.htm> – upright stone slabs 
with hieroglyphs and depictions of gods and rulers. The last one is dated 869. 
Soon after, there are signs of what might today be called urban decay, with 
palaces being occupied by squatters. Charred, gnawed human bones from this late 
period suggest desperate times. Then, the city went quiet.


Tikal’s over-use of forested land ended up exacerbating the drought in the 
ninth century, and their construction compromised the city’s back-up source of 
water. Both are familiar refrains from analyses of cities today. “They did at 
least two things that changed their environment in significant ways,” Lentz 
says. “This ultimately led to their demise. In the big picture, Tikal serves as 
an excellent model of us today, because we’re following the same trajectory.”

Tikal had a population explosion in the seventh century and continued to 
adapt. “But they ran all of the resilience out of the landscape. Then, when the 
rains didn’t come, they had no way to respond and the whole thing collapsed.”

Lentz draws a comparison with a neighbouring city called El Zotz 
<http://www.wmf.org/project/el-zotz>, which had a smaller population, which 
didn’t modify its landscape as drastically, and was thus able to survive the 
drought that felled Tikal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421165834089%2Fceadf015-e30c-4dc8-b8ac-1bd3565faa0e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20collapse%20of%20ancient%20capitals%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20the%20cities%20of%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwhat-the-collapse-of-ancient-capitals-can-teach-us-about-the-cities-of-today%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421165834089%2Fceadf015-e30c-4dc8-b8ac-1bd3565faa0e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Temple 1 and the palace from Temple 5 at Tikal. As drought struck, temples 
were occupied by squatters; gnawed human bones suggest desperate times. 
Photograph: David Lentz 
In the ancient world, low-density cities were prone to episodes of collapse. 
But back then, only a minuscule fraction of the world’s population lived in 
cities. According to Fletcher: “It’s now generally reckoned that50% of 
humankind lives in cities 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/world-urbanization-prospects-2014.html>
, a lot of which are relatively low density. In less than 200 years we’ve 
created a physical situation for millions and millions of human beings that has 
never existed before. It’s completely unprecedented. We should probably take a 
fairly hard look at it.”

Tikal, Angkor and Anuradhapura (which foundered in the 10th century after 
thriving for more than a millennium) were very different cities in their 
geography, environment and social and political functioning. But, Fletcher 
points out, they all had operational similarities: extensive land clearance, 
sprawling low-density settlement patterns, massive infrastructure – all of 
which are attributes of modern cities. The extended infrastructure of Angkor 
and Tikal proved vulnerable to a changing climate, something else that may be 
upon us.


“Whatever the cause of climate change, we’re in it,” says Fletcher. “And this 
fluctuation is getting serious.” He points out that events like the flooding of 
New Orleans have resonances with Angkor: “Both cities had developed a fantastic 
method of managing water. But if the impact that comes is outside the 
parameters of the system, you’re in trouble.”



 