
Q My husband died recently at the age of 55, having been diagnosed eight weeks 
earlier with liver cancer. Before his diagnosis we had no idea he was ill. 
Consequently, we had made no provision for his death. I now find myself alone 
with a daughter in her first year at university, and approximately £75,000 to 
invest that I will need in the future to supplement my retirement income.

I am currently working and can manage our family's day-to-day living, but my 
pension will be limited and I need to invest to provide capital for the future. 
I want a steady investment that I know will provide me with a consistent 
return, and am thinking of investing in National Savings' three and five-year 
saving certificates, in which I can invest £30,000. I don't want to gamble 
money on the stock exchange or pay fees for the management of the money. How do 
you think I should invest in the future?

A You don't say how old you are and what you are currently earning, or whether 
your current employer provides a company pension scheme, so I will confine 
myself to basics.

After the recent volatility in the stock markets I can appreciate your 
aversion to "gambling" money on the stock exchange, as well as your dislike of 
paying management fees. Nevertheless, I think you should consider some kind of 
formal pension plan bearing in mind the accompanying generous tax treatment. It 
is hard to beat an investment that receives an upfront boost of 22 % in the 
form of tax relief, and 40% if you are a higher rate taxpayer.

The downside is that any money invested in a pension scheme would be locked 
away until the date of your retirement. Furthermore, the amount you could 
invest each year, including any pension contributions already being made, would 
be limited to 100% of your salary.

It might be worth looking at a  Sipp 
<http://money.theguardian.com/personalpensions/0,,1747384,00.html> (self 
invested personal pension) arrangement, which allows you to choose the 
investments for your pension fund. However, there are fees involved that can be 
excessive in percentage terms for a fund of less than £100,000. As pension 
income is liable to tax, it is worth thinking about the tax-free benefits 
provided byIsas 
<http://money.theguardian.com/investments/isas/0,,567782,00.html> (individual 
savings accounts) and some of the accounts offered by National Savings & 
Investments <http://www.nsandi.com/> (NS&I).

You could invest in an Isa, perhaps putting £3,000 in cash and £4,000 in 
bonds, which provide returns free of income and capital gains tax. There is an 
element of risk in bonds and even in government securities (like gilts), as 
well as a management fee, although it should be a lot less than a share-based 
Isa.

At present, NS&I offer one of the best mini cash Isas on the market. Its  
Direct Isa <http://www.nsandi.com/products/disa/index.jsp> pays 5.80%, but can 
only be bought using a debit card, either on the internet or by phone. The 
maximum investment is only £3,000 each tax year.

The maximum that can be invested in National Savings certificates is £15,000 
per issue. There are currently four issues of savings certificates - two 
index-linked versions and two fixed interest versions, so in total you can 
invest up to £60,000. You can also roll over any money held in matured 
certificates that were taken out in the past.

The  index-linked <http://www.nsandi.com/products/ilsc/index.jsp> three and 
five-year issues are particularly good value at present, especially for top 
rate taxpayers. The tax-free returns are based on the rate of inflation as 
measured by the retail price index, plus the additional low rate of fixed 
annual interest quoted. The downside is that your money is locked away for the 
whole period of the investment.

There is also no guarantee that inflation will not fall back during that 
period - indeed the Bank of England will try its hardest to lower inflation, 
although it may be unsuccessful. In any event, the return will always be above 
inflation, although it may not remain competitive with deposit account interest 
rates.

The  fixed interest <http://www.nsandi.com/products/fisc/index.jsp> 
certificates are for two and five-year periods. They are competitive at 
present, but could give poor returns compared with deposit accounts should 
there be a further rise in interest rates.

If you want to be really cautious you can simply invest in a cash savings  
deposit account <http://www.moneysupermarket.com/Savingsp/Default.asp>, which 
are currently offering some pretty high rates. There is no apparent risk, 
although you should bear in mind that the "real" value of your capital 
investment will be eroded by inflation. That is why so many investors favour 
shares <http://money.theguardian.com/investments/shares/0,,567785,00.html>. 
They may be risky, but historically shares have provided the best long-term 
returns, which makes them very suitable for pension funds.
 