
My friend’s daughter has just transferred to secondary school. She likes 
reading but isn’t sure what to read next. Everyone else in her class is reading 
dystopian fiction but she doesn’t like fantasy. She tried The Hunger Games but 
knows it is not her kind of thing. She likes stories about relationships and 
feelings between friends and within families. Contemporary stories would be her 
first choice but she’s happy to read stories set at other times too

Wanting to read something different from everyone else is always hard! But 
sometimes, the banner heading of a book only describes part of it. There is 
such an emphasis on the setting of novels and especially the more extreme and 
fractured societies that are created in fiction just now that it is very easy 
to think that is all that it is about.

The success of Suzanne Collins’s The Hunger Games 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-8.html> in particular has set a 
trend which has been enthusiastically embraced by writers in both the UK and 
the US. The large scale worlds and big, overarching themes of dystopian novels 
are made especially prominent when such books are turned into films.

But, scratch below the surface, and whatever the rules and regulations of the 
invented world look like, family and friendship remain central themes. In The 
Hunger Games, Katniss Everdeen’s family are of very great importance to her; 
she volunteers herself as the female tribute from District 12 in order to 
protect her younger sister Primrose who has actually been selected to take part 
in the 74th Hunger Games. 

The theme of survival and protecting your family is powerful throughout the 
series which gives the books a “human” side which can be enjoyed even by those 
who remain unmoved by the complexities of the cleverly constructed world.

But, despite the seemingly total dominance of high-fantasy fiction, there are 
a great many other kinds of stories from those which create fictional worlds 
which are only mildly altered to those set in absolute reality. And they are 
not all “problem novels’ as it is often thought.

Malorie Blackman’s classic Noughts and Crosses 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/noughts-and-crosses-8.html> and the series of 
titles that follow it set in a world that is only a little bit different from 
our own. The story of Callum and Sephy, two teenagers who fall in love despite 
the differences between their families, provides a thought-provoking view of 
contemporary society but with a radical inversion of racial stereotyping that 
changes everything.

Anne Fine set a bench mark for realistic family fiction with Madame Doubtfire 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/madame-doubtfire.html> and Goggle Eyes 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/goggle-eyes.html> both of which humorously 
reflect the fury felt by children when their families disintegrate. Subsequent 
titles such asFlour Babies <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/flour-babies.html>, 
in which a group of boys have to care for pretend babies which makes them all 
think about their own parents, andThe Tulip Touch 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tulip-touch-3.html> which explores the effect 
of a damaging childhood on Tulip and the very real danger that poses for her 
friend Natalie, push the boundaries further raising questions about the effect 
of upbringing on behaviour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwhat-to-read-fantasy-fiction-hunger-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416824205233%2F58e28b99-c6de-4862-b76e-648d7dfc8982-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20to%20read%20if%20you%20don't%20%20like%20dystopia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwhat-to-read-fantasy-fiction-hunger-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20to%20read%20if%20you%20don%27t%20%20like%20dystopia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwhat-to-read-fantasy-fiction-hunger-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416824205233%2F58e28b99-c6de-4862-b76e-648d7dfc8982-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anne Fine’s Madame Doubtfire was made into a smash hit film starring Robin 
Williams in 1993. Photograph: SNAP / Rex Features 
Mila’s life is apparently far simpler. But is it? Her journey of discovery 
about her family in Meg Rosoff’s tightly woven, neatly played out and finely 
observedPicture Me Gone <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/picture-me-gone-2.html>
 is entirely grounded in reality. On a road trip with her father to find his 
missing best friend, Mila has to unpick the stories about her family that have 
previously kept her safe and re-stitch them with the new knowledge she acquires 
on the journey. She is wiser afterwards and has, in some senses, grown up.

In Sharon Creech’s wonderfully enlightening, un-judgemental and upbeat Walk 
Two Moons <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/walk-two-moons.html>, Salamanca 
Hiddle – or Sal for short – also goes on a long road trip. Travelling though 
America with her grandparents she tells them the story of her friend Phoebe’s 
mother. Telling the story helps Sal to uncover the story of her own, long 
missing mother.

There’s a journey, too, in Roddy Doyle’s lyrical and upbeat A Greyhound of a 
Girl <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/greyhound-of-a-girl-2.html>although in 
this one there is a touch of fantasy. Twelve-year-old Mary and her living 
relatives are joined by her great-granny who has been long dead on a magical 
night-time drive to a former family home where they can relive memories and so 
help Mary’s grandmother let go. In Rebecca Stead’sLiar and Spy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/liar-and-spy-2.html> there are no journeys and 
most of the drama takes place within the apartment block. Nonetheless Georges 
(the s is silent) makes new friends and some important discoveries in a family 
story that brilliantly and movingly leaves the readers following clues and 
guessing outcomes.


Stuck on what to read next about what? Ask the Book Doctor! Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose your question on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> using #BookDoctor. If you are under 18 
and not a member of the Guardian children’s booksjoin here, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.
 