
In an era where people try to block and avoid ads, look for experiences, and 
trust their peers more than advertising messages, sponsorship plays an 
increasingly important role in allowing brands to get among those 
conversations. That’s why the Olympics – which brings the spotlight to sports 
and event sponsorship – is the ideal time to reflect on sponsorship in the 
digital age.

Sport commands 70% of global sponsorship revenues 
<http://www.sponsorship.com/IEGSR/2016/01/05/As-Sponsorship-Borders-Fall,-Spending-Rises.aspx>
, according to IEG, with entertainment a very distant second at 10%. The 
biggest events like the World Cup and the Olympics have the power not only to 
draw large audiences – more than50 million people in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/13/bbc-olympics-coverage-tv-ratings>
 watched London 2012 for more than 15 minutes – but also to capture the public 
mood. Rio 2016 will offer far more ways to view events through rising access to 
TV and digital connectivity.

While there is an increased demand for sponsorship of the top events – for 
example from Asian companies like Huawei and Tata expanding to global markets – 
the number of big ticket events remains flat. The answer to meet this demand 
has been to increase supply through allowing more sponsors per event by adding 
categories; for example, restaurant, IT, timing systems, and audio visual 
equipment.

With the growing demand and increased sponsorship categories, sponsors risk 
disappearing into the noise. To take football as an example, Manchester United 
now has21 official sponsors 
<http://www.manutd.com/en/Partners/Global-Partners.aspx>, including an official 
paint partner, an official tyre partner, and even an official noodle partner. 
While sponsorship is a good opportunity to associate a brand with an event and 
an ethos, it does not automatically bring share of voice.

Sponsorship spend will grow to $60bn (£46bn) this year 
<http://www.sponsorship.com/IEGSR/2016/01/05/As-Sponsorship-Borders-Fall,-Spending-Rises.aspx>
, according to IEG, a rise of 4.7% on 2015. However, according to eMarketer, 
this is a lower growth than advertising, which is expected to rise 5.7% to 
$543bn (£413bn). When assessed in light of the fewer opportunities to sponsor 
rather than just advertise, this spend increase demonstrates the popular and 
crowded nature of sponsorship of audience-drawing events. Marketers should not 
take this as a sign that sponsorship is a cheap option, though. Sponsorship is 
a fantastic opportunity to align with an audience’s interests and passions, but 
works best when combined with other parts of the marketing mix, most notably 
advertising, to drive cut-through and engagement.

An IPA study in 2011 
<https://www.warc.com/Topics/Awards/IPAEffectiveness2011.topic> showed that the 
combination of sponsorship with advertising was one of the most effective in 
driving both hard and soft business effects for brands. This was backed up by 
research by Havas Sport and Entertainment after the London Olympics, which 
showed that those aware of a brand’s Olympic sponsorship were on average50% 
more likely 
<http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/179348/olympic-sponsorships-pay-off-for-brands.html>
 to view a sponsor as “world-class” or “admired” – but note that it depends on 
people being aware of the sponsorship.

There are lots of examples of this necessary amplification being done well: 

Budweiser’s sponsorship of the Fifa World Cup 
<http://www.mobilemarketer.com/cms/news/social-networks/17985.html> gives it 
the right to choose the man of the match. In 2014 they boosted their engagement 
by allowing their fans to vote to decide this via Twitter, ten minutes before 
the end of each game. Stella Artois has also used experiential marketing and 
outdoor activations at places likeWaterloo station 
<http://www.jcdecaux.co.uk/stella-artois-waterloo> to make people feel part of 
the event.

Digital and technology now allow brands to do so much more, to bring the 
experience, emotion and interaction to audiences. New capabilities in virtual 
and augmented reality give brands the opportunity to create experiences that 
will help people be there rather than just be spectators. Travel brands are 
already using virtual reality to good effect –Thomas Cook 
<http://www.thedrum.com/news/2016/03/11/thomas-cooks-mobile-vr-allows-travellers-try-they-fly>
 had great success selling special excursions to people who had booked holidays 
in New York by letting them get a flavour of what to expect via virtual-reality 
headsets, allowing them to virtually visit before they book.

Imagine being able to put yourself in the Games, slow down the action, see the 
angles, tap for stats. Link this through to other digital elements such as 
social, driving conversation, or click-to-buy or book, and you have a very 
powerful marketing mix.

Brands that enhance their sponsorships with such engaging and enriching 
experiences, leveraging the data and tech world, have a much greater 
opportunity to cut through and drive a deeper connection with an audience.

Dan Calladine is head of media futures at Carat Global 
<http://www.carat.com/global/en/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 