
So this is where is gets really hard: boiling down more than a century's worth 
of music into 50 key moments – using terms that are themselves highly 
contested. The starting point, given the criteria, could only be to think of 
world and folk music as that which exists outside the western mainstream. Even 
so, today's list in our history of modern music is highly partial and often 
tokenistic. It makes sense to start withCecil Sharp 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/16/cecil-sharp-morris-men>, a 
pioneering figure in appreciation of indigenous music, and several figures 
celebrated here fulfill the same role: folklorists and anthropologists who saw 
value in the music they came to hear. But – rightly – controversy has always 
surrounded the likes ofJohn Lomax 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/16/lomaxes-first-mission> – who with 
this son Alan, "discovered" Lead Belly, but then complained that this noble 
savage didn't play the role expected of him.

The blues is here; reggae too; Congolese pop is included (those who argued 
that the great Franco should have found a place in ourpop 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2011/jun/11/history-pop-music> list, 
because he was arguably the most popular African musician of his generation, 
have a point); English folk, as a whole, also.

"World" music – as described in entry No 43 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/16/world-music-term-invented> – was a 
term created by a bunch of (predominantly) white middle-class Englishmen in a 
north London pub in the late-80s. It made sense at that time to rack artists – 
however different in both their background and intentions – in the same space 
in record stores, because otherwise King Sunny Adé would end up next to Abba, 
and for the British record buying public, that would have been just confusing. 
But record stores barely exist any more. And thanks to modern media, we're 
ever-closer to new sounds emanating out of Kinshasha, São Paolo or Los Angeles. 
So perhaps world music is an outdated term; it could be that "roots" is more 
helpful; but then there are more recent alternatives, albeit for a more 
selective collection of styles, such as "global ghettotech", which could be an 
appropriate description of the music that MIA makes (and she – like Cecil 
Sharp, another Londoner – ends our list).

So do please have those debates in the thread below: should Charlie Patton be 
included instead of Robert Johnson; is it simply patronising to represent 
Japanese music in the way that we do; shouldn't there really have been a place 
for Mumford and Sons? There is no such thing as an objective history; this 
history – of necessity – is super-subjective.

Bearing that in mind, and in answer to that Mumfords question: well, I just 
couldn't bring myself to do it.

Do join us, too, for our history of jazz tomorrow.
 