
Its chips – or should that be French fries? – may be down, economically 
speaking, but it remains hard to escape the influence of America, whether in 
politics (the media obsession with Barack Obama continues apace), music, film 
or television – with the popularity of US imports such asMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> and The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire> as high as ever.

American studies <https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> 
graduates will have read about anything from US politics, literature and Native 
American history, to music and film. No wonder, then, that it proves a big draw 
– particularly as some courses offer the chance to spend a year at an American 
university. But is it possible to gain meaningful employment at the end of it?

The good news is that the interdisciplinary nature of the degree means it 
throws open doors to a wide range of sectors. Living the American dream need 
not be out of reach.

What skills have you gained?

A knowledge of America's history, an understanding of its politics and an 
insight into its literature, not to mention a host of other topics such as the 
constitution, culture, society, the various ethnic groups that live there and 
US foreign policy – all of which could be attractive to prospective employers 
looking for someone who can demonstrate flexibility of thought.

Other key skills include critical evaluation, good communication and 
organisation, clear and logical thinking, negotiation and cultural awareness.

Much of the specialist knowledge can be useful in business, and many other 
areas. And you will have an understanding of what has made America the major 
player that it is today.

What jobs can you do?

Graduates find jobs in a variety of sectors including banking or accountancy, 
the media, advertising, marketing, political administration and law. Popular 
career choices for American Studies graduates include teaching, journalism, 
publishing, law, broadcasting and librarianship.

Of 2009 graduates, around 59% went straight into employment, although the high 
take-up of clerical/secretarial and retail jobs reflected the tough conditions 
in the jobs market generally. Some 11% went into marketing, 8.7% business and 
finance and 5.6% into the arts, design, culture and sports fields. 
Interestingly, despite its international flavour, only 4% ended up working 
abroad.

"Graduates have an in-depth knowledge of many aspects of American history, 
literature, culture, politics and society making them attractive to 
multinational companies who operate in, or have extensive business 
relationships with, the US," says Margaret Holbrough, a careers adviser at
Graduate <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/graduate-jobs> Prospects.

"In addition, career opportunities in administration or management may arise 
in government (civil service) and non-governmental organisations, international 
organisations such as the UN or Nato (although it should be said that 
competition for jobs in these organisations is fierce) or charities working 
internationally."

Famous graduates include John McCarthy, the TV journalist and author who was 
held hostage in Beirut between 1986 and 1991.

Postgraduate study?

Almost 8% of American Studies graduates went on to study for higher degrees in 
2009 with 2% choosing to do a teaching qualification and 6.5% combining working 
and studying.

Data supplied by the Higher Education Careers Services Unit and Graduate 
Prospects <http://www.prospects.ac.uk> 
 