
Humanities degrees don't often lend themselves to obvious career choices. If 
you read medicine, you can be a doctor. But what job should you do if you 
studied medieval history or philosophy, for example?

Humanities graduates may worry that they lack the edge on others who have 
developed 'hard' skills in subjects such as science, technology, engineering 
and maths (Stem). But, your humanities degree is a perfect springboard into a 
successful career.

Research suggests 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/matthew-batstone-new-college-humanities>
 that 60% of the UK's leaders have humanities, arts or social science degrees. 
It compares to just 15% who have Stem degrees. For many employers, a good 
humanities degree is testament to your hard work, enthusiasm, creativity and 
ability to process lots of information. And many of the skills you pick up will 
be transferable into the workplace.

Kent University says <http://www.kent.ac.uk/careers/humanities.htm>: "Apart 
from teaching, there are few options open to you that will give you the 
opportunity to use your subject knowledge directly in a job." But it adds: 
"Many of the skills that are gained on a humanities degree are highly sought 
after in almost every job."

But, having this wide range of career options can make it tricky for 
humanities graduates to decide what to do.

So, if you don't know what job is best-suited for you – or you're not sure if 
your degree fits with your career ambitions – join our live Q&A from1pm to 3pm 
on Thursday 18 July. Topics up for discussion include:

• Career options for humanities graduates

• How to exploit and present your transferable skills

• Picking a career that suits your interests

• Job application tips

Our panel

Jo Arden is head of strategy for communications agency, 23red 
<http://www.23red.com>. Jo graduated with a BA in women's studies and has 
utilised her degree throughout her career, developing strategies for big 
brands. Jo also independently mentors women who are trying to get into the 
media industry and works with organisations, such as the Institute of 
Practitioners in Advertising, the professional institute for agencies.

Nilesh Kavia is a careers adviser with the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>. Nilesh is a 
qualified adviser who has been delivering careers information, advice and 
guidance for the past seven years.

Dan Hawes is the head of marketing and co-founder of The Graduate Recruitment 
Bureau <http://www.grb.uk.com/>, a niche recruitment consultancy that 
specialises in placing graduates into graduate jobs. You can engage with the 
team on@thegrbteam <https://twitter.com/thegrbteam>.

Professor Rosemary Evans is the head of the School of Law at Birmingham City 
University <http://www.bcu.ac.uk/>. With almost 20 years' experience in higher 
education, Rosemary has also worked at The Law Society now the Solicitors 
Regulation Authority. Rosemary's main subject interests are property law, 
family law, and solicitors' accounts. As a professor of legal education, she 
also has a keen interest in developments in legal education.

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part in 
our Q&As is easier than ever. You can create a free Guardian account, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you can tweet us on
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
to Kate Hodge <mailto:kate.hodge@theguardian.com>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 