
Today's top 10 leading thinkers are all men, according to a global poll 
published by Prospect magazine today. Advertised as "a snapshot of the 
intellectual trends that dominate our age", the most glaring trend seems to be 
the absence of women.

Any list, even one garnering 10,000 votes from over 100 countries before being 
decided on by a panel of 10, is bound to be subjective and somewhat partial. 
But this latest highlights the fact that when it comes to judging people for 
their ideas, voters act as though they still can't get past the image of a 
thinker provided by an old French sculptor –a man with his head in his hand 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Thinker>.

There are 15 women in the list of 65 thinkers, or some 23% of the total. 
Evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins tops the poll, in which scientists and 
economists, particularly thoseau courant with social media, are in the 
ascendance.

In contrast there's a far higher proportion of writers among the female 
contenders. The leading female thinker, for example, isArundhati Roy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/arundhati-roy> at number 15, a novelist 
turned campaigner. The women judged most successful over the past 12 months 
tend to be writers such asjournalist Anne Applebaum 
<http://www.anneapplebaum.com/>, and the novelists Hilary Mantel and Zadie 
Smith.
 Arundhati Roy: Prospect's top female thinker, at No 15 on the list. 
Photograph: Tom Pietrasik 
Two women successful because of their business or political success – Facebook 
bossSheryl Sandberg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2013/mar/15/facebook-sheryl-sandberg-lean-in>
 andAnne-Marie Slaughter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/22/annemarie-slaughter-haveitall-feminism>
 – have become internationally recognised for two works –Lean In 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780753541623>
 and Why Women Still Can't Have it All – which deal in their different ways 
with how women can and cannot balance work with children.

I scrolled down to find male writers on the list who had either written about 
the work-life balance or been criticised for having "an army of domestic 
drudges to do their work" and, amazingly, I failed to find any.

At this point I felt I had a bit of a eureka moment of my own. When it comes 
to Big Idea books, whetherThinking Fast and Slow 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141033570>
 orThe Wisdom of Crowds 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780349116051>
, it's men that have them. When women write about ideas they either focus on 
living their lives or are criticised for doing so. Either way, they are not 
expected to think big.
 Hilary Mantel. Photograph: David Levenson/Getty Images 
Sadly, this is not an unusual thought. My colleague Alison Flood wrote 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2008/oct/27/freakonomics-women-big-ideas>
 about this back in 2008 when she asked why such books were dominated by men. 
She also made the point that with academia, science and economics dominated by 
men, the numbers game is not in women's favour. It's a tiny aside, but the 15 
women lauded by Prospect at least prevented the list adding to this brilliant
meme <http://100percentmen.tumblr.com/> on men-only clubs.

Jessica Abrahams of Prospect has written a piece pointing out that the 
proportion of women on the list has has doubled since the last poll in 2008 
with a few more economists and business leaders than previously.

Yet there are still obvious absences from the list. Gloria Steinem, Mary 
Beard, Mona Siddiqui, Shirin Ebadi spring to mind. Others suggested Lionel 
Shriver or Katha Pollitt. So come on Guardian readers, which women make you 
think? And why aren't more of them applauded for doing so.

Read more about the poll here <http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/worldthinkers>
.
 