A striking commentary 
 It is a striking commentary on the nation's altered state that news of an 
aeroplane accident could come as somewhat of a relief... New Yorkers who veered 
between bottomless grief and frustrated anger after September 11 are left with 
only the grief.New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/13/opinion/13TUE1.html> 
Marching orders reaffirmed
 New York City, a shining symbol of the prosperity and social triumph that 
thugs like Osama bin Laden despise, is...on pins and needles. America [must] 
finally -finally - get serious about security at the nation's airports. So that 
terrorism isn't the first thing feared whenever a plane goes down.New York Post 
<http://www.nypost.com/postopinion/editorial/34211.htm>

Ugly new assumptions
 The instant speculation yesterday was not about fuel tanks and frayed wiring, 
but bombs and plots and incompetence in protecting a nation already spooked 
about flying...such reflexes and instincts used to be European, not American.
Seattle Times 
<http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/editorialsopinion/134365710_crashed13.html>

Another terrible blow 
 In the high-alert atmosphere of post-September 11, the possibility of a 
horrid reprise leapt to every mind: Would another airliner smash down somewhere 
in a few minutes, and then still another?Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/print/editorials/>

It never rains; it pours 
 The coincidence of this happening not only in New York, already a city in 
thorns, but in a neighbourhood, home to many firefighters killed on September 
11, that has suffered so much, is almost incomprehensible. Chicago Sun Times 
<http://www.suntimes.com/output/commentary/cst-edt-edits13.html>

We were terrorised 
 Before 9.17am yesterday, the new, unpleasant post-September 11 normalcy felt 
like it was finally in a bit of retreat. Then...news that reminded us of 
another blue sky, another explosion, another day of...death and calamity. 
Boston globe 
<http://www.boston.com/dailyglobe2/317/oped/Don_t_let_it_be_the_terrorists_again+.shtml>

Jet fighters scrambled
 The extraordinary precautions taken when news of the crash was broadcast were 
clear signs of how the ongoing anthrax scare and terrorism events of two months 
ago have changed the country in fundamental ways.Miami Herald 
<http://www.miami.com/herald/content/opinion/editorials/digdocs/102159.htm>
 