
In any given 24-hour period, the average urban commuter is subjected to 
hundreds of corporate advertisements. By contrast, it’s easy to make it through 
the day without hearing a mention of climate change. For all intents and 
purposes it is invisible in our daily lives, and this invisibility goes a long 
way towards explaining why the allegedly “defining” challenge of the 21st 
century barely registers on barometers of popular culture.

Whether it’s the addictive melodrama of long-running TV soap-operas, the 
swirling churn of “trending” topics on social media, or the glamorous 
high-definition version of reality refracted to us through the lens of 
Hollywood cameras, climate change is missing in action.


It was a surprise, then, to find such a high level of chatter about climate 
change at the glitzy Cannes film festival (not famed for grappling with the 
world’s biggest questions). The festivalconcluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/cannes-concludes-with-call-to-arms-on-climate-change-to-not-tackle-the-issue-through-film-would-be-criminal>
 with Ice & Sky, a sombre take on the work of the French scientist Claude 
Lorius, documenting the destruction of Antarctic glaciers.Charlize Theron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/14/charlize-theron-mad-max-landscape-awaits-unless-we-tackle-climate-change>
, discussing the forthcoming remake of dystopian classic Mad Max, commented: 
“What makes [the film] even scarier is that it is something that is not far off 
if we don’t pull it together.”


And it’s not just the film industry that has been showing some interest.


From antibiotics to fossil fuels: the inconvenient truth about sustainability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/06/sustainability-antibiotics-farming-industrial-agriculture-fossil-fuels>
On the small screen, the 20 million fans of fantasy-drama Game of Thrones may 
ostensibly be watching sword fights and violent vengeance. But they’re also 
being told a powerful story about impending ecological destruction – at least, 
according toa researcher at Arizona State University  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/04/08/us-climatechange-television-idUSKBN0MZ1SL20150408>
studying how science blogs have responded to the world-conquering series. And 
on the even-smaller screen, the maddeningly addictive Angry Birds franchise
recently announced 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-14/angry-birds-to-fling-into-climate-change-debate-this-earth-day>
 it would be integrating a climate change angle in September to coincide with 
the UN’s climate week events.


So is popular culture finally embracing the reality of a changing climate?

Saci Lloyd, author of The Carbon Diaries, thinks it is. “Climate change is 
definitely breaking out of the cultural fringes and into mainstream movies and 
pop. James Cameron has stated that Avatar is a lesson for humankind to stop 
damaging the environment. Lady Gaga has recently partnered with Vivienne 
Westwood for the Climate Revolution campaign. And now Pharrell Williams is 
dropping in on the UN and telling them it’s time to go from climate change to 
climate action. I don’t think you can go more pop than that.”


Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> has 
traditionally thrived in rarefied spaces (at least in the western world): the 
complex knowledge chambers of science; the bureaucratic back-channels of 
international diplomacy; and the minority-interest meetings of specialist 
campaigns groups. So climate change finding its way out of the highbrow realm 
and into popular culture at all is grounds for optimism.


But as ever with climate change, the transition is unlikely to be 
straightforward.


Why pictures of polar bears don't always tell the truth about climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/02/images-climate-change-mislead-polar-bear>
Firstly, when compared to other big issues of our time, it’s clear that 
climate change has one unique and problematic characteristic: there is no 
outside observer uniquely well positioned to narrate the story. Hollywood 
celebrities – often fairly – take flak for their advocacy around global poverty 
or human rights abuses. Because of their privileged positions, they may be 
challenged on their credibility. But we all have a credibility problem when it 
comes to climate change – because like it or not, we are all complicit.


And some of us are more complicit than others. Mad Max may tell a cautionary 
tale about a world ravaged by resource wars, but its own carbon footprint must 
be mind-bogglingly, extravagantly high. Mainstream cultural channels are, 
currently, unavoidably high-carbon. This doesn’t invalidate Hollywood’s voice 
on climate change, but it is essentially impossible to make a big budget (aka 
popular) film in anything approaching a sustainable way. Unsurprisingly,
research suggests <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wcc.119/abstract> 
that people have ambivalent views about the contradictions inherent in 
“eco-celebrities”.


As the British actor Tom Cullen <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3665787/> says: 
“It’s a tricky position I find myself in. I’m a climate change advocate but 
often find my lifestyle at odds with my views. I juggle my guilt and my career. 
The actor Mark Ruffalo has a strong voice in climate change awareness but has 
recently completed a round-the-world press tour for The Avengers, and therein 
lies a problem. How can our most adored and respected be listened to if they 
are hypocrites? How can we bring climate change into the pop-culture foreground 
if we deem their argument as illegitimate?”


Of course, you can entertain people on a village green with a local theatre 
company using solar-powered lights. The concept of entertainment does not start 
and finish with pyrotechnics and private jets. But if the mainstream is where 
climate change needs to be, then this is the reality it will have to grapple 
with – and it is not hard to see where tensions could arise.


BBC, ITV and Sky get green kick up the arts with new sustainability mark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/2014/oct/28/tv-bbc-itv-sky-sustainability-mark-carbon-albert>
While TV executives don’t agree on many things, research by the International 
Broadcasting Trust <http://www.ibt.org.uk/reports/environment-tv/> has found 
that they are unanimous in their belief that viewers do not want to be lectured.


Nick Comer-Calder, of the Climate Media Net, puts it this way: “Climate change 
themes need to be embedded in long-running series to make it mainstream – to 
normalise it. I don’t think it has to be the whole rationale for a plot – but 
it needs to be firmly woven in. And it is not just about the science or the 
impacts, its about the whole complex mechanism of tackling climate change in 
personal, political, and professional life.”


It is encouraging that the final spot in Cannes was reserved for an 
eco-documentary, and positive that a game played by millions worldwide sees a 
place for climate change in its franchise. But the real challenge is to 
integrate climate change into the juggernaut of popular culture – not drag it 
alongside in a special sidecar of its own – and this is a much tougher 
(although ultimately more meaningful) proposition.
 