
"Since we've started writing, I open the fridge and I don't know what to eat," 
playwright Nessah Muthy says. "I've even turned vegetarian. My boyfriend is 
behaving like I've just cheated on him."

Muthy and April De Angelis <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/angelis> (who 
wrote West End hitJumpy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OV9_9AXaGaA>) are the 
writers behind the Royal Court's new project,Gastronauts 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/gastronauts>, billed as a theatrical 
dining experience with music, that explores our complex relationship with food.

The piece for four actors is set in a sinister David Lynch-style restaurant. 
During the performance a variety of tastings will be served to the audience, 
with an emphasis on sound, smell and memory.

Muthy came up with the idea for the piece when the horsemeat scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/horsemeat-scandal> broke. "It was very 
ferociously in the public consciousness. I wanted to look at the politics 
around the wider food industry – what we are eating, who we are eating, what's 
in the kitchen?"

She and De Angelis began researching the "dark and dirty" world of industrial 
food production – how the raw materials get processed from field to plate. They 
uncovered "mind-blowing" inequities. "It's about capitalism, exploitation of 
animals and workers, addiction."

They visited a food bank <https://www.theguardian.com/society/food-banks> and 
interviewed psychotherapistSusie Orbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/susie-orbach>. Gastronauts won't be 
worthy, they promise, but neither will it linger on celebrity chefs – who 
represent "only 0.5% of food in human culture, worldwide", says De Angelis 
drily.

The piece will home in on how profoundly we are bound into our relationship 
with food; how we structure pleasure around mealtimes. "It's very hard if we 
can't eat with someone," sighs De Angelis. "If my partner says he ate earlier, 
I'm devastated. I think: "Jesus, what am I going to do this evening?"

She began her career in the 1980s as an actress with the theatre company 
Monstrous Regiment. As a feminist she's fascinated by the control issues around 
food and body image. "In the Victorian age women were policed over their 
sexuality; by the 1960s sex was OK, so they had to find something else to 
police you about."

Muthy, 25, started out in visual art and performance. She staged her short play
Hungry 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/news/podcasts/lost-in-theatre-4-hungry-by-nessah-muthy/>
 in the back of the Royal Court's house shower; and recently had a 
site-specific piece performed at the Bermondsey Square hotel. "I'm driven by 
visuals, while April has really anchored the text."

Gastronauts is directed by Wils Wilson who devised the barroom epic The 
Strange Undoing of Prudencia Hart 
<http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL43FCD0C0E42355A4> with playwright David 
Greig, so we can expect a similar mix of humour and surrealism. The songs have 
emerged organically during rehearsals.

As I leave, De Angelis is pondering whether to include a song about rats, her 
new obsession. "I love rats now. Like humans, they have a memory of food, one 
of the only creatures that do. It's very hard to poison them. They'll only eat 
a tiny, tiny bit of it and wait and see what happens to them. If they don't get 
sick, they'll know they can eat it."

Gastronauts is at Jerwood Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
Upstairs at the Royal Court, London, 21 Nov- 21 Dec
 