
If you said you liked rock music in 1955, people would have an idea of what 
you meant. You would have been an admirer of the high-energy music of the 
American south, which combined elements of country, gospel and blues in a new, 
overtly sexualised form. Members of an older generation might have assumed you 
were some kind of delinquent, hellbent on rebellion. Say you like rock music in 
2011, though, and you'll be pressed to clarify. You mean you like metal? 
Classic rock? Prog? Or just music made with guitars?

Rock is no longer a signifier of anything, let alone rebellion – 1955's 
teenagers are today's pensioners. Rock has evolved in myriad ways, 
soundtracking many of the social upheavals of the second half of the 20th 
century and the early years of the 21st. It's the musical accompaniment to the 
biggest cultural gatherings of our age – giant festivals that have sprung up 
around the world.

So how do you pick 50 moments that have defined rock? It's as much about 
omission as commission: we could easily have run to 200 moments and ended up 
leaving crucial things out. For the final 50 we tried to get a mix of things – 
recordings, meetings of minds, technological breakthroughs, gigs – that have 
made some contribution to where we find rock today. We asked writers to chip in 
with suggestions, we tried to give room to stories that aren't quite so well 
known – the invention of the wah-wah pedal – while downplaying the tales you've 
heard a thousand times before.

But this version of rock's story is just one version. The contributors in this 
instance have included Keith Cameron, Stevie Chick, Kitty Empire, Tom Ewing, 
Michael Hann, Pete Paphides, Alexis Petridis, Jude Rogers, Jon Savage, Bob 
Stanley, Caroline Sullivan. There are countless others, and a different 
selection of moments would have resulted in a different story. Tell us the 
moments that you would choose, and maybe we'll see a distinct version of rock 
history emerge on this thread.
 