
What would be Mahatma Gandhi's reaction, had he been around to witness the 
brutal police crackdown on his disciple and anti-corruption crusader Kisan 
Baburao Hazare, alias Anna Hazare? For years, the activist has been confronting 
injustice and corruption in a style dear to the Indian soul for generations: 
earlier this year, the septuagenarian started a fast in order to put the 
government under pressure to enact stronger anti-corruption laws. Once 
conferred with the third-highest civilian honour of the land,he has now been 
arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/anna-hazare-protests-india> and 
is facing the wrath of the ruling Congress party for his effort to retrieve 
Gandhi's legacy of nonviolence at a time when India is struggling to fetter the 
home-bred rebellions shattering the nation's tranquillity.

A grand old man is leading a struggle against corruption in a country whose 
average age is relatively young. Not averse to taking a firm stand against the 
establishment for a just cause, he played a pivotal role in awakening the 
conscience of the nation, so much so that Mahatma's granddaughterTara Gandhi 
Bhattacharjee lauded the noble objective 
<http://www.ndtvexpress.com/2011/06/22/mahatma-gandhi%E2%80%99s-grand-daughter-urges-civil-society-to-support-the-fight-against-corruption-10560>
.

Hazare's first hunger strike in April won concessions from the government, 
which promised a parliamentary bill creating a special ombudsman with power to 
investigate and punish corrupt politicians, bureaucrats and judges. Hazare's 
dissent attracted widespread support and social media helped to ensure that his 
clarion call echoed around the country.

A baffled government, struck by a series of domestic scandals involving 
influential politicians, called in a drafting committee composed of civil 
society members and senior ministers, in order to prepare the broad parameters 
of such an ombudsman. Having failed to reach a consensus after painstaking 
negotiations, however, the government ended up introducing a bill that 
compounds the vulnerability of whistleblowers.

Short-changed by the ruling establishment, India's modern-day Gandhi 
threatened a fast unto death. The public, livid at the government's pernicious 
attempt to defame a person who has appropriated the most potent symbol of 
nationalism in Indian history took to the streets in vast numbers 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/Nationwide-protest-against-Anna-s-detention/H1-Article1-733824.aspx>
. Irked by administrative apathy towards the widespread abuse of authority, 
people on the street are now desperate to unearth the reason for a ruthless 
assault on civil liberties. What prompted this sudden high-handedness? Who is 
behind the orchestrated smear campaign against the anti-corruption activists?

The answer perhaps lies in the attempted projection of Congress party general 
secretary and heir apparentRahul Gandhi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rahul_Gandhi> as a moderate face sympathising 
with public disenchantment, at the expense of the prime minister, Manmohan 
Singh. Why else would the young leader be credited with thedecision to rescind 
Hazare's detention order 
<http://www.rediff.com/news/report/pm-ordered-annas-release-after-consulting-rahul/20110816.htm>
? True, the cabinet was facing the dilemma of having to protect Hazare's life 
from an indefinite hunger strike on the one hand, and interfering with the 
right to protest on the other. Events on the ground, however, closely match a 
prepared succession script that envisages easing out the incumbent executive 
some time before the 2014 general election. Since the youngest offspring of the 
Nehru family is in no mood to lose credibility, the party and the dynasty might 
be seeking to quarantine Singh's successor from any genuine future inquiry 
conducted by an autonomous body.
 