
Today sees the start of a new seven-part series written by Guardian and 
Observer critics called A History of Modern Music, in which we've tried to 
pinpoint 50 key moments in the stories of seven different music genres. You can 
journey through time withthe interactive features 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/music/interactive/2011/jun/11/history-modern-music-timeline>
 we've created for each day.

It all kicks off with pop – beginning with Frank Sinatra and ending with Lady 
Gaga – while on Sunday it's the turn of rock, followed by hip-hop and R&B, 
indie, dance, world and folk, and jazz. We might have included classical music 
but to do that properly, we'd have to extend the timeline considerably, and the 
exercise would become unwieldy (later this summer we hope to make amends with a 
different project).

Even without those genres, it's meant a lot of arguments, a lot of shuffling 
of lists, and a lot of listening again to an awful lot of music since the first 
days of recording – some things that just had to be represented because they 
werepersonal favourites <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3JEVhOAyMo>, some 
things thatfew could dispute <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qiCEGXGm-z0>, and 
some things you'd wishedyou'd already forgotten 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1MwjX4dG72s>...

In some ways, picking what went into pop was the easiest task: just look back 
at the charts and see what's been popular. (One irony is that the perfect pop 
song is meant to be three minutes long and pretty much ephemeral, but the 
records made by the acts we're celebrating have soundtracked generations.) But 
we've not always gone for the most obvious moments, and we recognise that as 
pop history has progressed, some events – the release of a key record, a 
meeting of two minds, a memorable gig – that you might expect to see in the 
list we've come up with have ended up in one of our other histories.

Part of the fun – and pop should be fun 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iz6iENNnf08> – is that history is never an 
objective enterprise. The contributors in this instance have includedSimon 
Napier-Bell <http://www.simonnapierbell.com/>, Tom Ewing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/tom-ewing>, Gareth Grundy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/gareth-grundy>, Tim Jonze 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/timjonze>, Alexis Petridis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/alexispetridis>, Jon Savage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/jonsavage> and Caroline Sullivan. But what 
do they know? Let us know which moments we might have picked instead, and 
perhaps a different history will emerge.

• Listen to our ultimate pop Spotify playlist 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/4NFiWnjoyFb83WWpiAY5wj>

• Make your own ultimate pop Spotify playlists 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/19o9xD3964KJ437ZkkWQ3n>
 