
When I was young, Coca-Cola was the kind of brand you thought would dominate 
forever. Big. Red. Confident. American. Indestructible. Sponsor of the 2016 Rio 
Olympics, its new #ThatsGold campaign, which launches in 50 markets and 
captures athletes and ordinary people experiencing moments of joy, perpetuates 
thisCoca-Cola <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola> dream.



 It has enjoyed an enviable stint at the top of several well-known brand 
valuation league tables such as theInterbrand 
<http://interbrand.com/best-brands/> top 100 list 
<http://interbrand.com/best-brands/> and Millward Brown’s top 100 global brands 
list <http://www.millwardbrown.com/brandz/top-global-brands/2016>. On the 
surface, you’d be forgiven for thinking Coca-Cola is still at the top of its 
game. However, it lost the top spot inInterbrand’s best global brands list 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/10344966/Coca-Cola-loses-worlds-best-brand-title-after-13-years-to-Apple.html>
 in 2013 and just a few weeks ago it fell out ofMillward Brown’s top 10 ranking 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/coca-cola-crashes-worlds-top-10-brands/1397902>
.

 Cola-Cola was born in the era when consumers didn’t have much choice; when 
adverts came out of Madison Avenue and everyone watched them at the same time. 
In that environment it thrived, outspending everyone and engaging consumers 
with the promise of happiness delivered by its mythical secret recipe.

Coca-Cola's marketing shake-up requires a lot of bottle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2015/mar/06/coca-cola-marketing-unifying-sub-brands>
 Profitability ensued as Coke was able to charge a premium price for a simple 
and stable manufactured commodity. It was an easy go-to example of how branding 
strategies create value.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fcoca-cola-fall-global-brands-ranking-marketing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12683bb3efa81de44cb68c6418cbe023fcb3c33d%2F0_27_7648_4589%2F7648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Coca-Cola%E2%80%99s%20slide%20down%20global%20brand%20rankings%20really%20tells%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fcoca-cola-fall-global-brands-ranking-marketing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Coca-Cola%E2%80%99s%20slide%20down%20global%20brand%20rankings%20really%20tells%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fcoca-cola-fall-global-brands-ranking-marketing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12683bb3efa81de44cb68c6418cbe023fcb3c33d%2F0_27_7648_4589%2F7648.jpg>
 Coca-Cola is known for its nationwide Christmas truck tour Photograph: 
Graham/REX Shutterstock 
What goes up ...

 Coke remained top of Interbrand’s league table for 13 years, peaking at a 
value of $81.6bn in 2014. In 2015 its value, according to Interbrand, fell to 
$78bn. Millward Brown valued the brand at $81bn in the same year, yet also 
recorded a fall from in the rankings from position five to six.

Coke has had to adapt to respond to the modern world. On the one hand 
increasingly diverse consumer tastes, media evolution and the internet have 
reduced the potential for a single brand and product offering. On the other, 
the government’s move to tackleobesity and health concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/coca-cola-obesity-health-studies>
 by penalising soft drinks companies is a major concern for the likes of Coke. 
In the March budget, the then Chancellor George Osborne announced that soft 
drinks companies will pay a levy on drinks with added sugar, with proceeds 
going towards doubling sports funding for primary schools. With at least 8g of 
sugar per 100ml, regular Coca-Cola will fall into the highest band of the new 
sugar tax, effective from April 2018.

While there’s been no firm agreement on the additional amount customers will 
be charged, campaigners have called for fizzy drinks to be as much as 20% 
higher. It is only going to get harder to sell sugary drinks, especially to 
young consumers.

 Furthermore, consumers expect a fully immersive experience that entertains 
multiple senses at once. Although consumers are fond of traditional products, 
the success of Apple, Google, Facebook, McDonald’s, Disney (to name a few), 
their resilience has been driven by their ability to augment the core with 
multiple layers of experience. For example, Nintendo’sPokémon’s Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> concept blends a gaming 
experience across the online and offline worlds as players move around an 
augmented reality powered by Google Maps.

 Coca-Cola’s merchandise store <http://www.coca-colastore.com/> and branded 
microsites expose a lack of ideas. There’s only so much value consumers take 
from the deft placement of the Coca-Cola logo. The brand struggles to deliver 
the scale of its open happiness promise through the small opening in the top of 
its cans. Since 2012 Coca-Cola’s market capitalisation (total company value) 
has fallen from $300bn to just under $200bn.

Do compete on features

There’s no denying Coca-Cola remains one of the world’s best-known names. From 
Santa’s red lorry at Christmas time to its iconic 1970s “Hilltop” commercial 
calling to buy the world a Coke, you’d be hard pushed to name a drinks brand 
with more awareness. For many, a can of Coke is still their first and only 
choice.

The Coca-Cola brand is a far more important contributor to profit generation 
than your average technology-driven company’s brand because the brand is the 
key reason to choose Coca-Cola over its rivals. Using Interbrand’s values, 
brand value as proportion of market capitalisation is roughly 40% for Coca-Cola 
versus about 25% for Apple, Google and Microsoft. This explains why, when faced 
with growth challenges, the go-to solution is to spend more on branding, not 
create new experience or significantly diversify the business.

The end of big, bold brand promises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jul/12/end-big-bold-brand-promises-marketing>
 But, in a 21st century defined by accelerating fragmentation, simply shouting 
louder will not work. The mantra of branding used to be don’t compete on 
features. But increasingly that’s how modern businesses do succeed, because 
that’s how customers now choose. Proof over promise.

What does this mean for brand valuation?

 Coca-Cola’s fall in the rankings highlights a conflict at the heart of league 
tables. For the new crop of brand leaders there is far less clarity between 
brand strategy and business strategy. This leads to the question, what does 
this value actually represent?Is brand value simply a function of business 
value? Ultimately, we begin to look at the ever more volatile lists and say: 
“So what?”

 Google and Facebook, two big risers on the Brandz table 
<http://wppbaz.com/admin/uploads/files/BZ_Global_2016_Report.pdf> (pdf), offer 
businesses an alternative to mass branding through hypertargeting – further 
evidence of the collapse of the very phenomena these tables were originally 
built to measure.

Put brand on the balance sheet

 Brand valuation remains a way for marketers to make the case for the relative 
status of marketing within the organisation because it generates a large 
monetary value for the asset they are charged with managing. When set against 
other audited assets on a typical consumer company balance sheet, the brand 
appears to become one of the company’s most valuable assets.

Clients and colleagues would often ask me to validate the argument that “brand 
values ought to go on the formal balance sheet”. This was seen as a milestone 
in the story of how brands and branding would gain the credibility they 
deserved in the business world.

Not only would this depress most investor ratios (by disclosing that in fact 
more assets are required to generate the same earnings), representing the 
outputs of a single strategy as a separable asset celebrates and reinforces the 
traditional silos of brand versus business.

But it’s no longer possible to say where branding begins and ends with firms 
such as Apple or Google. There is no measurable advertising effect or credible 
way to say which aspects of the business are not branded.


Coke’s fall signals the long-term decline of the league tables and their brand 
valuation concept. The way we think about the contribution of brands and 
branding must also keep moving to stay accurate, relevant and useful to modern 
business. Brand valuation league tables need to change their methodologies to 
reflect the changing world of marketing, where brands create value in 
difference ways than the original methodology was designed to capture.

If Coke adapts successfully to the new regime of consumer needs, as Nintendo 
and Google are doing, they will be rightfully rewarded for their creativity. 
And just like Coke, brand analysts, advisers, strategy professionals and league 
table proprietors should look more broadly at an organisation’s total stock of 
intangible assets to reach a judgment of their economic value; at an 
organisation’s capacity for insight, at culture, at talent and process 
management as well as marketing prowess and branding power.

Nothing lasts for ever, regardless of how confident and indestructible it once 
seemed.

Julian Dailly is the director of strategy at Morar 
<http://morarconsulting.com/> and was formerly global director of brand 
valuation at Interbrand. He tweets@JulianDailly 
<https://twitter.com/juliandailly>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 