
1) Fast pitches have become collectors' items

England's capitulation to Mitchell Johnson in the Australia series was partly 
because there are so few quick Test pitches. Prior to the series England knew 
that they would face a trial by pace; indeed, by picking Steven Finn, Boyd 
Rankin and Chris Tremlett in their squad, they expected to fight fire with 
fire. And Johnson himself was a known quantity – England had faced him in nine 
previous Tests. But what England were less accustomed to was playing so many 
short deliveries on a bouncy wicket, and, with the exception of Ian Bell, they 
were flummoxed. But for all other than the Barmy Army, the sight of Johnson 
steaming in and Brad Haddin taking catches above his head was a joyous one. One 
of the most raw and visceral elements of Test cricket was restored in Perth, 
albeit temporarily. In contrast, there was little life in the pitches during 
the England series, where the hosts used their prerogative to slow the wickets 
down to maximise the effectiveness of Graeme Swann. Nevertheless, given the 
pressure that has been exerted on curators in recent years to ensure five-day 
pitches in order flog tickets and boost bar receipts, it was great to see Matt 
Page at the Waca prepare a fast, green wicket. The game was over before tea on 
the fourth day, but the beancounters atCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia have England, not the 
curators, to blame.

2) The DRS is still being asked to solve the wrong problem

The England series was littered with DRS controversies. The issue quietened in 
the return series; remarkably, England didn't take a wicket lbw until Sydney. 
But two underlying problems remain. First, there is the double-standard where 
most but not all, Test matches use the DRS because of the BCCI's opposition. 
Second, and more philosophical, is the fact that the authorities want to use 
technology to ensure that every umpiring decision is correct. However, human 
fallibility means that this will never happen, especially if umpires are given 
tools that create new ways for them to make an error. It would be better for 
cricket to reconcile itself with the idea that umpires get most things right, 
even with the use of DRS, and that their authority should be preserved.

3) Winning away is getting trickier

Ten matches, eight home wins. Neither side proved themselves to be competent 
tourists, but this is a trend that extends beyond the Ashes. In the past year, 
the series' between India and the West Indies; South Africa and India; New 
Zealand and the West Indies; England and New Zealand (twice); Sri Lanka and 
Bangladesh; India and Australia; South Africa and Pakistan; and South Africa 
and New Zealand have failed to see the away side win a Test. So far this 
decade, the proportion of away wins in Tests has fallen to 24%, from 28% in the 
2000s. This is a serious problem when it results in long, uncompetitive series. 
It is hard to look beyond the international schedule as the trigger of the 
recent landslides. Time allocated to rest days and warm-up matches is being 
squeezed all over the place, with the effect less pronounced on the home sides 
(elsewhere on the Guardian,Andy Bull discusses the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/14/the-spin-cricket-losing-streaks> 
in this week’s Spin).Australia's attempt to buck this trend in South Africa 
tour in February will be compelling 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/series/648637.html>.

4) For now, the Ashes still draws the crowds

So much for the suggestion that the appeal of Test matches is on the wane. The 
MCG hosted 91,092 on Boxing Day, the largest (verified) crowd for a single day 
of Test cricket ever. The combined attendance at that match was over 270,000, 
the largest for a four-day game at the stadium. The redeveloped Adelaide Oval 
lost some charm but gained extra bums on seats, recording its biggest 
attendance since the 1933 Bodyline series. There was more good news on the TV, 
with Channel Nine recording its best viewing figures since the Ashes in 2006. 
During the England series the grounds were sold out, with Lord's bringing in 
extra seating to increase capacity. In truth, the Ashes has always been Test 
cricket's banker. It is the one series when capacity crowds can be relied upon. 
The problem of empty stands continues in South Africa, the West Indies and Sri 
Lanka, in particular. Nevertheless, television images of packed stadia and 
passionate crowds will provide a lift for the sport around the world.

5) These were poor adverts for five-match series

The global popularity of Twenty20 has long eaten into the length of Test 
series. The Ashes stands alone as the sole regular five-Test series, but 
neither set of matches provided a compelling reason to contest the 
cannibalisation of the Future Tours Programme by avaricious national boards. 
Melbourne and Sydney were a public flogging for a very dead English horse, 
while the sole outstanding Test in the England series was, unfortunately, the 
first. England host India for five matches in the middle of 2014. Test cricket 
will need the tourists tobe better travellers than they were previously 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/series/474459.html>.
 