
So after all the patriotic hot air, a raucous campaign to protect America's 
favourite beer proved to be a bit of a flop. Budweiser's brewer, 
Anheuser-Busch, has meekly succumbed to a takeover by Belgium's InBev after 
barely a month of resistance.

Anheuser's chairman, August Busch IV, had insisted that he would defend the 
company - and promised that a sale wouldn't happen "on my watch". But an extra 
$5bn proved sufficient to change his mind as he accepted InBev's enhanced $52bn 
offer.

In Anheuser's home city of St Louis, the outcome was greeted with depression 
and despondency. Street marches, albeit modestly attended, had been organised 
to keep Budweiser in American hands. The governor, local senators and the city 
mayor were all wheeled out in united opposition.

A local radio station, KMOX, cobbled together a spoof Budweiser commercial 
<http://www.kmox.com/topic/play_window.php?audioType=Episode&audioId=2672485> 
which declared that the beer was "a condiment to the American life - a beer and 
a hotdog, a beer and peanuts". It asked: "You Belgian guys - what do you have 
to offer? A beer and a waffle? Won't that taste good?!"

One publican suggested to the St Louis Post-Dispatch 
<http://www.stltoday.com/stltoday/business/special/battleforthebrewery.nsf/story/C862BA2B2099B197862574860027B3BA?OpenDocument>
 that by getting every resident to bulk buy crates of Bud, the people could 
effectively out-bid the Belgians: "We can tell InBev to go to hell."

Carlos Brito, the Brazilian boss of InBev flew to Anheuser's headquarters on 
Tuesday to survey the spoils. And politicians who vigorously opposed the deal 
were obliged to make nice. St Louis' mayor, Francis Slay, said he would 
cooperate with InBev to ensure a smooth transition.

In a remark which may or may not have been a joke, Slay added that he would 
lobby the Stella Artois maker to relocate entirely to the midwest: "One of my 
first goals will be to try to convince InBev, which loves to cut costs, to move 
to St Louis, where pretty much everything is cheaper than in Belgium."

Experts agree that Anheuser's chairman didn't have much choice but to sell the 
company founded by his great-great grandfather. There was no way Auggie Busch 
could have persuaded fellow shareholders to turn down $70 a share - a price 
well above the range of $45 to $55 at which Anheuser's stock has been trading 
over the last year.

"Once the price was increased, there weren't that many good options and 
however reluctantly, they had to accept it," says Benj Steinman, publisher of 
Beer Marketer's Insights.

Brand values

InBev has promised to keep all 12 of Anheuser's breweries in north America 
open - a pledge upon which it won't be able to renege gracefully. There are 
likely to be some job losses among Anheuser's 31,000-strong workforce - but 
then, there were cuts of some 1,300 underway anyway as the Budweiser maker 
tried to revive its flagging financial performance independently.

"Certainly InBev's past has been an extreme focus on cost cutting but this 
deal's transformative," says Steinman. "I buy the idea that they're 
transforming themselves more into marketers. They won't want to devalue the 
brands and mess up something they've paid $52bn for."

Not everybody will be dismayed by the outcome. Cindy McCain, wife of the 
Republican presidential candidate John McCain, controls one of the country's 
biggest distributors of Budweiser.

The New York Times reported 
<http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/07/14/mccains-to-profit-from-inbev-anheuser-busch-deal/>
 that she drives around Phoenix in a car with a personalised number plate - MS 
BUD.

Based on her disclosed dividend income from Anheuser shares, Reuters  reckons 
she could scoop between $2.8m and $5.6m from the deal 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/burningIssues/idUKN1437968020080715>. That could 
be a nice boost to the political coffers.

Among the less affluent, an amateur musician from the St Louis area penned a 
chirpily defiant song 
<http://www.whenweplayed.com/AB%20&%20Inbev%20by%20Phillip%20McClary.mp3> 
urging the Belgians to "kiss our glass".

More than 71,000 people had signed an online petition <http://saveab.com/> to 
"save" Anheuser-Busch. But the petition's organiser, Ed Martin, is realistic in 
accepting defeat.

"Mr Brito and others at InBev had made some helpful promises and commitments," 
he says.

Although Martin remains concerned that InBev's indebtedness will force it to 
make heavy cuts, he accepts that the US has no grounds to adopt a protectionist 
stance.

"I've never thought the ideal thing in this would be some sort of government 
intervention. I don't think that's possible, plausible or the right thing to 
do."
 