
According to the great British press, Ken Loach's Looking for Eric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129188/looking-for-eric> is a 
surprisingly feelgood comedy, Ang Lee'sTaking Woodstock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129971/taking-woodstock> is a little 
throwaway andPixar's Up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129187/up> is 
endearingly old-fashioned for a film sold on its 3D credentials. Meanwhile, 
Jacques Audiard's mobster thrillerA Prophet (Un Prophète) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129970/prophet> is being cited by some 
as an early frontrunner for the Palme d'Or at the Cannes film festival.

Opinions vary wildly, but the critics do seem united in the view that this 
year's films, especially those appearing in competition, represent a rather 
bumper crop. Even poorly-favoured movies, such as Lee's comedy drama about the 
infamous 1969 hippy festival, are being handed three stars out of a possible 
five. Most are getting four or five stars.

The anomaly, perhaps fittingly for a film which has bemused as much as it has 
outraged and enraptured, is Lars von Trier'sAntichrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129974/antichrist>. According to which 
critic you read, it is either a lurid work of genius worth four or five stars, 
or an outrageously misogynist mess which is hardly worth one.

"Lars von Trier, we get it. You really, really don't like women," writes the 
Times' Wendy Ide 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/cannes/article6312877.ece>
, the bestower of that latter prize. "There's a puritanical undercurrent in his 
work that seems to want to punish women for being sexually active entities. If 
the film were not so cold and emotionally uninvolving then the arty torture 
porn element might be more upsetting. But given how desperate to shock the film 
is, it's surprising that long swathes of it are so turgidly dull."

Hideous and boring then, the most heinous of twin crimes. But elsewhere, the 
view is very different:the Telegraph's Sukhdev Sandhu 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/cannes-film-festival/5344487/Antichrist-at-Cannes-2009---review.html>
 says Antichrist "looks brilliant" and describes the performances of Willem 
Dafoe and Charlotte Gainsbourg as "brave and truthful".Empire's Damon Wise 
<http://www.empireonline.com/features/cannes2009/Post.asp?id=529> calls it 
"completely bizarre, massively uncommercial and strangely perfect", and our own 
Xan Brooks, whiledistinctly weirded out by the whole talking-fox imbroglio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/18/cannes-film-festival-antichrist-lars-von-trier>
, says he "loves it". It should be pointed out here, however, that all three of 
the above critics write as though Von Trier has unscrewed the top of their 
skulls and marinaded their living brains in something highly potent for 100 
minutes.

Fortunately for journalists' health, not all films on the Croisette this year 
are such disturbing experiences. More comfortable fare can be found in the 
shape of Loach's Looking for Eric, a gentle comedy from the veteran British 
film-maker and former Palme d'Or winner about a troubled, middle-aged 
Manchester United fan who finds solace through footballing legend Eric Cantona, 
who appears to him in a stoned vision and then decides to hang about for a 
while.

"This is Ken Loach in feelgood mode," writes Geoffrey Macnab in the Independent
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/reviews/looking-for-eric-cannes-film-festival-1687208.html>
. "Funny and sharply observed, it nonetheless has a sentimentality and 
contrivance about it that stops it short of its director's best work." 
Meanwhile,the Times' James Christopher declares 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/cannes/article6281104.ece>
: "Ken Loach couldn't have painted a more perfect, bittersweet picture for 
Cannes," whileSandhu calls the film 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/cannes-film-festival/5344487/Antichrist-at-Cannes-2009---review.html>
 "endearing, crowdpleasing fare".

Lee's Taking Woodstock doesn't fare so well – it is dismissed by Ide as 
"enjoyable" but "essentially mild-mannered and rather conventional" while 
Sandhu labels it "almost too sweet for its own good, tasteful rather than 
transcendental [and] imbued with a nostalgia that Lee doesn't convince us he 
truly feels".

No such platitudes for Audiard's A Prophet, which Ide says 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/cannes/article6311429.ece>
 "is a movie which instantly takes its place alongside the greats of the crime 
movie genre". She continues: "It seems almost inconceivable that another 
picture with the ambition, scope and compelling dramatic impetus of Audiard's A 
Prophet will emerge in this year's competitive lineup."Sandhu calls it 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/cannes-film-festival/5335109/Un-Prophete-at-Cannes-2009-review.html>
 "a smart, stylishly-directed and compulsively watchable thriller", whilethe 
Guardian's Peter Bradshaw writes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/18/cannes-film-festival-review>: 
"For sheer muscle and sweat, nothing has so far beaten Audiard's terrific 
prison-gangster movie. The film shows him to be the biggest beast in new French 
cinema."

Finally, Pixar's Up, which opened the festival out of competition on 
Wednesday, gets a critical thumbs-up – but looks unlikely to repeat the success 
of WALL-E, the best reviewed film of 2008, on the evidence of reactions here. 
The critics, it seems, are starting to get wise to the Disney-owned animation 
studio's shtick.

"It is increasingly apparent that Pixar is a company that operates best when 
dealing with nostalgia,"writes the Independent's Kaleem Aftab 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/reviews/first-night-up-cannes-film-festival-1684582.html>
. "Like the outfit's previous film, WALL-E, Up is superb in setting up 
characters and a world that hankers over memories of yesteryear, but once the 
adventure moves into its obligatory action denouement, it enters a world of 
stereotypes that disappoints."Christopher, however, endorses it as  
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/cannes/article6281104.ece>
 "an unusual, magical film" whileWise calls it 
<http://www.empireonline.com/features/cannes2008/post.asp?id=> "a classic piece 
of entertainment, which cleaves to the Pixar template of being beautifully 
rendered, emotional and laugh-out-loud adult funny, all the while capturing the 
naïve charm of old-school Disney".
 