
It’s a dirty job, but someone has to do it: TV critics Alan Sepinwall (HitFix 
<http://www.hitfix.com/>) and Matt Zoller Seitz (New York 
<http://nymag.com/author/Matt%20Zoller%20Seitz/>) have ranked the 100 greatest 
comedies and dramas broadcast in the US. The book they’ve co-authored – TV (The 
Book), which is out this week – is sure to inspire debate, especially their 
number one pick:The Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>. The Guardian spoke to 
them about the project, the power of the Simpsons and why they included such 
outliers and obscurities as Frank’s Place in their rundown.

Hey guys. Where did the idea for the book come from?

Matt Zoller Seitz: It was a couple of years ago. I don’t remember the exact 
circumstances but Alan and I were talking and there are a lot of books along 
the lines of Maltin’s film guide and David Thomson’s Biographical Dictionary of 
Film, but there wasn’t really an equivalent for television. I thought that the 
time was right for a book like that because Alan and I have been in the 
business long enough to say not just “What do you think is great now?” but 
“What do you think are the greatest shows in TV history?”

The Simpsons' secret formula: it's written by maths geeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/22/the-simpsons-secret-formula-maths-simon-singh>
Alan Sepinwall: TV is in this extraordinary time right now. Some people are 
calling it Peak TV, some people are calling it the Golden Age. Whatever you 
want to call it, TV is as good as it’s ever been if not better, and has finally 
achieved a level of respect that the medium has been striving for basically 
since the 1950s and yet there’s been very little done in terms of canonization, 
in terms of trying to legitimize it through other forms.

Why did you pick The Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons> as your number one?

MZS: Well, The Simpsons is not just a television show. In a lot of ways, it is 
television. There’s almost no political or cultural development in the last 30 
years that The Simpsons hasn’t addressed and in many cases had the last word on.


AS: It’s done everything you can possibly do, and it’s done it for a 
ridiculously long time, and it’s so funny, and it’s so quotable and so 
versatile and covered so many topics. And it’s stayed good! That’s the dirty 
little secret that people don’t want to acknowledge. It’s not as good as it is 
in season four, nothing could be.

One of your biggest disagreements was over the fourth season of Arrested 
Development, wasn’t it?

AS: Matt has already said that if there’s a second edition, he’s going to 
write an essay just aboutArrested Development season four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/may/31/arrested-development-season-four-fan>
 because he thinks I’m a heathen and a philistine over it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvzVhPCMAxWQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvzVhPCMAxWQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvzVhPCMAxWQ&media=>
 The trailer for the controversial fourth season of Arrested Development. 
MZS: It’s a milestone in television storytelling. It’s the first season of a 
series that is devised and constructed with streaming in mind. The way people 
watch things on Netflix is very different from they way they watch things on a 
regular broadcast or cable channel. Mitchell Hurwitz understood this, and it 
was also an attempt to solve a practical problem, which is that the cast were 
all in much more demand in 2014 than they were when the show went on the air. I 
think the solution he came up with was ingenious, which is basically that the 
entire season is one long episode of Arrested Development: the scenes are 20 to 
30 minutes long instead of three.


Why did you choose only American TV?

AS: Our feeling was Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> would certainly be on 
here, Prime Suspect would certainly be on here, Fawlty Towers would certainly 
be on here, but while we think that we know what the best British shows are, we 
probably don’t. We have some blind spots here, while there are probably some 
shows that are not anywhere in the book and probably should be. If we’re not 
going to know what those are, we’re just half-assing it in terms of foreign TV 
and we’re just going with whatever PBS aired, which is not really fair.

What were the other areas of disagreement?

MZS: There are things in there that I think Alan thinks are really 
what-the-hell – like I did an entry on the HBO series K Street by Steven 
Soderbergh, which only ran 10 episodes and I think was watched by nine people, 
but I thought it was an amazing show and that television had never seen 
anything like it and probably never will again.

AS: I don’t know that we need to have every single show that Michael Mann ever 
made for television included in the book, but Matt loves Michael Mann. It’s 
less the main section than the A Certain Regard section where we deal with 
sentimental favorites, Matt threw in a lot of shows that made me go, “Really?” 
He’ll tell you this: he’s really not happy that Boardwalk Empire is in the top 
100.

There are some really obscure choices in the book. What’s your most underrated 
show?

MZS: One of our pantheon shows is Frank’s Place, which ran on CBS for one 
season in 1988. It was by Hugh Wilson who created WKRP in Cincinnati, and Tim 
Reid [of WKRP] was also the star, and it’s one of the greatest shows in the 
history of American television, and almost nobody watched it when it was on 
except me. It’s never gotten a proper DVD release because of what I think are 
rights issues. I really hope some attention will be paid to Frank’s Place and 
that it will be given the reception it deserves.

There’s maybe two full episodes and fragments on YouTube. It’s a shame, 
because that show was shot on 35mm film without a laugh track in the style of a 
motion picture. The fact that the cast was predominately African American threw 
people a little bit because I think at that point in time, viewers were 
conditioned to expect that every time you saw a non-white face on TV there was 
a laugh track on it, and this was not like that.

How much rewatching and ranking did you have to do?

AS: The rewatching, when it happened happened during the writing and not the 
ranking. To do what we do as well as we aspire to do it, you really have to be 
able to absorb the shows into yourself. I can recite whole Cheers scenes, or 
diagram Deadwood story arcs without looking at them. These are the shows we 
know, we’re going to score them accordingly. As it was all written and we were 
getting ready to turn the manuscript in, we went to a bar in Brooklyn and 
rescored everything slightly. There were not a lot of major changes.

MZS: We originally had five categories, which were innovation, influence, 
storytelling/film-making, performance/characterization and consistency. We 
realized we needed one more category that accounts for the extraordinary burst 
of creativity that can make a show great even if it’s not perfect, which we 
called “peak”. We’d originally considered casting a much wider net – sports 
shows, live shows, sketch comedy shows, variety shows and children’s 
entertainment – but as we proceeded down that road we realized the book would 
be 2,000 pages long.
 