
As I mentioned yesterday, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2011/may/16/pcc-theguardian> the 
Press Complaints Commission has produced a booklet called "Perspectives" to 
accompany today's release of its 2010 annual report. 
<http://www.pcc.org.uk/review10/>

It seeks, according to the introduction, "to show the relevance of the PCC to 
all sorts of people across society, from ordinary members of the public to 
celebrities."

You may well feel that it reveals a great deal about the way journalists and 
editors operate. Anyway, here's what some of them have to say...

Clare Balding, the TV presenter who once complained to the PCC over a 
reference to her sexuality byAA Gill in the Sunday Times:

"I had already written to the editor of the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> but it was his high-handed 
response that persuaded me to take further action.

It is a big step to take on a major newspaper in such a public way but Scott 
Langham (the PCC's head of complaints)... seemed very aware of the 
vulnerability felt by all complainants.

I did not employ a lawyer and am very glad of that, both in terms of expense 
spared but also it meant I could remain personally involved every step of the 
way.

I found the PCC to be extremely helpful in guiding me through the process and 
ensuring that I was neither afraid nor confused.

I was surprised by the amount of interaction between the Sunday Times's lawyer 
and myself as the ball was batted back and forth, but the PCC stepped in and 
put a stop to it once it was clear that the complaint had legitimacy and I was 
not going to back down...

The only disappointing aspect was that while the PCC can ensure that the 
Sunday Times print the decision in full, they cannot actually make them 
apologise, which they still haven't."

Janice Troup, head of ITV programme publicity for drama and soaps:

"We have a hotline to the PCC! Maybe not exactly a hotline, but sometimes it 
feels that way. As the ITV press office which representsCoronation Street and 
Emmerdale... we've had our fair share of complaints based on inaccurate 
reporting, privacy issues, harassment of high profile individuals, newspapers 
intent on revealing medical conditions and we've also had to protect bereaved 
actors at their most vulnerable times...

We wouldn't be as successful in our daily work without the guidance of the PCC 
who strive to uphold fair, accurate and just reporting."

Madeleine Moon, the Labour MP for Bridgend, who was critical of media coverage 
in 2007-8 when a spate of suicides occurred in her constituency:

"When disaster strikes and the media circus comes to town an impartial referee 
to help control the show is essential.

I found the PCC advice, support and guidance invaluable. Its staff helped 
weather the torrent of stories which varied from the inaccurate to the hurtful 
and distressing...

The PCC can support local families involved in stories when at their most 
vulnerable, and help protect them from some of the most excessive media 
practices."

Nicola Peckett, head of communications for Samaritans, a charity that provides 
emotional support to people in distress or at risk of suicide:


"It has long been known that publishing excessive detail about the method of 
suicide can encourage others to emulate the suicide in what is known as a 
copycat death...

We understand that there is a fine line between working constructively with 
the media and being seen as trying to restrict press freedom.

Our relationship with the PCC means that we can pick up the phone to them on 
an informal basis and seek guidance on the best way to work with the press."

Gill Shearer, head of communications with Cumbria police, the force that dealt 
with the murder rampage byDerrick Bird last year:

"The PCC initially approached Cumbria constabulary on 2 June â€“ the day of the 
shootings... Since the shootings we have worked pro-actively with the PCC and 
the affected families to ensure the media knows which of the families do not 
want to be contacted by the journalists.

To date this has worked well and has removed some of the distress that the 
families have felt when approached directly by the media. Our work with the PCC 
will continue as we approach key times such as the first anniversary."

Lawyers are often hostile to self-regulation, but two of them have seen fit to 
offer support to the PCC.

Nick Armstrong, a partner at Charles Russell, writes:

"An essential aspect of the PCC's work which is underrated is the assistance 
it can provide behind the scenes, as part of the negotiation process which 
underlies the successful resolution of the majority of media-related issues.

By definition, this 'behind the scenes' work is less known than the more 
public process of complaints and adjudications.

In my role as a media litigation solicitor advising clients about contentious 
media issues, having a flexible range of options is key to dealing effectively 
with cases where the facts and tactical considerations vary widely. Only rarely 
is immediate recourse to law appropriate."

And Rod Dadak, head of defamation at Lewis Silkin, also weighed in with a 
measure of praise:

"It is all too easy to criticise self-regulation by the media... Nobody would 
pretend that it doesn't have shortcomings... But it is in fact remarkably 
successful.

With a robust code of practice it provides a public service which, apart from 
being free, is fair and is relatively quick.

The code is respected by the courts, and indeed is specifically relied upon as 
a guide to the application of the balancing exercise between freedom of 
expression and the right to a private life...

All the evidence suggests that the PCC succeed in achieving a satisfactory 
outcome, through mediation or adjudication, without falling foul of allegations 
of bias or giving inadequate consideration to complaints made...

There is still room for improvement but credit should be given where credit is 
due and in a cash-strapped society the free and fair service the PCC offers 
should be supported."

There are also interesting contributions from two critics - Tim Luckhurst, 
professor of journalism at the University of Kent, andJonathan Heawood, 
director of English PEN
 