
Everybody's got an idea of what record labels do, and the more fanatical music 
fans out there may even have a favourite. But have you ever wondered what it's 
like behind the scenes – or how to run a label yourself?

We tracked down two executives to share their insights.

Simon Dunmore

Simon has been DJing since 1982 and is the founder of Defected 
<http://defected.com/>, one of the world's best known dance labels. For him, 
career progression stems from a love of music and being aware of his audience 
and colleagues.

"Fundamentally, I'm a long time music enthusiast who's been fortunate enough 
to make my passion my vocation," reveals Simon.

"The key to success is putting yourself in the position of the other person 
involved and anticipating their needs or what makes them tick. Why does a DJ 
want to play a certain record? Who would sell or buy a record? Who would you 
want to pay to see DJing or perform? Consistently reading these situations is 
invaluable."

For aspiring music professionals, technology has opened up a wealth of career 
opportunities. "Now that the digital record business is a reality it's a much 
more manageable," says Simon. "If you're savvy, you can communicate directly 
with your consumer. As a result, your marketing is more targeted and you have 
greater control of all your costs.

"The record industry had a tendency to bemoan the fact that sales and income 
are massively down. But what is equally true is that technology and the 
internet have reduced the costs of producing, mastering, manufacturing and 
promoting music. If you know your audience and the potential of a release then 
there is little risk in putting music into the marketplace these days."

But he adds: "You need to be a team player and get involved even outside of 
normal working hours. You have to live it [music] throughout your life. I've 
found a balance between my professional and family life which is important, but 
you need to be ready and willing to dedicate yourself to the job 100% when 
necessary."

Toby Langley

Co-founder of independent record label, Transgressive Records 
<http://www.transgressive.co.uk/>, Toby has helped discover the likes of the 
Foals, The Noisettes, Regina Spektor and The Young Knives. Despite this, Toby 
doesn't think success comes from second-guessing the charts. "I've never been 
fantastic at guessing which pop artists will fly or flop in the short-term, and 
it's a game I don't really fancy entering into. I focus on working with 
creative, inspiring songwriters or musicians, and how to further their message."

The key to Toby's success was working with his friend, Tim Dellow, 
Transgressive's co-founder. "I didn't entertain doing it solo – the two of us 
met and felt we could do anything together, and little has changed. The best 
bit is sharing the highlights, but it's also important to have support during 
the challenging moments.

"The exciting thing is that it's always different. Whether we're promoting an 
event, filming a documentary, releasing a seven-inch, or checking out a band in 
the studio as they make an album. No day is the same."

But the hours can be long and Toby says he has to be careful to avoid 
burn-out. "I'm often up at 7am and still emailing beyond midnight. But I ensure 
that when personal time arrives with family and friends, work is blocked out 
entirely — even if that time is only a day or a few hours. It's crucial to have 
perspective and space in order to make valued judgements.

He says: "Running your own record label is a lifestyle job and you have to be 
prepared to make personal sacrifices in order to commit the required time to 
it. However, the upside of doing something you love is that it's always 
empowering and exciting."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 