
Does the collapse of the Jolie-Pitt marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
 have any significance for the rest of us? Yes. It is a time to call a halt to 
the business of welding celebrity couples’ first names together and then – in 
the same spirit of smirking irony – inventing a new version that commemorates 
their parting. #Brangelina has become#Brexelina 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/hashtag/Brexelina?src=hash>. #Hiddleswift became 
#Hiddlesplit <http://www.someecards.com/entertainment/celebrities/hiddlesplit/>
. (It’s like the word “underwhelming”, which can never be spoken without the 
self-conscious and self-congratulatory implication: see what I did? I took the 
word “overwhelming” and wittily turned it on its head!)

Angelina Jolie files for divorce from Brad Pitt citing irreconcilable 
differences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
The first-name fusion has become smug shorthand for stating that you have 
complete ironic awareness of a gossiped-about relationship, that you are 
entirely conscious of it as an exploitable brand identity in the celebrity 
marketplace. Brad and Angelina were not the pioneers of this. That honour 
surely belongs to Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez who wereBennifer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/sep/19/3>: they split in 2004, two years 
beforeTwitter was invented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2010/jan/11/twitter-first-140-users-history>
, and so were spared its really widespread use, or an ironic split version 
(Gonnifer?). Shakespeare’s lovers on the Nile would be #Antopatra, and then
#Aspoatra 
<http://womenshistory.about.com/od/cleopatraimages/ig/Cleopatra-Pictures/Cleopatra-and-the-Asp.htm>
. Or in Verona it would be #Ruliet and then possibly #Ruliex.

It is a mark of the respect in which the US president and first lady are held 
that they did not become #Barelle. Let it die with #Brangelina.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwhat-next-cringe-orama-name-fusion-brangelina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca1f9b06509593e8261d3318e319fc25398fe53f%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20next%20in%20the%20cringe-orama%20of%20name%20fusion%3F%20Let%20it%20go%20with%20Brangelina%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwhat-next-cringe-orama-name-fusion-brangelina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20next%20in%20the%20cringe-orama%20of%20name%20fusion%3F%20Let%20it%20go%20with%20Brangelina%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwhat-next-cringe-orama-name-fusion-brangelina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca1f9b06509593e8261d3318e319fc25398fe53f%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 From Antopatra to Aspoatra? Richard Burton, as Mark Antony, and Elizabeth 
Taylor in the 1963 film Cleopatra. Photograph: Silver Screen Collection/Getty 
Images 
Crash course



Jeremy Corbyn was mocked for suggesting that Trident submarines should roam 
the seas without nuclear warheads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/17/jeremy-corbyn-trident-compromise-no-nuclear-warheads>
, like a box in whichSchrödinger’s cat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/16/experiment-to-put-microbe-in-two-places-at-once-quantum-physics-schrodinger>
, you are quite certain, is dead. But now the capital’s transport authorities 
are indulging in Corbyn-Trident-ism with a scheme in Commercial Street, east 
London, designed to keep drivers at 20mph or below:painting phoney or 
optical-illusion speed bumps 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37420421>, clever perspective 
lines that trick drivers into thinking the surface is bulging upwards — much as 
sponsors’ logos are often etched into sports pitches at an angle so that TV 
audiences can see them at the right shape.

Of course, optical speed bumps are cheaper than the real thing. But you drive 
up, decelerate and, as you smoothly sail over the optical speed bump, realise 
that you have been tricked. So the danger is surely that enraged drivers will 
come to assume all speed bumps are phoney, and will smash their cars and 
possibly themselves. Is Transport for London engaged in a worryinglyBallardian 
experiment in group psychology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/04/zadie-smith-jg-ballard-crash>?

Laugh? I almost lifted a car



I am a sucker for very sad films: I always cry at E.T. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/07/et-finale-voted-most-moving>, at 
The Diving Bell and the Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/08/worldcinema.drama>, and at the 
scene inThe Cruel Sea <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0045659/> where Jack Hawkins 
says: “It’s the war, it’s the whole bloody war 
<http://www.nowinfullcolor.com/2012/11/no-one-murdered-them-its-war-whole.html>
.” And ,like my colleague Catherine Shoard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/cried-your-eyes-out-at-a-weepie-well-done>
, I found myself choking up at the forthcoming outrageous weepie The Light 
Between Oceans, starring Alicia Vikander and Michael Fassbender.

But now researchers at Oxford have revealed that the endorphins released by 
sad films are not merely perversely enjoyable – they can actuallyincrease your 
pain thresholds 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/why-sad-films-can-help-to-relieve-the-pain-vjcj08hj7>
. Test subjects were asked to hold the fiendishly painful “wall-sit” test: 
holding an unsupported seated position against a wall using your tensed thigh 
muscles. The scientists found that after watching a sad film, the subjects 
could hold the position for 13% longer.

That would not work with me. Watching Bambi’s mother get killed does not cause 
my physical fitness to spike. I have to lie down on the sofa, staring 
lip-tremblingly at the ceiling.

But comedies are different. After watching the “desk pop” scene in the Will 
Ferrell comedyThe Other Guys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/16/the-other-guys-review> – where 
the hapless police officer is persuaded it’s traditional to fire a gun into the 
air at his desk – I have so many endorphins I can lift a car above my head.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwhat-next-cringe-orama-name-fusion-brangelina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad630c1981a9a4805bd84a518d466239db4e6693%2F0_16_2705_1623%2F2705.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20next%20in%20the%20cringe-orama%20of%20name%20fusion%3F%20Let%20it%20go%20with%20Brangelina%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwhat-next-cringe-orama-name-fusion-brangelina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20next%20in%20the%20cringe-orama%20of%20name%20fusion%3F%20Let%20it%20go%20with%20Brangelina%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwhat-next-cringe-orama-name-fusion-brangelina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad630c1981a9a4805bd84a518d466239db4e6693%2F0_16_2705_1623%2F2705.jpg>
 Strong man: Will Ferrell, with Eva Mendes, in The Other Guys. Photograph: 
Allstar/Columbia Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd  