
Results day marks the end of two years’ work for students – and the beginning 
of the end ofA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> as we 
know them.

A-level results day 2016: UK students get their grades – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/live/2016/aug/18/a-level-results-day-2016-uk-students-get-their-grades-live>
As well as A-levels ceasing to be modular, with exams taken along the way, 
AS-level results will no longer count towards final A-level grades.

In general, each year’s A-level results tell us little about the effectiveness 
of teaching, since theexams regulator 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofqual>’s policy of comparable 
outcomes 
<https://ofqual.blog.gov.uk/2016/06/03/some-thoughts-on-comparable-outcomes/> 
means the overall grade distribution is tied to GCSE achievement. This means if 
GCSE results rise, AS- and A-level results will be allowed to rise in the 
ensuing years.

So while, overall, this year’s A-level results are similar to last year’s, the 
main conclusion we can draw from this is that those taking A-levels this summer 
had similar GCSE attainment to that of their predecessors.

A-level results show another drop in A* and A grades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/a-level-results-show-another-drop-in-a-and-a-grade-students>
But while results nationally have stayed broadly the same, there have been 
significant changes at a subnational level. The distribution of A-level grades 
is always better in England than it is in Wales. This disparity has increased 
further, with 52.8% in England achieving A*-B compared with 48.1% in Wales – 
versus 52.7% and 49.0% last year.

What is fascinating is that the proportion of A* and A grades among Welsh boys 
has fallen significantly in 2016, a pattern not mirrored by Welsh girls or 
English boys. Academics have previously shown that the exam performance of 
teenage boys is affected by major sporting events. Could the success of Wales 
in Euro 2016 be to blame?

Nationally, the number of entries in the social sciences, such as economics 
and sociology, has continued to rise. However, there has been no increase in 
entries in the so-calledfacilitating subjects 
<https://successatschool.org/advicedetails/204/What-is-a-Facilitating-Subject>, 
which are preferred by the more selectiveRussell Group of universities 
<http://russellgroup.ac.uk/about/our-universities/>.


Next year may be a different story, as the changes kick in. The first sign of 
things to come can be seen in this year’s AS-level results, particularly in the 
subjects that have been “decoupled” from A-levels.


Ditch the platitudes, please: A-levels matter – especially for the least well 
off | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/18/ditch-platitudes-a-level-results-matter-results-day>
Approximately a third of subjects have been decoupled so far, with the link to 
be broken for the remainder of subjects over the next two years. Sixth forms 
can still enter students forAS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> in these subjects – but they 
will no longer count towards the A-levels they will sit next summer.

This has resulted in some large falls in entry levels in the subjects that 
have decoupled. Entries in AS history, for example, have fallen by 24%; other 
decoupled subjects have dropped by up to a third. By contrast, in mathematics, 
which will be among the final set of AS-levels to be decoupled in two years, 
the proportion of entries has fallen by only 2%.

Looked at another way, between two-thirds and three-quarters of schools and 
colleges have still chosen to enter year 12 students for AS-levels in the 
decoupled subjects.

AS-levels can help students make informed decisions about which subjects to 
continue into year 13 and help sixth forms track student performance. The 
evidence suggests, for now at least, a majority of sixth forms believe these 
benefits outweigh the value of the extra teaching time that not preparing for 
AS-levels exams would present.

Rebecca Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rebecca-allen> is director 
ofEducation Datalab <http://educationdatalab.org.uk>
 