
Grandparents are living longer which means that more of them have mental 
health issues, such as dementia. Can you recommend books that might help 
children cope with confused elderly relatives?

Grandparents frequently feature in children’s books – and always have done. In 
Joyce Lankester Brisley’sMilly Molly Mandy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/milly-molly-mandy-stories.html>, published in 
1928, for example, the extended family including grandparents, are part of 
Milly Molly Mandy’s everyday life. But grandparents looked and seemed much 
older and the idea that they might be suffering from acute memory loss or 
dementia was not widely discussed.

It is something that Lauren Child touches on in her first picture book Clarice 
Bean, That’s Me <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/clarice-bean-that-s-me.html>
which was published in 1999. Clarice Bean sometimes feels overwhelmed by her 
family; she longs for a space of her own and feels that she is the only member 
of the family who doesn’t have one.

Lauren Child: I never know whether writing is more difficult than illustrating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/18/lauren-child-interiew-ruby-redfort>
In the first spread that introduces the family, Grandad is in his chair 
“asleep as usual”. When Clarice Bean describes him later, she adds that when he 
is asleep he often has the cat on his head.

These characteristics are initially only mildly eccentric but later, it 
becomes clear that Grandad is pretty confused. He pours soup on his cornflakes 
and says he thinks the milk is off. Clarice Bean points out that what he 
thought was milk was, in fact, pea soup! Nothing is said here about Grandad’s 
behaviour but it does give a good picture of a modern grandfather who lives 
with the family and suffers from confusion. Lauren Child herself has talked 
about the fact that there is always a touch of ambiguity about Grandad – it’s 
possible that he’s putting it on a wee bit to make Clarice laugh… but actually, 
that sort of makes it more interesting in a way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fbest-childrens-books-on-dementia-grandparents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F19%2F1445248659708%2F59872954-3ebe-4392-b4a0-bb1d51bb2b05-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20best%20children's%20books%20exploring%20grandparents%20with%20dementia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fbest-childrens-books-on-dementia-grandparents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20best%20children%27s%20books%20exploring%20grandparents%20with%20dementia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fbest-childrens-books-on-dementia-grandparents%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F19%2F1445248659708%2F59872954-3ebe-4392-b4a0-bb1d51bb2b05-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jamie Bell as Billy Elliot in Stephen Daldry’s film. In Melvin Burgess and Lee 
Hall’s book, Billy looks after his elderly grandmother. Photograph: 
Allstar/UN/Sportsphoto Ltd 
In Billy Elliot <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/billy-elliot.html>, written 
by Melvin Burgess and Lee Hall after the success of the film and published in 
2001, Billy’s home life is full of complications. His mother died when he was 
young; his father and brother are both miners out on strike during the 
nationwide miners’ strike of the 1980s; his grandmother needs watching. She has 
a tendency to wander out of the house. Billy usually knows where to find her 
but her confusion is evident and he needs to be responsible. That’s not 
something that all children experience, but some do and, without spelling 
anything out, it gives a very good picture of how families manage grandparents 
with dementia.

Anne Fine is always a flawless commentator on families and their inherent 
chaos. Ralph, inThe More the Merrier 
<http://www.annefine.co.uk/books/more.merrier.php>, is about to experience his 
family at its maximum in terms of both numbers and chaos. It is Christmas and 
the relatives are descending… There are his cousins – the twins Sylvester and 
Sylvia who are unbearable and the ghastly Titania in her frilly frocks, Uncle 
Tristram, Great Granny who says the most inappropriate things and Great Aunt 
Ada who, like Billy Elliot’s aunt has a tendency to wander.

Jenny Downham: 'my own mother had Alzheimer’s and died while I was writing 
Unbecoming'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/07/jenny-downham-unbecoming-dementia-alzheimers>
The most powerful contribution to stories of this kind – and the only one that 
makes it the centre of the story is Jenny Downham’sUnbecoming 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/326091/>. Very much a 
reflection of contemporary life, it is a deeply moving story of three 
generations of women that centres round a grandmother with dementia. In 
Unbecoming the situation is particularly difficult because 17-year-old Katie 
cannot remember ever meeting her grandmother Mary before she unexpectedly 
arrives to live with the family.

Everything Katie has ever heard about her grandmother from her mother Caroline 
has been negative, as they are based on Caroline’s memories of her own 
childhood in which she felt she had been abandoned. Mary needs a lot of looking 
after; she wanders if unsupervised, she gets upset, becomes desperate for 
things quite unexpectedly and she sees people and places that aren’t quite 
there. But Katie and Mary forge a strong bond which turns out to be important 
in unlocking the secrets concerning both of them. Jenny Downham never 
glamorises or trivialises dementia but through her understanding of Mary she 
opens readers’ eyes to something of what the confusion of old age may feel like 
in a way that makes is both heartbreaking but also bearable.

Can you recommend books on this theme? Tell us on Twitter@GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> and by emailing 
childrens.books@theguardian.com and we’ll add your ideas!

Ruth, via email

I really liked Celia and Nonna by Victoria Lane, it’s a great story about 
grandparents’ role with little ones, and helps tackle ageing issues such as 
dementia.

Amy Griffiths, via email

Can I recommend Jessica Shepherd’s Grandma published by Child’s Play 
<http://www.childs-play.com/bookshop/9781846435973.html>. 
Miss Adkins (@RPS_Library) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> The book that 
introduced me to Alzheimer's was Memory, by Margaret Mahy. My Grandad has it 
now; Mahy captures it perfectly.
 <https://twitter.com/RPS_Library/status/656069804583878656> October 19, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RPS_Library/status/656069804583878656> 
Mark, via email

I can recommend ‘Do You Remember’ published by Wombat Books – beautiful 
illustrations for difficult situations.
 