
Most of the other bankers at the heart of the credit crisis have not enjoyed 
Adam Applegarth's lucky rehabilitation and are still sitting on the sidelines.
Sir Fred Goodwin, former chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland, returned to 
Scotland in August after spending the summer months in the south of France. He 
has turned to PR experts to rebuild his reputation, but as yet to no avail.

Goodwin's chairman at RBS, Sir Tom McKillop, quit his post and was then forced 
to step down as a non-executive director of BP. Like Goodwin, the former chief 
executive of AstraZeneca faces a lawsuit against RBS over its rights issue in 
2008.

Johnny Cameron, the former chief of investment banking at RBS, attempted a 
comeback at the headhunters Odgers Berndtson, but he resigned within a couple 
of weeks of joining after the firm lost a key contract with a government 
agency, UK Financial Investments. UKFI, which controls government stakes in 
banks, had engaged Odgers to find a new boss.

Steve Crawshaw, the former boss of the crashed buy-to-let specialist Bradford 
& Bingley, stepped down due to ill health and remains too ill to take up 
another post, according to the bank.

Peter Cummings, former investment boss of HBOS, widely blamed for the bad 
debts that wrecked the bank, has now quit all his directorships. It is rumoured 
that he decamped to a Â£4m villa on the Costa del Sol.

Andy Hornby, the former HBOS chief executive, bucked the trend. He quit the 
City in favour of the high-street chemist chain Alliance Boots, where he is 
chief executive. His humility following the crisis, and his decision not to 
take a payoff, helped him attract less opprobrium than others.Eric Daniels, 
boss of LloydsBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group, 
continues to guide his ship despite attacks on his decision to buy HBOS and 
almost wreck his own bank in the process.
 