
If you are an undergraduate finishing university this summer, your thoughts 
are probably turning to securing a job. We've looked atwhether getting a 2:2 
will hinder your chances of finding your first role 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/does-getting-lower-second-degree-hinder-career>
, but what about your degree subject?

HESA's Destinations of Leavers from Higher Education (DLHE) survey 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/images/stories/hesa/Pubs_Intro_Graphics/DLHE_1112/DLHE_1112_table_E.xls>
 found 40.5% of graduates with degrees in historical and philosophical studies, 
and 47.2% in creative arts and design, were in full-time employment after six 
months. This is less than the average for all subjects which was 52.7%. It also 
found 9.1% and 11.2%, respectively, of graduates with these degrees, were 
unemployed. Which is higher than the average for all subjects, 8.8%.

So, with competition fierce, how can you stand out from other applicants and 
get the first job of your dreams? There are lots of options available for arts 
and humanities grads, and the summer is a great time to get some work 
experience under your belt.

If you want to know what you can do with your arts or humanities degree, or 
are wondering what your options would be if you took one, ask our experts on
Thursday 29 May from 2pm to 4pm BST.

We'll be discussing:

• What career paths are available

• How to gain valuable work experience

• Where to find roles

• How to apply and make your application stand out

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you cancreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register>, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook 
profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can tweet us@GuardianCareers 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions to Hannah Friend 
who can post them for you.

Our panel

Paul Glennon is an associate dean at Birmingham Institute of Art and Design 
<http://www.bcu.ac.uk/biad>, Birmingham City University. As an artist, 
freelance graphic designer and consultant, Paul has exhibited his work across 
the world including Vancouver, New York, Europe and the UK. In his current role 
as associate dean, he oversees the student experience of 3000 undergraduate and 
postgraduate students. You can follow him@paulglennon 
<https://twitter.com/paulglennon>.

Vicky Creevey is IdeasTap <http://ideastap.com/>'s marketing manager. She 
completed a BA Design at Goldsmiths in 2006 and has worked in a range of arts 
marketing roles since. She previously worked as a marketer for a number of 
design, architecture and engineering companies. You can follow her@VickyCreevey 
<https://twitter.com/VickyCreevey>.

Andrew Davidson leads Design Council <https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/>'s 
skills work, focussing on education and industry collaboration and 
apprenticeships. He previously worked at Creative & Cultural Skills, 
Institution of Civil Engineers and Department for Education and Skills. He is 
an RSA (Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts) Fellow, and studied visual 
culture at Brighton University. You can follow him@designandrewd 
<https://twitter.com/designandrewd>.

Dan Hawes is the co-founder and head of marketing at Graduate Recruitment 
Bureau <http://www.grb.uk.com/>, the UK's leading independent recruitment 
consultancy for students, recent graduates and experienced graduates. You can 
follow@thegrbteam <https://twitter.com/thegrbteam>.

Cary Curtis is the founder and MD of London-based graduate recruitment agency, 
Give A Grad A Go <http://www.giveagradago.com/home.htm>. Give A Grad A Go 
specialise in placing talented graduates into their first or second jobs in 
some of the UK's most exciting businesses, from global brands to thriving 
start-ups. You can follow@giveagradago <https://twitter.com/giveagradago>.

Anne Shackleton is a careers adviser at Newcastle University 
<http://www.ncl.ac.uk/careers/>. She helps students of all disciplines on daily 
drop-in, runs advice workshops and provides practice interviews. You can follow
@ncl_careers <https://twitter.com/ncl_careers>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 