



Amy Poehler is one of the most popular sitcom stars of recent years, thanks to 
her role inParks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation> and awards-show 
turns with Tina Fey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/jan/12/golden-globes-2015-tina-fey-amy-poehler-bill-cosby-george-clooney-video>
. She has seamlessly made the transition from TV to the big screen via Pixar’s 
latest hit,Inside Out <https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out>. But such a 
path has proven hazardous in the past. Many TV comedy stars have briefly popped 
up on the big screen, only to retreat back to their comfort zone; some have 
become something of a joke, and others have been let down by the different 
demands of Hollywood. Few have gone on to enjoy a prolonged career making 
movies – fewer still making good movies. But who has managed to pull it off? We 
sort 25 sitcom stars into the ones whose careers went big, and those who stayed 
small.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437658953789%2FKP_367683_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Out%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Out%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437658953789%2FKP_367683_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Inside Out 
Big timers

Chris Pratt
When Chris Pratt reappeared at the start of Park and Recreation’s sixth season 
an alarming 60 pounds lighter and with a fully formed six-pack, it was clear 
that the erstwhile loveable buffoon had made the transition to blockbuster 
beefcake. He went on to star in the mega-hitsGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> and Jurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>.

Will Smith
The career progression from rapper and sitcom actor to movie superstar may be 
unorthodox, but it was enormously successful for the Fresh Prince. Recent turns 
in Men in Black 3 and Focus reinforced his status as one of Hollywood’s most 
bankable stars, and he will make his comic-bookdebut as Deadshot 
<http://screenrant.com/suicide-squad-movie-deadshot-mask-costume/> in DC’s 
Suicide Squad next year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jurassic%20World%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjurassic-world-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434039399659%2FKP_270997_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Jurassic World video review 
Martin Freeman
Having built a reputation as a likeable everyman in The Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/01/favourite-tv-show-the-office-ricky-gervais-david-brent>
, Martin Freeman was an inspired choice for the role of Bilbo Baggins in The 
Hobbit, and brought a humane presence to an otherwise bloated and impersonal – 
albeit very successful – film trilogy.

Amy Poehler
Following several years of being one of the funniest women on TV – most 
notably as Leslie Nope inParks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation> – Poehler is in 
the process of making it on the big screen, starring as the voice of Joy in 
Pixar’s Inside Out. She’s set to appear alongside Tina Fey in Sisters, opening 
in the US in December.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fany-poehler-interview-inside-out-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434413515234%2FAmy-Poehler-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Poehler%20on%20Pixar's%20Inside%20Out%3A%20No%20one%20can%20be%20Joy%20all%20the%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fany-poehler-interview-inside-out-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Poehler%20on%20Pixar%27s%20Inside%20Out%3A%20No%20one%20can%20be%20Joy%20all%20the%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fany-poehler-interview-inside-out-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434413515234%2FAmy-Poehler-001.jpg>
 Amy Poehler on Inside Out 
Danny DeVito
Having made a name for himself in the multiple Emmy award-winning Taxi, Danny 
DeVito became one of the most recognisable faces in Hollywood during the 1990s, 
thanks to memorable performances in the likes of Batman Returns, Matilda (which 
he also directed) and LA Confidential, and has since come full circle with his 
fantastically committed performance as squalor-loving Frank in the US sitcom
It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/14/its-always-sunny-in-philadelphia>

Mila Kunis
For years best known as the voice of Meg in Family Guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/family-guy>, Mila Kunis has emerged 
as one of the brightest prospects in Hollywood, thanks to roles in box-office 
successesOz the Great and the Powerful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oz-the-great-and-powerful> and Ted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ted>, and critical hit Black Swan. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/20/black-swan-review>

Ted stars Mila Kunis and Seth MacFarlane v the Guardian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/28/ted-seth-macfarlane-mila-kunis> 
Woody Harrelson
There weren’t a lot of jokes in True Detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective> and No Country for 
Old Men <https://www.theguardian.com/film/no-country-for-old-men>, but esteemed 
character actor Woody Harrelson first made a name for himself as dimwitted 
bartender Woody Boyd in the classic sitcom Cheers.

Steve Carell
Steve Carell’s successes on the big and small screens virtually coincided, 
when both the US version of The Office and The 40-Year-Old Virgin became big 
hits in 2005. Since then, he’s appeared in several hit comedies, and recently 
proved himself decent at drama in Bennet Miller’sFoxcatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/foxcatcher>.

Helen Hunt
During her stint starring in New York-set sitcom Mad About You, Helen Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/helen-hunt> also nabbed a best actress oscar 
for her bubbly performance alongside Jack Nicholson in As Good as It Gets.

Michael Cera
Following his role as an awkward, stammering teen in Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>, Michael Cera 
went on to play virtually every awkward, stammering teen in Hollywood for the 
next couple of years, before breaking type inScott Pilgrim vs the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scott-pilgrim-vs-the-world>.

Small screeners

Jennifer Aniston
The Friends <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/friends> star has never 
quite succeeded in translating the magic that made her such a zeitgeisty figure 
during the 90s, and although the likes of We’re the Millers and Marley and Me 
made a splash at the box office, none of her big-screen roles have created 
anything like the same beloved legacy as Rachel Green.

Jason Segel
Jason Segel was one of several current comedy stars to get their first break 
on Judd Apatow’sFreaks and Geeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/dec/31/box-set-freaks-and-geeks>
, and has since had the role of Marshall in How I Met Your Mother, all while 
establishing himself as a talented movie actor and writer with the likes of 
Knocked Up and The Muppets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fwhen-the-laughter-stops-how-sitcom-stars-have-fared-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436784702627%2F5356a757-3f4f-4764-9611-9b68102bc87a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20the%20laughter%20stops%3A%20how%20sitcom%20stars%20have%20fared%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fwhen-the-laughter-stops-how-sitcom-stars-have-fared-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20the%20laughter%20stops%3A%20how%20sitcom%20stars%20have%20fared%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fwhen-the-laughter-stops-how-sitcom-stars-have-fared-in-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436784702627%2F5356a757-3f4f-4764-9611-9b68102bc87a-1020x612.jpeg>
 The cast of Judd Apatow’s TV comedy Freaks and Geeks, including (back row) 
Seth Rogen, Jason Segel and James Franco. Photograph: NBCUPhotobank/Rex Features
John Cleese
Throughout the 70s, John Cleese was one of the biggest names in comedy, thanks 
to Fawlty Towers and Monty Python, but his film career tailed off after The 
Holy Grail andLife of Brian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/monty-python-s-life-of-brian>, aside from the 
gleefully amoral A Fish Called Wanda.

Tina Fey
The 30 Rock star’s history in film actually stretches back to her beloved and 
endlessly quoted script for Mean Girls, but her outings in front of the camera, 
such as Date Night and Baby Mamma, have been lukewarm.

Seth MacFarlane
The days when Seth MacFarlane’s Family Guy was perpetually under threat of 
cancellation seem a long way away, and he’s now considered a bona fide 
Hollywood star thanks to the success ofTed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ted>, but his trademark scatological humour 
is just as hit and miss on the big screen as it is on the small.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fted-2-review-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436526007300%2FKP_348718_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%202%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fted-2-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%202%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fted-2-review-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436526007300%2FKP_348718_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Ted 2 – video review 
Charlie Day
Day brings his manic energy and shrill vocals to voiceover roles in The Lego 
Movie and Monsters University, and was the best thing aboutHorrible Bosses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142717/horrible-bosses>, but always 
seems restrained compared with his unhinged role in It’s Always Sunny in 
Philadelphia.

Jason Bateman
As the good-looking straight man who functioned as a soundboard for the more 
outlandish performances that orbited around him, Jason Bateman was always the 
most likely of theArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> cast to make it 
in Hollywood – but comedies such as Horrible Bosses and Identity Thief failed 
to make the most of his talent.

Alison Brie
Having done great work for years on the cult comedy Community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/community>, Alison Brie was an 
inspired choice for Princess Unikitty in The Lego Movie, and now her traction 
as a comic lead in films is about to be tested in the forthcoming No Stranger 
Than Love.

Aubrey Plaza
Aubrey Plaza’s performance as moody, deadpan April Ludgate in Parks and 
Recreation provided a refreshing counterpoint to how women are expected to 
behave in comedies, but such a distinctive persona tends to be served better 
these days by television – films such as Grumpy Cat’s Worst Christmas Ever 
don’t do her justice.

Aubrey Plaza: from 'sarcastic, eye-rolling weirdo’ to lustful zombie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/02/aubrey-plaza-life-after-beth-interview>
Julia Louis-Dreyfus
Despite being one of the most gifted comic actors of her generation and 
starring in Seinfeld, Julia Louis-Dreyfus has few notable film credits to her 
name, beyond some minor roles in Woody Allen films and the voice of an ant in A 
Bug’s Life. She continues to land her best roles (such as Selina Meyer inVeep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep>) in TV.

Ricky Gervais
Given his notorious outing hosting the Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes>, it would be wrong to say 
Gervais hasn’t made it in the US, but none of his films thus far have come 
anywhere near the nuanced humour that made The Office such a classic.

Rowan Atkinson
One of Britain’s most beloved TV comics and the star of Blackadder, Not the 
Nine O’Clock News and Mr Bean, Rowan Atkinson has not looked as at home on the 
big screen, with neither the Jonny English franchise nor the Mr Bean spin-offs 
successfully exploiting his obvious comic abilities.

Sofia Vergara
The Colombian-American actress received her star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame 
in May 2015, but that honour was more in recognition for her role in the sitcom 
Modern Family than for any of her films. Her most recent high-profile 
big-screen outing, Hot Pursuit, wasuniversally panned 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/dont_mess_with_texas_2014/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjennifer-aniston-horrible-bosses-2-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416933386241%2FHorrible-Bosses-2-Jennife-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Aniston%20on%20Horrible%20Bosses%202%3A%20'I%20loved%20playing%20someone%20so%20twisted'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjennifer-aniston-horrible-bosses-2-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Aniston%20on%20Horrible%20Bosses%202%3A%20%27I%20loved%20playing%20someone%20so%20twisted%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjennifer-aniston-horrible-bosses-2-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416933386241%2FHorrible-Bosses-2-Jennife-017.jpg>
 Jennifer Aniston on Horrible Bosses 2: ‘I loved playing someone so twisted’ 
Neil Patrick Harris
Despite having a film career spanning nearly 30 years, and having hosted the 
2015 Oscars ceremony, none of Neil Patrick Harris’s silver screen outings have 
come close to the prominence of his character from How I Met Your Mother.

Alyssa Milano
Alyssa Milano’s determined efforts to leave behind her best-known role as the 
child star on the US sitcom Who’s the Boss and make a distinguished film career 
for herself never quite came to fruition, and she has since returned back to 
her small-screen origins in shows such as Charmed.
 