
It was with a fit of pique, revenge in mind and a double-winning flourish that 
Johan Cruyff <https://www.theguardian.com/football/johan-cruyff> brought the 
curtain down upon his remarkable playing career. He also crossed one football’s 
greatest divides to do it. Cruyff was 36 in the summer of 1983 and in his 
second spell at Ajax, having just helped the club clinch the domestic league 
and cup double. The achievement was rewarded with the news from the club that 
he was to be cast aside. A new contract was not to be offered to the man who 
had given so much power, status and prestige to the club, not to mention a 
sparkling array of trophies.

With a point to prove and anger levels high, Cruyff opted for the previously 
unthinkable. He signed for Ajax’s increasingly bitter rivals,Feyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/feyenoord>, a club that had laboured for 
much of the previous decade since winning the league and Uefa Cup in 1974. The 
Rotterdam giants, the first club from the Netherlands to win both the European 
Cup and the World Club Championship, had only managed to add one KNVB Cup 
success since the league and European double glory almost a decade earlier.

Johan Cruyff: father of modern game who also shaped Dutch culture | David 
Winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/johan-cruyff-father-modern-game-dutch>
Feyenoord probably needed Cruyff more than Cruyff needed Feyenoord. The club 
wasn’t in a position of simply being subjugated by an all-encompassing Ajax; it 
was a little more complex than that. PSV Eindhoven had come on strongly during 
the second half of the 1970s, with three title wins in four seasons to add to a 
Uefa Cup success of their own in 1978. AZ Alkmaar also arose to prominence at 
the beginning of the 1980s to win their first title and contest the 1981 Uefa 
Cup final against Bobby Robson’s Ipswich Town. By 1983, Feyenoord were being 
swamped by the new kids on the block as much as their old nemesis from 
Amsterdam.

The somewhat uneasy union between Cruyff and Feyenoord took a lot of getting 
used to, not just for the fiercely partisan fans of both clubs but also the 
players themselves, along with the stunned media. Over 30 years later the sight 
of Cruyff in a Feyenoord shirt is still one that has the power to make you look 
twice, just to make sure your eyes aren’t deceiving you.

The world, however, did get to see Cruyff in a Feyenoord shirt, and the 
players and fans at De Kuip soon started to warm to the alien concept unfolding 
before them. Feyenoord started the season impressively, winning five of their 
first sixEredivisie <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eredivisie> fixtures 
and dropping just one point before they made the trip to Amsterdam for the first
De Klassieker of the season, a game that was played at the Olympic Stadium. 
Feyenoord had even scored a remarkable 14 goals in their opening three league 
fixtures. The return of Cruyff to Ajax in Feyenoord colours was never going to 
be a static occasion.

Just a few days after a midweek Uefa Cup trip to Scotland to take on St 
Mirren, Feyenoord walked intoDe Klassieker full of confidence. It would, 
however, prove to be a chastening experience, as Feyenoord slipped to a record 
8-2 defeat at the hands of their greatest rivals and the defending champions. 
Feyenoord didn’t play that badly during a game that was marred by crowd 
trouble; it was instead a case of a number of simple errors being punished in 
the most emphatic manner by their opponents.

The result could have derailed Feyenoord’s outstanding start to the campaign 
but it did just the opposite. Feyenoord emerged from their mauling at Ajax as a 
team increasingly empowered. The trip to Paisley to take on St Mirren at Love 
Street a few days before the loss toAjax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> had ended in a 1-0 victory for 
Feyenoord, the goal scored by a man just two days short of his 21st birthday. 
That man was Ruud Gullit.

This Feyenoord team was by no means a one-man band. Cruyff was joined not just 
by the emerging Gullit but also by talented players such as goalkeeper Joop 
Hiele, who would later serve as understudy to Hans van Breukelen at Euro 88. 
The side was also blessed with the free-scoring Peter Houtman, who would go on 
to become the stadium announcer at De Kuip. André Hoekstra blossomed during the 
campaign and the defence was marshalled effectively by Sjaak Troost and Michel 
van der Korput. Ben Wijnstekers, Denmark international Ivan Nielsen, Pierre 
Vermeulen and the Bulgaria international Andrey Zhelyaskov all made telling 
contributions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fjohan-cruyff-ajax-feyenoord-holland-eredivisie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e037b0fe5e744efde4561b55224083610b4cebd%2F0_33_2680_1892%2F2680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Ajax%20didn't%20want%20Johan%20Cruyff%20he%20left%20for%20Feyenoord%20...%20and%20won%20the%20double&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fjohan-cruyff-ajax-feyenoord-holland-eredivisie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Ajax%20didn%27t%20want%20Johan%20Cruyff%20he%20left%20for%20Feyenoord%20...%20and%20won%20the%20double&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fjohan-cruyff-ajax-feyenoord-holland-eredivisie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e037b0fe5e744efde4561b55224083610b4cebd%2F0_33_2680_1892%2F2680.jpg>
 Johan Cruyff playing for Feyenoord. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
It would be five months before Feyenoord lost again in the league as they 
launched into a 15-game unbeaten run that included 12 wins. When they 
eventually slipped up at Groningen in late February it would prove to be the 
last time Feyenoord would taste defeat in the 1983-84 season. With steady 
progress being made in the KNVB Cup, including knocking out Ajax in a replay in 
the last-16, the only disappointment was their Uefa Cup exit at the hands of 
Tottenham Hotspur. An imperious Glenn Hoddle, at a decade younger than Cruyff, 
proved too much during both legs of their second-round encounter. The Londoners 
went on to lift the trophy.

Johan Cruyff: the revolutionary who changed how the world saw football | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-revolutionary-changed-football-richard-williams>
A week after the loss at Groningen came the acid test. Ajax arrived at De Kuip 
still hoping a win would provoke Feyenoord to hit the self-destruct button. 
Feyenoord, in an uncompromising mood, had other plans. Gullit opened the 
scoring with a spectacular free-kick and Cruyff emphatically blasted another of 
the goals home from close range, during a 4-1 victory where Jan Molby snatched 
the only Ajax goal of the game. It was a result that confirmed Feyenoord had 
the mental durability to match the ability they had shown since that fateful 
8-2 defeat in Amsterdam.

The following week, Feyenoord dropped a point in a draw away at Go Ahead 
Eagles in a game they largely dominated. Feyenoord’s scorer that day was 
Stanley Brard. Brard was a left-back by trade, but on Cruyff’s insistence had 
been deployed as a left winger. Brard was often awkward and uncomfortable in 
the position and would provoke the frustration not just of the Feyenoord fans, 
but also some of his team-mates.

Brard, however, played a pivotal role in the side as his positioning higher up 
the pitch meant that opposing right-backs didn’t have the freedom to go 
forward. This in turn meant there was less pressure on the ageing Cruyff to 
track back. It was a key switch. Brard celebrated his goal that day with a 
well-aimed hand gesture towards his tormentors in the away section.

Feyenoord won eight and drew three of their last 11 league games after the 
victory over Ajax. They effectively clinched the title with two games to spare 
after a 3-0 win at home to Utrecht. Three days later they defeated Fortuna 
Sittard in a closely contested KNVB Cup final on home soil at De Kuip to clinch 
their third league and cup double. Houtman scored the winning goal midway 
through the second half, just three minutes after climbing from the bench.

It was a stunning riposte from Cruyff towards Ajax, who had cut him adrift 
just 12 months earlier after having helped them to the very same league and cup 
double. Cruyff was also named player of the year by the nation’s football 
writers. Gullit won the equivalent award as voted for by his fellow 
professionals. It was a remarkable and fitting way to bring an end to Cruyff’s 
playing career, just not at the club he expected to do it with.

Johan Cruyff, Total Football pioneer, dies at the age of 68
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-dies-aged-68-holland-football-legend>
As Cruyff walked away from Feyenoord in the summer of 1984, the club signed 
another ageing Ajax icon in a bid to repeat the success. A then 33-year-old 
Johnny Rep was signed from PEC Zwolle to fill the void left by Cruyff. However, 
1984-85 would be a season of disappointment, as Feyenoord fell at the first 
hurdle in the European Cup, going out of the competition in Athens against 
Panathinaikos.

There was also an early exit in their defence of the KNVB Cup, surprisingly 
toppling out at home to Excelsior. Although Feyenoord finished a reasonable 
third place in the league, it was yet another blow to have to hand the title 
back to Ajax. The final insults for Feyenoord to stomach in the summer of 1985 
were the departure of Gullit to rivals PSV Eindhoven and the return to Ajax of 
Cruyff as coach.

The last three decades haven’t always been kind to Feyenoord, with the 
Eredivisie title returning to De Kuip only twice, the last of those triumphs in 
the 1998-99 season. Just two further major honours have found their way into 
the Feyenoord trophy room since the dawning of the new millennium.

Financial difficulties and even flirtations with relegation have been nearly 
as common as realistic title challenges, but Feyenoord continue to chase the 
ghosts of their glorious past. It’s difficult to envisage a time when Feyenoord 
will reign supreme in the country once again, butPSV Eindhoven’s title win last 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2015/nov/26/psv-eindhoven-eredivisie-factory-workers-holland>
 shows that sleeping giants can awaken.

• This article appeared first on These Football Times 
<http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Steven 
Scragg <https://twitter.com/scraggy_74> on Twitter
 