
A year ago, David Hyde, an unpaid United Nations intern, resigned after the 
media discovered he had been camping out in Geneva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/unpaid-un-intern-who-had-to-sleep-in-a-tent-quits-after-media-uproar>
 because he couldn’t afford the high rents in the city. Hyde’s case helped to 
raise awareness of the injustice of unpaid work – especially in one of the 
world’s most expensive cities. Since then a movement of intern activists and 
civil society allies have been putting pressure on the UN to live up to its own 
values.

The Fair Internship Initiative  
<https://fairinternshipinitiative.wordpress.com/>(FII) – which started as the 
Pay Your Interns movement in Geneva in early 2015 – is a network of interns 
across five countries. We are calling for the UN to offer paid internships, not 
only as a basic workers’ rights issue, but to ensure that people from 
developing countries and poorer backgrounds are able to afford these 
opportunities.


Change is coming, but it is slow. While the UN’s own World Youth Report 
released last month described unpaid positions as “exploitative”, some interns 
speaking out on the issue have faced resistance from their superiors. Last 
year, FII members protesting at the UN headquarters in New York wereremoved by 
security 
<https://news.vice.com/article/un-intern-protest-ends-with-security-breaking-things-up-asking-to-delete-photographs>
.




The status of interns at the UN remains a complicated and contentious topic. 
At the highpoint of media attention last year, the UN was quick to blame the 
policy on a general assembly resolution banning the payment of interns. 
However, the UN later admitted that the resolution didn’t actually exist. In 
fact, interns are classified under a decade-old administrative instruction 
known as “gratis personnel” – a term originally invented for peacekeeping 
troops lent by governments to the organisation. UN secretariat leaders are able 
to change this instruction and have done so multiple times in the past.
 The leading the UN special rapporteur on freedom of expression then took to 
Twitterto question <https://twitter.com/davidakaye/status/664279309369126914> 
the organisation’s treatment of protests. 
The UN has also claimed they would need to ask for an extra budget from member 
states to pay their interns. However, their spending priorities are 
questionable when last year the UN secretariat asked the general assembly to
raise the salaries of their top employees by 10% 
<https://www.letemps.ch/economie/2015/08/20/onu-ne-paie-stagiaires-veut-augmenter-salaires-cadres>
.

There is something inherently wrong when the organisation is not the first one 
to implement its own rules
Alfred de Zayas 
Furthermore, the costs of paying all interns a living stipend, similar to that 
offered by the International Labour Organisation (ILO), would require less than 
0.5% of the organisation’s budget, despite the fact that the organisation 
employees more than 4,000 unpaid interns (according to 2012-13 figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/un-employed-thousands-unpaid-interns>
). When the ILO first implemented a stipend programme, after discovering one of 
their interns living in the building’s basement, they did so without searching 
for a new budget but by simply incorporating the cost into existing allocations.

The FII has developed a range of strategies to push the organisation and other 
employers to change. While a taskforce meets with ambassadors and diplomats, 
another group is involved planning the next protest action.


An anonymous video 
<https://www.facebook.com/100012187664664/videos/124949677921287/> posted by a 
UN intern calling for the organisation to end the policy recently went viral on 
social media. It raised the point that “as interns we do real work of real 
value but are rarely recognised”. The movement is planning the first worldwide 
intern strike later this year.



Other voices are now joining the call for change. The Council of Global 
Unions, representing over 200 million workers, recentlyendorsed a letter 
<http://www.world-psi.org/en/global-trade-union-movement-condemns-unpaid-internships-calls-un-change-policy>
 to Ban Ki Mooncriticising 
<http://world-psi.org/en/global-trade-union-movement-condemns-unpaid-internships-calls-un-change-policy>
 the UN internship policy and called on the organisation to end precarious work 
within its own halls.

Given its visibility and symbolic importance, the UN has the chance to be a 
critical global fulcrum on this issue
Ross Perlin author of Intern Nation 
Government officials from France, a permanent member of the UN security 
council, have been calling for payment of interns to be addressed the UN’s 
fifth committee meeting where budget and HR issues will be discussed later this 
year. Ian Richards, the UN staff council president, has already called on the 
committee to prepare a proposal for the introduction of intern stipends.

Meanwhile, Alfred de Zayas, independent UN expert on international order, has 
criticised the UN’s hypocrisy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=55o27aufUXo>, 
saying “there is something inherently wrong when the organisation is not the 
first one to implement its own rules.” At a recent UN forum, the unpaid policy 
wasdescribed by a moderator 
<https://twitter.com/anunpaidact/status/695186702739062784> as an “absolutely 
disgusting practice” for which the UN should “hold its head in shame”.


The UN is now facing criticism from a group of over 35 NGOs called the We Pay 
Coalition <http://wepayourinterns.org/ngos/>, which formed earlier this year 
with the goal of lobbying the UN and other employers to pay their interns.

How can the UN fight inequality when it doesn’t pay its interns?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/03/how-can-the-un-fight-inequality-when-it-doesnt-pay-its-interns>
Although the UN is not the only employer to benefit from the work of unpaid 
interns, it plays an important, norm-defining role. “Given its visibility and 
symbolic importance, the UN has the chance to be a critical global fulcrum on 
this issue,” says Ross Perlin author ofIntern Nation 
<https://www.versobooks.com/books/1112-intern-nation>. 

 The change of secretary general later this year is seen by many as a chance 
for the organisation to reassert its relevance. The Fair Internship Initiative 
hasalready questioned 
<https://fairinternshipinitiative.wordpress.com/oursg-candidate/> many of the 
new candidates about their position on paid internships and while most sound 
supportive, only a handful have made meaningful commitments to change.

However, intern activists are not giving up hope. Developments such as UNICEF’s
 
<https://www.facebook.com/PayYourInterns/photos/a.1583803278564717.1073741831.1577174352560943/1725994257678951/?type=3&theater>
 recent pilot paid internship programme suggest their efforts are having an 
effect. “I think what this shows is that the argument has been won – now we 
just need to turn the words into actions,” says Bridget, a member of FII. “This 
issue is just so simple. Pay your interns. Then we can move on to all the 
bigger, much tougher questions the UN faces.”

Vi Tran and Kate Richards at the Fair Internship Initiative 
<https://fairinternshipinitiative.wordpress.com/> Geneva.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 