
I first realised I was living next door to a weekend sublet two years ago. 
Late one Saturday night I heard boys yelling and loud music, and the thumping 
against the walls was so hard one of my picture frames fell off and cracked on 
the floor. I presumed the neighbours had a teenager who was throwing a cheeky 
party while their parents were away. When it happened again the following 
weekend I assumed it was a repeat. However, a few weekends later it was girls 
yelling, playing what I recognised to be the true hymn of the hen party, You 
Can Leave Your Hat On. Suddenly it made sense: I was living next door to a 
sublet playing host to hen parties and stag dos most weekends.

I’ve had men wrestling on the floor outside my flat, someone trying to kick in 
my door, and fights that have left blood smears across the corridor walls. I’d 
refrained from complaining to the building manager or letting agents and tried 
to deal with the host directly.

I had nothing against someone trying to make a little extra cash over the 
weekend. It was when it became clear the property was being entirely used for 
short-term rentals, and after my second phone call to the police, that I 
started complaining. I complained to the building manager, to my landlord, to 
the council. So far, nothing has been done.

Weekend sublets such as those offered on Airbnb <http://www.airbnb.co.uk/> and 
Booking.com <http://www.booking.com/> have revolutionised holidays. But I’m not 
the only person to have a bad experience. Paul, a teacher with a flat in 
Edinburgh, noticed people trundling by his apartment with luggage. Then he was 
kept awake by late-night noise. “The irritation was that it was very difficult 
to get in touch with the owner via the Airbnb website. I had to pretend to be 
interested in renting it in order to send them a message,” he says, and he 
claims that “the problems have left people in negative equity”.

Residents alleged that the Airbnb host had breached several terms in his lease 
agreement, and the tribunal judge agreed

If you want to hear a real Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> horror story, how about the one 
involving the riot police who were called to a flat in Brixton, south London, 
after 150 people arrived for a party that turned into chaos? In that case, 
reported in the Times in May, residents had apparently called the police on 
several occasions to break up parties in the flat, which had been let through 
the website. One complained that a partygoer “landed with a crash on to his 
balcony from above” and knocked on his window to get back in.

In the First-Tier Tribunal (Property Chamber), which handles disputes over 
property and land, the residents alleged that the Airbnb host had breached 
several terms in his lease agreement, and the tribunal judge agreed, saying the 
defendant appeared to be using the property as a guesthouse. It’s the first 
known ruling against an Airbnb host by the tribunal – but probably won’t be the 
last.

Plenty more alarming tales can be found on AirbnbHell.com 
<http://www.airbnbhell.com/>, a website “dedicated to helping hosts and guests 
share their stories about the risks and dangers of using Airbnb”.

Cal King, shows editor at TV channel Comedy Central, rents a flat in London 
next door to one that is empty quite a lot of the time, “and then each weekend 
a different group of raucous people turn up and have parties”. He is sanguine. 
“In a way, I quite like knowing that even though there’s pounding tropical 
house at 1am, chances are they’ll be gone tomorrow.”

Katie Gray, a barrister at Tanfield Chambers, says that in the first instance 
you should see if there can be anything done informally, for example by having 
a conversation with tenants or the host directly. If this does not work, she 
suggests you gather as much evidence as possible. “Keep a diary of events, 
record the frequency of the lettings, and the dates and times of the nuisance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fairbnb-nuisance-neighbours-tribunal-ruling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2216ac225eba2dc88c86a18be964f26e4ba9dde%2F0_202_6016_3612%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Airbnb%20rentals%20turn%20into%20nuisance%20neighbours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fairbnb-nuisance-neighbours-tribunal-ruling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Airbnb%20rentals%20turn%20into%20nuisance%20neighbours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fairbnb-nuisance-neighbours-tribunal-ruling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2216ac225eba2dc88c86a18be964f26e4ba9dde%2F0_202_6016_3612%2F6016.jpg>
 The legal avenues available to resolve disputes will depend on whether the 
property is leasehold or freehold. Photograph: John Macdougall/AFP/Getty Images 
The legal avenues available, should it come to this, will depend on whether 
the property is leasehold or freehold. For leasehold properties, owners or 
tenants will have to report the issue to the freeholder of the block, who will 
be the people able to take action.

In terms of longer nuisance sublets, local authorities may offer protection. 
For example, in London, stays longer than 90 days require previous planning 
permission.

If you are selling your property, things become a little tricky. You are 
required to complete a property information form disclosing any disputes or 
complaints about the properties or properties nearby. If you have been in a 
dispute about an Airbnb letting and you do not inform the buyer, you could be 
liable in court for misrepresentation and potentially be asked to pay damages 
to the buyer. In an extreme situation the sale will not go through.

Airbnb now has well over 1m properties and is active in 200 countries. One of 
the key features of the website is the review function: guests can review the 
properties they have stayed in, and hosts can review their guests. Though 
neighbours have, until recently, been left out in the cold.

New York laws ban apartments in buildings with three or more units from being 
rented out for less than 30 days

Two weeks after the Brixton case emerged and was widely publicised, Airbnb 
launched an online tool <http://blog.airbnb.com/new-resource-for-neighbors/> 
for neighbours of its hosts who experience problems and want to make a 
complaint. The site reviews whether your complaint matches up with an active 
Airbnb listing, then messages the host. If problems persist, the website says 
it can suspend or remove them from Airbnb entirely. However, it is not clear if 
anyone has yet been banned. Airbnb says just one in 18,000 UK guest arrivals 
has prompted a complaint via the tool.

“The overwhelming majority of Airbnb hosts and guests are good neighbours and 
respectful travellers,” the company says. “We want to do everything we can to 
help our community members be good neighbours.”

In a recent blog, it pledged to treat each case seriously. “Hosting is a big 
responsibility,” it said, “and those who repeatedly fail to meet our standards 
and expectations will be subject to suspension or removal from the Airbnb 
community.”

The cities cracking down on Airbnb


The idea of Airbnb and other short-term lets as an alternative to over-priced 
hotels may soon be over,writes Patrick Collinson. Many cities have begun to 
introduce new rules, after residents complained about being overwhelmed by 
weekend visitors banging wheelie bags up stairs, breaching building security 
rules, and loud parties. Pressure has also come from hotel groups and local 
politicians who have lost revenue from hotel taxes.

Berlin
In June, a court upheld Berlin’s de facto ban on short-term rentals. People 
who let more than 50% of their apartment on a short-term basis without a permit 
risk a fine of €100,000 (£85,000). City authorities were concerned that the 
availability of affordable housing was being severely threatened by the rise of 
short-term letting. Munich and Hamburg have also taken steps to curb
short-term lets. 

San Francisco 
The city that is home to Airbnb’s HQ is also one of its fiercest opponents. 
Hosts have to register with the authorities; if Airbnb advertises an 
un­registered property it can be fined $1,000 (£755) a day for each listing. An 
action group in the city has posted “wanted” flyers. The crime? “Airbnb’ing our 
community” and “destroying affordable housing for immigrant, minority, and low 
income families”.


New York 
The city’s rental laws ban apartments in buildings with three or more units 
from being rented out for less than 30 days. Landlords who flout the ban can be 
fined as much as $7,500. But home ­sharing – where the host is ­present – is 
legal. Critics say that short-term rental companies like Airbnb are ­flooding 
the city’s housing ­market, reducing available housing stock citywide by 10%, 
­according to a study released in June.


Barcelona
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fairbnb-nuisance-neighbours-tribunal-ruling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ca17518f67a6ead3c680c855818d6b1e16cc792%2F0_399_5928_3558%2F5928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Airbnb%20rentals%20turn%20into%20nuisance%20neighbours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fairbnb-nuisance-neighbours-tribunal-ruling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Airbnb%20rentals%20turn%20into%20nuisance%20neighbours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fairbnb-nuisance-neighbours-tribunal-ruling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ca17518f67a6ead3c680c855818d6b1e16cc792%2F0_399_5928_3558%2F5928.jpg>
 Barcelona is popular for Airbnb rentals. Photograph: kiko_jimenez/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
The Catalan city has been among the most aggressive in fighting Airbnb, 
­slapping a €30,000 fine on the site for hosting illegal tourist lets in 2014. 
Flat owners have to list their apartments with the city’s tourism register, 
obtain a licence and be responsible for collecting the daily €0.65 tourist tax.

Madrid
The Spanish capital set a minimum stay of five nights in private homes and 
apartments which, given the ­typical three-night stay on Airbnb, ruled out most 
rentals. But the directive was later ­overturned in court.

Reykjavik 
The 1,600 short-term lets in Iceland’s capital have to operate under strict 
rules introduced in June. The legislation limits the number of days residents 
can offer rentals in their properties to 90 days a year before they must pay 
­business tax.

 