
Discovering how many people in a given city believe in God (or not) is an 
almost superhuman task. In territories controlled or influenced by Islamic 
State, for example, the risks to declared non-believers are drastic and 
obvious. On the other side of the coin, the state atheism promulgated by the 
leaders of the Soviet Union meant that believers were stigmatised at best, 
persecuted at worst.

As sociology professor Phil Zuckerman pointed out in an essay in The Cambridge 
Companion toAtheism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/atheism>, even the 
terminology of religious belief can throw up roadblocks to understanding. If my 
idea of religious practice is a good deal looser than yours, can we have a 
meaningful conversation about which cities are godless and which are not?

Naturally, the methodological hurdles have not prevented researchers from 
making the leap. According to the 2011 Census of England and Wales, Norwich had 
the highest proportion <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-20679514> of 
respondents reporting “no religion”. The city’s figure was 42.5% compared with 
25.1% for England and Wales as a whole.

The survey revealed that Brighton & Hove came in a close second in the 
‘godless’ stakes with 42.4% of residents describing themselves as having no 
religion. Local newspaper reports in both areas pointed to the relative youth 
of the population and the high number of students as being relevant factors. If 
you are young and bright, it seems, you are more likely to be irreligious.

Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, professor of psychology at the University of Haifa, 
provided a psychological profile of atheists inThe Cambridge Companion 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/the-cambridge-companion-to-atheism/6236955319782AE6B18D5E45B4B5129E>
. He argued that: “Those with no religious affiliation have been found to be 
younger, mostly male, with higher levels of education and income, more liberal, 
but also more unhappy and more alienated from wider society.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43198ab27c64522ee5a6105a63b364a14a7bd638%2F0_249_3952_2371%2F3952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20'godless'%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20%27godless%27%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43198ab27c64522ee5a6105a63b364a14a7bd638%2F0_249_3952_2371%2F3952.jpg>
 Norwich had the highest proportion of respondents in England and Wales 
reporting ‘no religion’. Photograph: Howard Taylor/Alamy 
Meanwhile, the author and biopsychologist Nigel Barber has argued that as 
cities become morestable and prosperous 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nigel-barber/atheism-to-defeat-religion-by-2038_b_1565108.html>
, their inhabitants are less likely to feel the need for religious belief.

These broad generalisations go some way to explain why Berlin has been dubbed 
the “atheist capital of Europe”. Some60% of Berliners claim to have no religion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/26/berlin-germany-religious-education-ethics>
, shaped no doubt by the city’s divided heritage. In 2009, a proposal to give 
religious lessons the same status as ethics classes in Berlin schools was
defeated in a referendum 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-germany-religion-berlin-idUKTRE53P2D620090426>
. The proposal was backed by Chancellor Angela Merkel, but a low turnout of 30% 
revealed the lack of interest from the capital’s citizens. Ethics classes have 
been compulsory in the city’s schools since 2006, introduced after a so-called 
“honour” killing of a Muslim woman by her husband. Before the change, voluntary 
religious education classes were poorly attended.

One attempt to study the demographics of godlessness is made by the American 
Bible Society, whichranks the nation’s cities  
<http://www.americanbible.org/features/americas-most-bible-minded-cities>based 
on their level of Bible engagement. The survey is conducted by the Barna group 
and regards individuals who report reading the Bible in a typical week and who 
strongly assert the Bible is accurate in the principles it teaches as 
‘Bible-minded’. “This definition captures action and attitude, those who both 
engage and esteem the Christian scriptures. The rankings thus reflect an 
overall openness or resistance to the Bible in various US cities,” the survey 
organiser says.

The least Bible-minded cities in the 2016 survey were Albany/Schenectady/Troy 
in New York state with only 10% of residents qualifying as Bible-minded. 
Boston, Massachusetts (11%), moved from third to second place while Providence, 
Rhode Island (12%), the least Bible-minded city in 2015, dropped two spots to 
third place. The only Midwest city to make the top five in ‘least Bible-minded’ 
list was Cedar Rapids, Iowa (13%), followed by Buffalo, New York (13%). Other 
cities in the bottom 10 include Las Vegas, Nevada (14%), San Francisco (15%), 
Hartford/New Haven, Connecticut (16%), Phoenix/Prescott, Arizona (16%), and 
Salt Lake City, Utah (17%).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00d7f0109079bdd31acd5923370d4810d766e3e5%2F0_207_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20'godless'%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20%27godless%27%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00d7f0109079bdd31acd5923370d4810d766e3e5%2F0_207_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 A convocation at the Vines Center in Lynchburg, Virginia, which topped the 
list of ‘Bible-minded cities’. Photograph: The Washington Post/Getty Images 
Emily Heady, an English professor in Lynchburg, Virginia, which topped the 
list of ‘Bible-minded cities’ told the survey organisers: “In some ways, when I 
moved to Lynchburg, I felt I’d stepped back in time 25 years to the 
conservative small town where I grew up, where the question was where, not if, 
you went to church and where the line between basic human decency and 
Christianity was hard to draw. At the same time, as the cultural swerve towards 
relativism and identity politics picks up speed, and as ideas like ‘basic human 
decency’ no longer have universal definitions, Bible-minded towns like 
Lynchburg will have to figure out how to articulate their own values in ways 
that make sense to those who don’t share them.”

Non-readers of the Bible may wish to argue that a lack of acquaintance with, 
say, the Book of Job, does not mean their values are any less decent. About 
half of Americans (53%) say it is not necessary to believe in God to be moral, 
while 45% say belief in God is necessary to have good values, according to a 
2014 survey from the Pew Research Center.

A report published by the same organisation  
<http://www.pewforum.org/2015/04/02/religious-projections-2010-2050/>last year 
found that atheists, agnostics and others who do not affiliate with any 
religion, though increasing in absolute numbers, will make up a declining share 
of the world’s total population in the future.

Over the next 40 years, the report stated, Christians will continue to make up 
the largest religious group, but Islam will grow faster than any other major 
religion. If current demographic trends continue, by 2050 the number of Muslims 
around the world (2.8 billion, or 30% of the population) will nearly equal the 
number of Christians (2.9 billion, or 31%).

The four largest cities in the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation  
<http://www.oic-oci.org/home/?lan=en>are Jakarta, Karachi, Cairo and Lagos. In 
cities across sub-Saharan AfricaMuslim populations are increasing  
<http://mgafrica.com/article/2015-04-25-africa-to-be-the-centre-of-religious-growth-in-the-next-few-decades>
ahead of Christian nations in the west. In 2012, an Australian census  
<https://web.archive.org/web/20140318063452/http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/CO-61>
showed that while more citizens than ever professed to have no religion, the 
fastness growing religion in its cities was Buddhism, due to migration from 
India.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda7f2decd0761dfb5d78e82fd80cbced496777d8%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20'godless'%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20%27godless%27%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fwhere-world-godless-city-religion-atheist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda7f2decd0761dfb5d78e82fd80cbced496777d8%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Atheist shoes for sale at the World Humanist Congress. Photograph: Martin 
Godwin for the Guardian 
Last year the residents of Hamtramck in Michigan elected what is reported to be
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/15/michigan-muslim-majority-city-council-hamtramck-detroit>
 the first majority Muslim city council in the United States. The city boasts a 
population of 22,000 and it is estimated that 60% of the population is 
comprised of Muslims. In England,a census data visualisation tool  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/datablog/gallery/2014/jul/03/where-atheists-live-maps-uk-godless-cities-religion-census-data-viz>
developed by Oliver O’Brien at UCL’s Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, 
revealed a clear split between neighbours Bradford and Leeds.

Beyond the big numbers, the intensity of religious practice may matter more to 
the experience of urban living. It is not what people believe that shapes a 
city, it is how they put those beliefs into action.

Three years ago, when Upstate Atheists, a South Carolina-based group, 
approached Spartanburg Soup Kitchen to help give out food, their services were 
rejected because of their differences in beliefs.

The kitchen’s director, Lou Landrum, told a local newspaper that she was 
willing to resign from her position as executive director before she would 
allow atheists to volunteer at the soup kitchen. Eve Brannon, president of 
Upstate Atheists, said her group knew the organisation was Christian-based 
before they asked to help, but they did not expect to have their overtures 
rejected.

In the end, Upstate Atheists handed out care packages across the street from 
the kitchen. The group gave out 300 care packages containing socks, gloves, 
deodorant, toothpaste and antiseptic wipes among other items after raising 
about $2,000 (£1,590) through an online campaign to fund their efforts.

Where do atheists live? Maps show the 'godless' cities of England and Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/datablog/gallery/2014/jul/03/where-atheists-live-maps-uk-godless-cities-religion-census-data-viz>
If, like believers, atheists are perfectly capable of making life in a city a 
little more bearable for those at the sharp end, can they also fashion an 
environment that inspires us to try harder? What would Durham look like without 
the most glorious cathedral in Europe? Can we imagine Granada without the 
Alhambra?

The philosopher and writer Alain de Botton certainly thinks atheism and awe 
are compatible. His plan to build a £1m “temple for atheists” in London has 
drawn flak from the Rev Katharine Rumens, rector of St Giles’ Cripplegate 
church, in the Barbican, and Richard Dawkins, the militant atheists’ militant 
atheist.

Apparently visitors will enter the temple through a single door “as if it were 
an art installation” (it is possible to regard all spiritual buildings as art 
installations with extra ingredients for those who want them ). The roof will 
be open to the rain and sun and there may be fossils and “geologically 
interesting rocks” in the concrete walls. You probably won’t have to be an 
atheist to enjoy it, but by the same token you don’t need to be a Hindu, say, 
to have your socks knocked off by Kashi Vishwanath Temple.

From the Sodom and Gomorrah to the urban canyons of Gotham, the literary 
depictions of godless cities have usually focused on venality and despair, but 
researchers in real life find atheists to be at least as tolerant, keen on 
civic duty, and mindful of their neighbours as their more obviously religious 
fellow citizens. Identifying any one city in the world as the most godless of 
all remains fraught with problems. In the end, putting a number on holiness is 
like measuring happiness – it often requires a leap of faith.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 