
At a BBC Academy's Radio Fast Train 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/academy/news/view/rft_feature> panel discussion in 2012 
about the best way to break into the radio DJ business, Annie Mac blurted out: 
"More women in specialist!" It was a footnote to the discussion, the talk time 
was up and she was almost drowned out by applause.

But someone at Radio 1 was listening. The news that Éclair Fifi 
<http://soundcloud.com/eclairfifi> will be joining the network's In New DJs We 
Trust slot <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b02w3r0h> is another small victory 
for dance music's female contingent. A core member of Glasgow's LuckyMe label, 
of which Hudson Mohawke is a founder, Fifi will be taking over as of 20 June 
from Jackmaster (a fellow Scot), and presenting four hour-long specials of 
house, Detroit-influenced techno, futurist R&B and low-end hip-hop, with hints 
of Italo disco and Latin freestyle.

Fifi's appointment to a specialist show free from the constraints of station 
playlists is another joyous skip towards asserting women as authorities on 
music, as well as positioning them at the centre of the UK's burgeoning bass 
scene. Triumphs like this are unfortunately hard-won for female DJs, who make 
up just a fraction of the dance music scene. Even when women do secure a 
foothold, sexism often lurks. Remember when 1Xtra pitted its two female DJs 
against each other for a soundclash show calledAngry Birds 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b018709x>? Or the misogynistic messages 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/07384-dance-music-misogyny> that used to clog 
up the chat room every time a female DJ played atThe Boiler Room 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/11026-wreath-lecture-live-streaming-channel-4-house-party-boiler-room>
?

There are just two dance specialists on Kiss FM, Hannah Wants and Charlie 
Hedges, the latter of whom also co-hosts the breakfast show. According to their 
website, Rinse, a bastion of forward-thinking tunes and attitudes, now has 
seven female-led shows, but this pales in comparison to the 43 hosted by men.

Elsewhere, Mac's whoop-whooping is slowly beginning to have an effect. Over on 
6Music, which is more female-friendly, their Friday night male-dominated 6 Mix 
slot is now followed by a new show,Nemone's Electric Ladyland 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b02v1ty7>, which runs from 12 until 2am. In 
addition,Annie Nightingale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/04/annie-nightingale-radio-one-40>, 
Mary Anne Hobbs, Annie Mac and Heidi have proven that female dance music 
specialists can succeed in a big way – and there should be far more of them.

In the past year, Radio 1 has taken on three new female specialist dance music 
talents, joining Heidi, Jen Long, Annie and Nightingale.B Traits 
<https://soundcloud.com/btraits>, a member of Shy FX's Digital Soundboy label 
family, was introduced in April 2012; she's currently covering Mac's maternity 
leave on her primetime Friday evening slot, and next week will be co-presenting
Glastonbury highlights <https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury-2013> 
with Zane Lowe. Likewise, the former Rinse FM intern Monki, whom Mac is said to 
have mentored, started on In New DJs We Trust this January and has been filling 
in for B Trait's usual Monday-morning show.

"If anybody's ever had the chance to see their resident DJ Éclair Fifi play a 
set, they wouldn't ask the question of whether her gender was the reason we 
invited her to join Radio 1," says station editor Louise Kattenhorn. Radio 1's 
programming is more about supporting scenes than filling a quota of female DJs, 
she says. "We are constantly piloting DJs from right across the dance music 
spectrum. We identify which musical styles are underrepresented and go in 
search of an exciting name from that area, or we look at groundbreaking 
movements, labels and genres. After the success ofTNGHT 
<http://warp.net/records/tnght> and Baauer, we wanted to tap into the 
electronic music that [Éclair Fifi's crew] LuckyMe are pushing."

Internet stations are fast becoming the place to find new female 
specialist-music talent. Names to watch include Goldierocks, host of the 
British Council's international new music show The Selector;Ruth Barnes 
<http://amazingradio.com/?show=ruthbarnes>, whose Amazing Radio slot focuses on 
female-led music; and NTS Radio'sMoxie <http://ntslive.co.uk/shows/moxie/>, who 
steps in for Sinden on Kiss FM.

On commercial radio, however, these numbers are still worryingly low, and they 
go across the board, from specialist to primetime radio. The figures, I'm 
warned, are troubling.Sound Women <http://www.soundwomen.co.uk/>, an 
organisation created in order to support women in radio, will release research 
on 10 July into the number of female presenters on national stations. "Let's 
just say 50% feels a long way away," says its founder, Maria Williams.

Here's hoping that, before long, Annie Mac's blurt becomes a battle cry.
 