
London’s most historic – and possibly dustiest – buildings, the Houses of 
Parliament, are to become home to a monumental artwork that will collect and 
showcase the dirt that has lined the walls of the Palace of Westminster for 
hundreds of years.

The work, created by the Spanish artist Jorge Otero-Pailos and commissioned by 
the audacious art organisationArtangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>, will dominate Westminster 
Hall later this summer. It will take the form of a vast sheet of latex – 50 
metres long and six metres high – which contains every particle of smoke, dirt 
and pollution that has built up on the internal stone wall for at least two 
centuries.

The project, the largest artwork ever allowed to be installed in the Houses of 
Parliament and an undertaking dubbed byArtangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel> as its “most ambitious” 
yet, has taken almost six years to get approval. Titled Ethics of Dust, it was 
created by painting latex directly on to the stones of the east internal wall, 
one of the oldest in the Houses of Parliament.


The material absorbed the dust over three days before being peeled off in 
small sheets that will be woven together into what Otero-Pailos refers to as a 
“skin of history”. It will be suspended just a few metres from the wall it was 
cast from and lit so that it becomes translucent.

Visitors walking between the newly cleaned stones and the latex wall of dust 
this summer will be “walking between the layers of history”, said the artist, 
whose background is in architectural conservation. “I straddle these two worlds 
of art and conservation, and I started thinking, why do we throw this stuff 
away? Why do we clean the major monuments of the world and then just get rid of 
the stuff? What stories, what histories are in the stuff that we are removing?

“There is so much pressure to clean buildings because that’s how people want 
to see them, but there is a story in this microscopic layer of dust that’s not 
insignificant; it’s the record of the world in which we live in, so to save it 
is important.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwhere-theres-muck-artwork-showcases-houses-of-parliament-dirt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5019044731490c402742d3e876d041f1bf8b954%2F0_319_3111_3589%2F3111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20there's%20muck%3A%20Artangel%20artist%20wraps%20Houses%20of%20Parliament%20in%20latex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwhere-theres-muck-artwork-showcases-houses-of-parliament-dirt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20there%27s%20muck%3A%20Artangel%20artist%20wraps%20Houses%20of%20Parliament%20in%20latex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwhere-theres-muck-artwork-showcases-houses-of-parliament-dirt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5019044731490c402742d3e876d041f1bf8b954%2F0_319_3111_3589%2F3111.jpg>
 Jorge Otero-Pailos: ‘Dust has history. Dust is not chaos.’ Photograph: Artangel
Otero-Pailos said it had been essential to him to be able to realise the 
artwork in the Palace of Westminster itself, a building almost 1,000 years old 
and which, for centuries, has been a seat of global political power. As he 
stresses, the dust that lines these walls has a potent part in history.

Whilst there are no official records, it is thought that the last time 
Westminster hall was cleaned was in 1832, so Otero-Pailos’s piece contains dust 
that has settled on the wall for almost two centuries, probably including 
factory smoke from the industrial revolution, debris from the second world war 
and tiny fragments of skin from many of the individuals who have walked through 
the hallowed halls.

“Dust does have history,” he said. “Dust is not chaos – it is a very 
particular material that registers history in a very different way than a 
literary text. And it is a human creation; it is our product.”

Getting the green light for the project required lengthy negotiation with 
various parliamentary committees, and Artangel co-director Michael Morris said 
there had been “many dark days when we thought this would be impossible”.


Otero-Pailos said he saw the Ethics of Dust as part of a recent trend by 
artists to look to the past, using cultural preservation as platform to 
envision the future of our planet. He cited a recent project by Ai Weiwei in 
Beijing, where he bought an old ancestral hall and filled it with dynastic 
furniture, salvaging the cultural heritage of China, and Olufar Eliasson’s 
decision to bring part of aniceberg to Paris during COP21 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/nov/17/olufar-eliasson-ice-watch-paris-icebergs-place-de-la-republique>
.

“I think there’s a moment where we become aware of the need to manage the 
future of the earth,” he said. “There is a great push on the part of artists to 
remind us that the earth is not a machine. So with this work, it’s about 
capturing a microscopic layer of time from the past, which is then an 
invitation to look deep into the future.”

He was insistent that despite its setting, the work was not about making a 
political statement, and more a reminder of the artistic, and not just the 
technical, importance of conservation. “This is very much a working object 
where the brushstrokes of the work are painted by time,” added Otero-Pailos. 
“On the wall, this latex is conservation, but the second it comes off, it 
becomes art.”


 * The Ethics Of Dust <https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/the-ethics-of-dust/>
 will be open from 29 June-1 September 2016. Free admission – advance tickets 
can be booked at artangel.org.uk/ethics-of-dust  