
1. Party city: Berlin

Right now, from Mexico City to St Petersburg (both touted as nightlife 
hotspots in their time), the clubland cognoscenti all look to one city, Berlin. 
Former East Berlin is completely unique: a truly international city with 
non-existent licensing laws and cheap living costs which, for the foreseeable 
future, will remain the unruly epicenter of cutting-edge club/electronic music 
culture. New clubs like103 <http://www.103club.de> are opening all the time, 
and old favourites likeTacheles <http://www.tacheles.de>, a bizarre 
art-squat-bar-beach complex, continue to astound anyone who has grown up in 
dull old Britain. Last summer, Guardian Travel ended up in legendary techno 
club,Tresor <http://www.tresorberlin.de>. At a 24-hour live electro-jam. At 6pm 
on a Thursday afternoon. That is Berlin in a nutshell. Free local listings 
magazines like Fresh and Stadtkind will help you navigate, just remember the 
local ravers' cautionary motto: "Don't forget to go home."

· Way to go: Flights through easyJet <http://www.easyjet.com>, Ryanair 
<http://www.ryanair.com> and British Airways <http://www.ba.com>

· Tony Naylor is the dance music critic for The Guide

2. Food: Istanbul

Having thrown off the languor of lost empire and gone through its ostentatious 
nouveau phase, Istanbul will this year re-establish herself as food capital of 
the Near East. Balkan grilled meats, Levantine mezze, Bulgarian cheeses, 
Mesopotamian desserts - foods from all over the ex-Empires' provinces - have 
always featured on the city's menus. But Istanbul is now confident enough to 
reinterpret its classics, and to research those lost. No-one does this better 
than Musa Dagdeviren atCiya <http://www.ciya.com.tr/>. In this family of three 
lively restaurants, village foods from all over Turkey, the Black Sea, Armenia 
and Kurdistan are brought bang up to date, and cooked fresh every day. Expect 
rare herbs like mallow and goosefoot, breads from pre-Biblical recipes and 
desserts made from tomato. Chefs from all over the world are taking notice of 
Istanbul's virile food scene: Peter Gordon is consultant chef atMuzedechanga 
<http://www.changa-istanbul.com/v2/muzedechangamain.asp>. Alan Yau is opening 
1001 nights' version of Hakkasan, and Jean-Georges Vongrichten is planning a 
blow-out New York-meets-the-New-York-of-the-Near-East extravaganza.

· Way to go: British Airways <http://www.britishairways.com> fly to Istanbul 
from £175.70 return.

· Kevin Gould is the Guardian's Hungry Traveller columnist and author of the 
cookbook Dishy

3. Budget: Albania

Throughout the late 90s and early Noughties, the Balkan coast has been opening 
up for tourists. But nobody seems to have ventured beyond the increasingly 
pricey Croatia and Montenegro. Albania is a true, brilliantly cheap backpacker 
adventure … wildly undulating coastal roads, tiny fishing villages clinging to 
mountain bases, untouched forts and fresh local food and drink at every stop. 
But get there quick ... the last undiscovered coastline in Europe won't remain 
so for long. Stay at one of the €24-a-night beach huts (
lorencgjikurija@yahoo.com <mailto:lorencgjikurija@yahoo.com>) by the water in 
the village of Dhermi, at the foot of the 1,000m-high Llogora Pass that marks 
the northern tip of the Riviera.

· Way to go: British Airways <http://www.ba.com> flies Gatwick-Tirana return 
from £139 return inc all taxes.

· Benji Lanyado is the budget travel columnist for the Guardian

4. Sport: Beijing

Before the Bird's Nest was woven out of steel and concrete, the Workers' 
Stadium was home to both the national side and local Super League outfit, 
Beijing Guoan. The venue, which will host many of the Olympic football events, 
is hewn out of the Communist bloc — neo-realistic statues to artisans stand 
outside in the car park and its design is one that puts practicality over 
aesthetics. After much re-education — not to mention threats of fines and bans 
— come the Olympics, Beijing's notoriously profane football crowd should have 
dropped their favourite chants in favour of something more politically correct. 
Expect them to get behind domestic athletes on a scale that will make Atlanta's 
jingoistic Go U-S-A pale into insignificance. There's no greasy "mystery meat" 
burger joint at this stadium either, instead punters will tuck into fluffy 
bread rolls filled with sweet soy bean paste.

· Way to go: Flights through British Airways <http://www.britishairways.com>, 
Emirates <http://www.emirates.com/> and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines 
<http://www.klm.com>.

· Dominic Fitzsimmons is the managing editor for Time Out Beijing

5. Families: Egypt

Thirty years on and we've got Tutankhamen fever all over again. With Ancient 
Egypt on the KS2 curriculum and school trips descending on the O2's King Tut 
exhibition faster than you can say "you're a rotten mummy", it's only a matter 
of time before your offspring are begging to see the boy King's remains – which 
went on public display for the first time in November – in situ.

· Way to go: Suitable for kids aged six plus, Responsible Travel 
<http://www.responsibletravel.com/egyptfamilyholiday>'s 13 day Egypt Family 
tour takes in Cairo, Aswan, Luxor and the Red Sea – with plenty of time for 
snorkeling and sandcastles. Transportation includes a sleeper train, felucca 
cruise, horse drawn carriage and – natch - a camel. Various departure dates 
throughout the 2008 school holidays - from £495 to £520, excluding flights.

· Abigail Flanagan is the travel editor of Mumsnet.com <http://www.mumsnet.com>

6. Culture: Liverpool

2008 is going to be a really exciting year for Liverpool, not just because 
it's the European Capital of Culture. The city has spent most of this year 
warming up; over 270 bands performed across the city during Liverpool Music 
Week, the Turner exhibition at the Tate attracted worldwide attention, and the 
opening of the Echo Arena will start drawing big name acts to the city. But 
ultimately it's the people that make Liverpool great. Everyone's a character, 
everyone has something to say.

· Gill Nightingale, from mega-club Cream

7 Green: Mozambique 

After years of civil war and isolation, Mozambique is beginning to draw in 
tourists looking to explore its vast coastline and sparsely inhabited tropical 
islands. The excellent diving and growing number of ecotourism holidays are 
creating jobs and bringing income to communities living in areas of extreme 
poverty. Recommended places to stay includeGuludo <http://www.guludo.com> and 
Ibo Island <http://www.iboisland.com>.

· Way to go: Rainbow Tours <http://www.rainbowtours.co.uk> can arrange a 
package with six nights in Guludo and Ibo Island with flights via Johannesburg 
for £2,745pp.

· Richard Hammond is the editor of Sawday's Green Places to Stay

8. Emerging: Isfahan (or Esfahan), Iran

Isfahan's mist-blue mosaics flash in the desert, and on more adventurous 
travellers' itineraries. The city is the jewel of the Islamic world. On summer 
evenings families picnic along its riverbank, women loosening cumbersome 
chadors, offering a glimpse of red hem or tight denim. At its heart is the 
pale-domed Sheikh Lotfollah mosque, the most beautiful building on the planet. 
In no other man-made place have I felt a greater sense of serenity.

· Way to go: The Iranian embassy can be slow to issue travel visas. Agencies 
such as Links to Persia (020-7559 9600) can arrange a one-month visa for £168.
BMI <http://www.ba.com> flies Heathrow-Tehran, but code shares the route with 
British Airways, from £468.70 rtn.

· Rory MacLean is author of Magic Bus: On the Hippie Trail from Istanbul to 
India (Penguin)

9. Adventure: Lake District 

Via ferrata have been popular in Europe for years, but have become the latest 
thing with British adventurers too. Meaning "iron roads", they are a line of 
metal ladder, cables and steps driven into rock and were first constructed in 
the Great War as a way of controlling high ground in the Dolomites. Real 
climbers are a bit sniffy about them, but via ferrata allow hikers with a head 
for heights to experience the thrill of a big cliff without the danger. Now you 
can experience a via ferrata in the Lake District atHonister Slate Mine 
<http://www.honister-slate-mine.co.uk>. All equipment is provided for the 
dramatic ascent up Fleetwith Pike and an insight into the lives of slate 
quarriers in the past.

·  Ed Douglas is the author of Tenzing, published by National Geographic.

10. Music: Seattle

Sitting on the opposite coast from the more self-conscious hipster enclave of 
Brooklyn, and a few hours north of the music scene's reigning monarch — 
Portland, Oregon — Seattle, the Grunge capital of the 90s, is now enjoying 
something of a resurgence. This is, after all, the city that spawned the 
magnificentBand of Horses <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=tLMTtSfYSm8> — 
admittedly they've now upped sticks to South Carolina, but they have remained 
on Seattle label Sub Pop (once home to Nirvana, Soundgarden, Mudhoney, now to 
the Shins, Iron & Wine, Wolf Parade, Flight of the Conchords). Two of the most 
exciting acts for 2008 hail from Seattle: theCave Singers 
<http://www.myspace.com/thecavesingers> and Fleet Foxes 
<http://www.myspace.com/fleetfoxes> (rumoured to have recently signed to Sub 
Pop). And waiting in the wings, there'sThrow Me the Statue 
<http://www.myspace.com/throwmethestatue>, the brainchild of 
multi-instrumentalist Scott Reitherman, offering a breed of ludicrously melodic 
synth-driven pop. Throw Me the Statue were one of many local acts to appear at
Reverb <http://www.seattleweekly.com/promos/reverb/>, one of Seattle's many 
festivals, fromBumbershoot <http://www.bumbershoot.org/> to Georgetown 
<http://www.georgetownmusicfest.com> via the not-so-far-away the Sasquatch 
Festival <http://www.sasquatchfestival.com/>, which this year served up Arcade 
Fire, Bjork, and MIA. Elsewhere, you'll find the originalAce Hotel 
<http://www.acehotel.com/seattle/>, coffee 
<http://seattle.citysearch.com/bestof/winners/coffee> to rival Portland's, 
plenty of places tomooch 
<http://www.pikeplacemarket.com/frameset.asp?flash=true>, loads of record stores
 <http://www.nwsource.com/shopping/guides/record_stores.html> and the 
Gehry-designed, Hendrix-inspiredExperience Music Project 
<http://www.empsfm.org/>, a place to witness "creativity and innovation as 
expressed through American popular music and exemplified by rock n roll."

· Way to go: British Airways <http://www.ba.com> flies Heathrow-Seattle from 
£428.40.

·  Laura Barton writes the Queen of Noise column in the Guardian's Friday 
Review

· This article was amended on Friday December 21 2007.
 