
The surprising thing about Sacha Baron Cohen’s appearance as Ali G at the 
Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/sacha-baron-cohen-oscars-ali-g-academy>
 on Sunday, wasn’t that it was unauthorised by the Academy, but that it was so 
unfunny. The comedian’s decision to revive his almost20-year-old alter ego 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_os2S7O9EtU> was, obviously, part of the 
evening’s commentary on race, but even in a room full of people selling 
something, it seemed highly self-serving – a way to say: “Hey, guys, I was 
doing spoof race-baiting before some of you were even born!”

It appears that it went down better in Britain than in the US, where the jokes 
about “little yellow people” largely fell on deaf ears. I think this is partly 
a case of American audience-fatigue with a certain type of naughty British 
comedian. But it’s also the fact that Baron Cohen’s satire seems outdated and 
heavy-handed, a party piece that has been over-used in the past few years and 
that everyone is a little tired of.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsacha-baron-cohan-appears-as-ali-g-at-oscars-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacha%20Baron%20Cohen%20appears%20as%20Ali%20G%20at%20Oscars%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsacha-baron-cohan-appears-as-ali-g-at-oscars-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacha%20Baron%20Cohen%20appears%20as%20Ali%20G%20at%20Oscars%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fsacha-baron-cohan-appears-as-ali-g-at-oscars-video&media=>
Sacha Baron Cohen appears as Ali G at the Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/01/sacha-baron-cohan-appears-as-ali-g-at-oscars-video>
s 
We had Amy Schumer doing her jokes about Latinos being rapists 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/amy-schumer-apologizes-racist-joke-807066>
 (“I used to date Hispanic guys, but now I prefer consensual”). In Britain,
Jimmy Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/may/11/jimmy-carr-funny-business-review-dorking-halls>
 is still labouring away at the coalface of “unsettling” comedy, fearlessly 
confronting taboos and upsetting people with no sense of humour who don’t 
understand the real targets of his jokes. Even Tina Fey and AmyPoehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/11/amy-poehler> have done it– not 
just with Fey’s Asian and Native American characters inKimmy Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/05/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-tina-fey-netflix>
, which came in for criticism from some minority groups, to which she responded 
haughtily: “There’s a real culture of demanding apologies, and I’m opting out 
of that.”

But also with their Bill Cosby segment at the Golden Globes last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/11/tiny-fey-amy-poehler-bill-cosby-golden-globes>
. The two were applauded for taking him on, but as a rule of thumb it seems to 
me a bad idea for a white person to do an impression of a black person, even if 
it is Cosby.

Everyone gets it. Most of these jokes are sending up racists and white 
supremacists. But they also gratify the comedian’s intellectual vanity, 
signalling to the audience how sophisticated the act is for posing as a bigot. 
It’s not that it’s lazy. It’s not even that it’s backhanded racism – although 
it often is. It’s that, a generation after Ali G first said “booyakasha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/jan/09/broadcasting>”, it’s simply an 
exhausted approach to making people laugh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fsacha-baron-cohen-ali-g-tina-fey-amy-poehler-ironic-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7ad5cbcea4a4bb71405d27f19f2c39e772a034b%2F0_237_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whether%20it%E2%80%99s%20Ali%20G%20or%20Tina%20Fey%2C%20ironic%20racism%20just%20isn%E2%80%99t%20funny%20any%20more%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fsacha-baron-cohen-ali-g-tina-fey-amy-poehler-ironic-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whether%20it%E2%80%99s%20Ali%20G%20or%20Tina%20Fey%2C%20ironic%20racism%20just%20isn%E2%80%99t%20funny%20any%20more%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fsacha-baron-cohen-ali-g-tina-fey-amy-poehler-ironic-racism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7ad5cbcea4a4bb71405d27f19f2c39e772a034b%2F0_237_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Amy Poehler arrives at the Oscars. Photograph: UPI/Barcroft Media  