
It is lunchtime. England face Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/28/england-sri-lanka-second-test-day-two-live>
 in the second test, and the radio commentary is on as we eat. The cricketers 
are also at lunch, but the commentary fromBBC Test Match Special 
<https://twitter.com/bbctms> continues with an ‘Ask the Umpire’ session, in 
which bizarre and unlikely cricket scenarios are postulated,


A batsman hits the ball in the air towards the stumps, it grazes the bowler’s 
fingers, hits the stumps (with the non-striker out of his ground) and loops up 
into the air and is caught at mid-on. Who’s out?

and their resolution within the laws of cricket is explored. 

This prokes exasperation and amusement from the rest of my family, but then so 
does cricket in general to some extent. If you really want to understand the 
laws of cricket though (and I appreciate that is quite a big “if”), it is a 
useful exercise to imagine how they would operate in extreme cases.


While I am mildly interested in the laws of cricket, I am very interested in 
the laws of physics. Real experiments arbitrate eventually, of course, but 
thought experiments have a long and productive history of pointing the way to 
deeper understanding.


Probably the master of them was Einstein. He imagined trying to catch up with 
a ray of light, and decided the idea was absurd. This influenced his 
development of his theories of relativity, in which it is impossible to catch 
up with light, because it travels at the same speed for everyone. The theory 
led to predictions that are, arguably, equally absurd. Time flows at different 
rates depending on relative speed, for example. But those predictions have been 
thoroughly vindicated by real experiments.


Thought experiments including relativitistic pole-vaulters running into 
garages, spacefareing twins, or train guards with flashlights are still 
important in teaching relativity and testing how thoroughly you and your 
students have (mis)understood it.


Sizing up a new particle accelerator, and the 'cosmic stupid' limit | Jon 
Butterworth | Life&Physics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2014/nov/22/sizing-up-a-new-particle-accelerator-and-the-cosmic-stupid-limit>
Einstein bowled a series of thought experiments at the great Danish physicist 
Niels Bohr in the first half of the 20th Century, in an attempt to defeat 
quantum indeterminism. In this case, Bohr’s straight bat was firm enough to 
reply, and he finished the innings ‘not out’. The result was a better 
understanding of physics all round, however.


Erwin Schrödinger, one of the pioneers of quantum mechanics, also used thought 
experiments. As far as we know, no cats were harmed in his famous attempt to 
highlight the apparent contradictions of the so-called ‘Copenhagen 
Interpretation’ of the new theory. Schrödinger’s Cat lives on as a useful idea 
however, still relevant as physicists build larger and larger coherent quantum 
systems, in attempts to understand the fundamentals of quantum mechanics and 
also to make use of them in practical applications such ascomputing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/22/age-of-quantum-computing-d-wave>
.

One of the biggest open questions in physics is how gravity and quantum 
mechanics might come together to give a single consistent description of 
nature. We may be lucky and get clues about this from real experiments, but 
much of the exploration of the boundaries between these two giants of physics 
has to take place at such extreme energies that thought experiments are the 
only way forward for now. The quantum emission of radiation near the event 
horizon of a black hole is a good example, famously theorized byStephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/hawking>.

The bit about ‘contrived extremes’ lends itself to certain political 
analogies, especially in the UK and the USA at present, but I am not going to 
go there. An important aspect of thought experiments is that they are cheap and 
safe. In thought, we can travel to the event horizon of a black hole without 
being spaghettified. We can ponder quantum coherence without harming any cats, 
and try to overtake a light ray without leaving our armchair. We can check the 
rules of the game for consistency without having to watch every ball until one 
heads for the stumps, grazes the bowler’s fingers and loops into the air.


And on that last point, to resolve the suspense cunningly introduced at the 
start of the article:


The catch takes precedence over the run-out, so the striker is out. Same as 
bowled takes precedence over lbw.

The quantum gravity business is, I’m afraid, not yet resolved.

Jon Butterworth <https://twitter.com/jonmbutterworth>’s book Smashing Physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/smashing-physics-jon-butterworth-review-cern-higgs-boson-particle>
is available as “Most Wanted Particle” in Canada & the US.
 