
Alexandre Dumas’s tale of The Three Musketeers might now be 170 years old but, 
asthe new BBC1 series The Musketeers demonstrates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/20/the-musketeers-tv-review>
, it’s perfectly capable of moving with the times. In 1948, for example, 
society called for a version of the story that had pioneering fight sequences 
andstarred Gene Kelly <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7TxP2QIX1VU>. In 2011, it 
called for a sort of3D steampunk Matrix version 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=38an1IAG1TA>. And, of course, in 1993, it 
called for a version that had the absolute very worst, most unstoppably 
toe-curlingly smug theme tune of any film that ever had the miserable 
misfortune ofbeing farted out into a cinema 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ofA3URC1wyk>.

And now, in 2014, society has apparently requested a version that’s a bit like 
Merlin <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/merlin> and has lots of pretty 
boys running around with their tops off. And that’s fine because until now – 
aside from one 1954 BBC series that has since been lost to the ages – 
television versions of The Three Musketeers have been squarely aimed at 
children. Here are some of the best of The Musketeers’s forebears.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP-xO72s5EBY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP-xO72s5EBY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP-xO72s5EBY&media=>
Dogtanian and the Three Muskehounds (1981)

It says something about the limited entertainment value of The Musketeers 
that, during Sunday night’s episode, the term "Dogtanian" began to trend on 
Twitter. God knows why – it was an endless, billion-part, 0.5fps animated 
series of Spanish/Japanese origin that, combined with the equally interminable 
Mysterious Cities of Gold, conspired to sap the will of an entire generation 
before it had even reached adolescence. Even the title sequence went on for 
what seemed like a full calendar month, which wouldn’t be so bad except for the 
fact that the theme tune was essentially the sound of a binbag full of kittens 
and Casio keyboards being flung down the world’s longest flight of stairs. If 
you think Dogtanian was in any way enjoyable, you are an incurably terrible 
person.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5vWT85OhzTk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5vWT85OhzTk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5vWT85OhzTk&media=>
The Three Musketeers (1968)

Not much better was Hanna-Barbera’s effort to corral the Musketeers into a 
bite-sized animated format. For starters, the Musketeers all look like 
freakishly sentient V for Vendetta masks that have suddenly come to life to 
tell you that they’re going to eat you alive in your sleep. And then there’s 
the small matter of Tooly, a dismal Scrappy Doo prototype who should have been 
killed with swords the first time that anyone caught a glimpse of his 
ridiculous bright yellow helmet hair. The whole thing looks cheap and, unless 
the member of the Cardinal’s guard in the video above really did have shins 
made of sproingy springs, sounded even cheaper. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoJTKNz66L3U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoJTKNz66L3U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoJTKNz66L3U&media=>
Young Blades (2005)

It’s especially hard to know what to make of Young Blades, especially because 
it seemed to come and go without anyone even noticing. The most notable talking 
point would be thatRobert Sheehan from Misfits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/03/robert-sheehan-so-much-trouble>
 played a young Louis XIV who, on the basis of his twitchy performance in this 
video, existed solely on a diet of additives and whatever the opposite of 
Ritalin is. Sheena Easton also starred as Queen Anne; one of the episodes was 
called Four Musketeers and a Baby; and in the final episode, everyone meets 
Alexandre Dumas. Presumably he spends the entire episode crying and wondering 
what these brutes have done with his beloved creation, but that’s merely 
conjecture at this point.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D72H3ZmTiTNE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D72H3ZmTiTNE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D72H3ZmTiTNE&media=>
Spaceketeers (1978) 

To use its full title, Sci-Fi West Saga Starzinger was a Japanese anime series 
that was brought to America, thrown in with Jim Terry’s Force Five collection 
of Japanese imports and renamed Spaceketeers in the early 1980s. Like The Three 
Musketeers, Spaceketeers was the story of three friends attempting to maintain 
the peace in an increasingly unstable environment. However, unlike The Three 
Musketeers, the friends were all cyborgs and they travelled around on flying 
jetskis fighting people made out of planets in the year 2072. Note to Dogtanian 
– this is how you do a theme tune.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCtcdwwqve2k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCtcdwwqve2k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCtcdwwqve2k&media=>
The Three Musketrucks (2007)

An episode of Bob the Builder, The Three Musketrucks has almost no bearing 
whatsoever on anything that Alexandre Dumas ever wrote, said, heard or thought. 
It’s the story of three anthropomorphic vehicles who band together to pick up a 
delivery on yellow pallets with green cord and red stickers. However, possibly 
because one of the Musketrucks – Scrambler, a blue quad bike – has a voice so 
intensely annoying that hearing it for even one second is like spending a 
billion years being kicked in the ballsack, they mess it up. Cardinal Richelieu 
would be furious.
 