
Edward Albee occasionally expressed exasperation at being forever identified 
as the author of Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? “The play,” he wrote in a 
programme note to the1996 Almeida production 
<http://david-suchet.ru/en/who-s-afraid-of-virginia-woolf-1996/article/215>, 
“has hung about my neck like a shining medal of some sort.”

Edward Albee in quotes: 'the only things you can write about are life and 
death'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/17/edward-albee-quotes-life-and-death>
Yet Albee exercised fierce control over all productions. I was recently told 
of a brilliant British actor who was summoned to Albee’s New York apartment for 
a reading of the play prior to an intended Broadway production with Patti 
LuPone. Albee’s mounting dismay at the British actor’s textual quibbles meant 
that, by the end of a long afternoon, all hopes of the production had been 
abandoned.

Albee’s protective attitude to his play stemmed in part, I suspect, from the 
fact that it is widely misunderstood. Thesearing Mike Nichols 1966 film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/20/mike-nichols-10-best-virginia-woolf-charlie-wilson>
, starring Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton, stamped it in the public mind 
as a liquor-fuelled marital slugfest. But the play, I am convinced, is as much 
about the state of the Union as about marriage. Albee was a deeply political 
writer who once told me he liked plays to be “useful, not merely decorative”. 
It is also significant that he wrote the play in the early 1960s when America 
was slowly emerging from the narcoleptic Eisenhower years and when a fragile 
Cold War peace depended on the balance of terror.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fwhos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf-edward-albee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4b8f32c2491646b950b598539d76b589207ee7%2F0_463_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%E2%80%99s%20Afraid%20of%20Virginia%20Woolf%3F%20is%20a%20misunderstood%20masterpiece&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fwhos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf-edward-albee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%E2%80%99s%20Afraid%20of%20Virginia%20Woolf%3F%20is%20a%20misunderstood%20masterpiece&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fwhos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf-edward-albee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4b8f32c2491646b950b598539d76b589207ee7%2F0_463_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
 David Suchet (George) and Diana Rigg (Martha) in Who’s Afraid of Virgina Woolf 
at the Almeida in 1996. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
It was Howard Davies’s magnificent Almeida production that fully awoke me to 
the fact that the play, apart from being about the stock American theme of 
truth and illusion, has even wider resonance. George and Martha, whose marathon 
battles we watch with appalled fascination, derive their namesfrom the 
Washingtons 
<http://www.mountvernon.org/george-washington/martha-washington/george-marthas-courtship/>
. They live in a college at New Carthage which evokes a classically ruined 
civilisation. Unable to face reality, George himself is a historian who, while 
his wife is busy humping the guest, curls up withSpengler’s The Decline of the 
West <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Decline_of_the_West>. Meanwhile Nick, 
who gets laid by Martha, is a biologist credited with a chromosome-alteration 
scheme that will produce perfect future specimens.

Albee’s play embraces not only history and science but even religion in that 
Nick’s father-in-law was a travelling preacher who managed to reconcile God and 
Mammon. We only think about this later. While watching the play we are 
hypnotised by the spectacle of a couple tearing each other apart.

An A-Z of Edward Albee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/11/edward-albee-a-to-z-delicate-balance-broadway>
I was lucky enough to have caught the first London production in 1964 and my 
chief memory is of Uta Hagen and Arthur Hill starting on the lightest of notes 
before descending into Walpurgisnacht. Diana Rigg, playing Martha as an 
intelligent woman haunted by self-disgust, and David Suchet’s George, hiding 
his disappointment behind a sardonic exterior, were equally unforgettable in 
the 1996 Almeida revival. And in 2006 Kathleen Turner and Bill Irwin,in a West 
End revival directed by Anthony Page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/feb/01/theatre>, showed there are no 
games without pain: I always recall Irwin slamming the door-chimes in agony as 
he realised Martha and Nick were about to retire upstairs.

Rumour has it 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/westend/article/GYPSYs-Imelda-Staunton-in-Talks-for-WHOS-AFRAID-OF-VIRGINIA-WOOLF-in-London-20160630>
 that Imelda Staunton and Conleth Hill are to star in a new London production. 
With America currently engaged in its own form of post-truth politics, now 
seems the perfect time to revive Albee’s enduring masterpiece about the danger 
of living in a world of illusions.
 