
YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> and Adobe don't have 
a great deal in common, apart from being key players in the media-technology 
ecosystem. But their evolving strategies demonstrate a shift that more and more 
companies in the media and tech worlds see as a key part of their futures: 
subscriptions. They highlight the fundamental reality for everyone in this 
business and related ones: in a world where we are almost always online, change 
happens at an accelerating rate.

First, YouTube: Google's huge video unit is planning to turn on its head, at 
least in a small way, the very basis of its existence until now. It's going to
create subscription-based "channels" 
<http://youtube-global.blogspot.com/2013/05/yt-pc-2013.html> – that is, 
collections of content that it hopes people will pay for directly, as opposed 
to being supported by advertising.

This should be surprising to no one. YouTube, which has turned itself into the 
default video upload-and-display site, has been experimenting with premium 
services based on advertising as a business model. This hasn't worked out well, 
so far, as Peter Kafka recently reported at All Things Digital 
<http://allthingsd.com/20130304/youtubes-show-me-the-money-problem/>. So it's a 
logical experiment to try a model that pay-video channels like HBO and, more 
recently, Netflix have done: getting people send money on a regular basis in 
return for content they don't mind supporting.

For many video producers, YouTube could become a source of ancillary revenue, 
just as newspapers are trying to restore some of their lost (paper) 
subscriptions online via paywalls. Or, even better, this might become the first 
step in an overdue process of unbundling cable and satellite TV, which force 
customers to pay for all kinds of channels they don't want in order to get the 
ones they do watch.

The obvious question is whether YouTube can offer anything people actually 
want to support this way, and whether creators of online content will see 
enough upside as well. I'd expectGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> to pump some serious money into 
the operation, at least at the outset. But a generation of video watchers has 
become accustomed to YouTube as a free or ad-supported service. I'm agnostic, 
verging on skeptical, about the prospects, but I'm also glad to see this kind 
of experimentation.

Likewise, I'm intrigued – and more skeptical – about Adobe's strategy shift. 
The company said it wouldstop selling almost all of its retail (boxed and 
downloaded) software <http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2418602,00.asp>, and 
move its major products – PhotoShop, Illustrator, InDesign, AfterEffects and 
Dreamweaver – into a "cloud-based" model where customers would work in a 
blended desktop/online platform, for a monthly fee. What had been known as the 
"Creative Suite" will henceforth be called the "Creative Cloud" – a software 
platform that will require a broadband connection and will cost about $50 a 
month for individual users ($70 for corporate sites that need administrative 
tools), and $20 a month for a single application.

For people who absolutely must use these products and routinely upgrade to the 
latest versions, $600 a year will be a good deal. But I wonder what people 
who've been doing fine with older versions of Adobe's desktop software will 
decide when it becomes necessary to upgrade. My bet is that a lot of them will 
look for alternatives.

I asked my Google+ and Twitter followers what they'd recommend, and got some 
useful responses 
<https://plus.google.com/113210431006401244170/posts/G3JAmvhcR6r>. (As a Linux 
user my options have always been more limited, since Adobe treats Linux like a 
poor stepchild, at best.) Meanwhile, LifeHacker helpfully suggests ways to "
build your own adobe creative suite with free and cheap software 
<http://lifehacker.com/5976725/build-your-own-adobe-creative-suite-with-free-and-cheap-software>
." Again, for some Adobe users, there are no serious alternatives to the 
originals; for the rest of us, there are plenty.

Adobe's move isn't unique, of course. Gaming companies have been trying to 
urge, if not coerce, their players into hybrid systems for several years now. 
Microsoft, the king of desktop software, has taken increasingly big steps in 
this direction, most recently with itsOffice 365 <http://office.microsoft.com> 
product, though it still offers basic desktop versions.

This can go both ways; Google's online office competitor, Google Docs, can run 
offline <https://support.google.com/drive/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=2375012>. 
Everyone is encroaching on everyone else, trying everything to see what will 
work – and this will only accelerate.
 