
Shakespearians often groan when the Shakespeare authorship 
<http://60-minutes.bloggingshakespeare.com/> conspiracy theory raises its head. 
But it often does, especially for those of us connected withShakespeare's 
birthplace <http://www.shakespeare.org.uk/home.html>. Or perhaps you've chatted 
about the issue in taxis, on trains, or during long flights? Sometimes I hear 
"it doesn't matter, we still have the plays." The fact is it matters utterly, 
otherwise there would be no conspiracy theories in first place. And there would 
be no new film calledAnonymous <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1521197/> (from 
Roland Emmerich <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000386/>, the director of Godzilla 
and Independence Day) trying to insinuate itself into the popular imagination. 
Suddenly, those questions are going to be cropping up more often.

Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anonymous> will put over the view 
that the plays and poems should be attributed to the Earl of Oxford, a nominee 
first suggested by Thomas Looney (pronounced "Loney") in 1920. Let's get this 
straight. There is not a shred of evidence for the Earl of Oxford's nomination, 
nor for the 76 other people who have been suggested. Time and again I hear the 
rhetoric: "Shakespeare couldn't have written the plays; he wasn't educated 
enough; he wasn't aristocratic; he wasn't knowledgeable enough; he didn't have 
the right kind of experience." That isn't evidence of anything. It's just an 
unattractive mix of ignorance, jealousy, snobbery, and intellectual theft. And 
it denies the power of the human imagination.

There is, in fact, a mass of evidence for Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon 
as author of the plays and poems. The first time his name appears in print is 
at the end of the dedication of the erotic poem Venus and Adonis in 1593 and 
again the following year in The Rape of Lucrece. Both works were printed by his 
Stratford contemporary, Richard Field, and remained hugely popular well into 
the 17th century. There were around 35 editions of about half the plays 
published during his lifetime: two thirds of those bear Shakespeare's name; 
those that don't carry the name of the companies for which he wrote. At least 
14 different people refer to Shakespeare as a writer in his lifetime. In 1598, 
Francis Meres mentions the Earl of Oxford in the same sentence as Shakespeare 
and lists their different plays. On his death,Shakespeare was commemorated by 
the bust in Holy Trinity Church, Stratford 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shakespeare%27s_funerary_monument> (which refers 
to him three times as a writer) and by a collection of 36 of his plays in 1623. 
There, Ben Jonson – never a man quick to praise – refers to him as "the sweet 
swan of Avon" and Leonard Digges refers to Shakespeare's "Stratford monument". 
Later, William Davenant liked to claim he was Shakespeare's illegitimate son 
(Davenant's mother looked after a popular inn on the journey between Stratford 
and London). In the 1660s, Rev John Ward (the Stratford vicar) makes notes 
about Shakespeare writing in Stratford, and Nicholas Rowe sends researchers to 
Stratford for his 1709 biography. Everything, in other words, connects 
Shakespeare of Stratford with the works.

The conspiracy theories started in the middle of the 19th century. It was the 
era of an inherited gothic and Romantic imagination, reacting to Darwin, and 
alive to the beginnings of detective fiction. Gaps in the record began to make 
people uneasy. But there's nothing unusual in those gaps. We don't know very 
much about most people during Shakespeare's time.

Does it matter who wrote the plays? I think it matters greatly, and always 
will. As people we want to know as much as possible about the artist who 
produced the work. William Shakespeare was Stratford and London through and 
through. He didn't go to university. He wasn't an aristocrat. He was from 
fairly humble origins and worked hard at what he was good at.So the Shakespeare 
Birthplace Trust <http://bloggingshakespeare.com/> is speaking up for 
Shakespeare. We've gathered together 60 speakers to answer60 questions for 60 
seconds each <http://60-minutes.bloggingshakespeare.com/>. Contributors include 
Shakespeare scholars (Gary Taylor, Stanley Wells), writers (Margaret Drabble, 
Michael Holroyd, Stephen Fry), and actors (Simon Callow, Antony Sher, Harriet 
Walter, Janet Suzman).

• Anonymous <http://tiff.net/filmsandschedules/tiff/2011/anonymous> is showing 
at theToronto film festival 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/toronto-film-festival-2011> on 11, 12 and 17 
September
 