
Studs in leather? Check. Swordplay? Check. Buckled swash? Check. Medieval 
cleavages? Check. Over-complicated facial hair? Check. Dead-eyed Peter Capaldi 
as Louis XIII's enforcer Cardinal Richelieu, that 17th-century prototype of 
Capaldi's Malcolm Tucker in The Thick of It? Check.

There's so much diverting stuff in BBC1's current adaptation of The Musketeers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00sxqkb> that you might have missed perhaps 
its most intriguing aspect. One Telegraph reader didn'tduring their 
below-the-line rant 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/tv-and-radio-reviews/10580278/The-Musketeers-episode-1-BBC-One-review.html>
 against what they called a "dumbed down romp". "And," they sighed, mid-tirade, 
"there is the one obligatory part-black character to prove that multiculti 
[sic] political correctness outweighs historical accuracy."

What's the problem? That in the new adaptation, Porthos, traditionally a fat 
white comedy turn (think: Oliver Platt in the 1993 comedy The Three Musketeers) 
is a trim, sexy musketeer of colour played by Howard Charles.

But should Porthos be mixed-race? In one sense, sure, why not? If a black 
actor such as David Harewood, say, can play the (probably white) English 
nobleman Sir Harry Hotspur in the National Theatre production of Shakespeare's 
King Henry IVwithout critics whining about the historical accuracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/may/05/theatre1> (trickier in fact for 
a white actor to play Othello since the colour of the Moor's skin is inscribed 
deep in Shakespeare's verse), surely a mixed-race musketeer isn't a stretch.

But that isn't the issue. Rather, the casting of Porthos works as a homage to 
the parentage and race ofAlexandre Dumas père 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexandredumaspere>, author of The Three 
Musketeers and The Count of Monte Cristo (and father of Alexandre Dumas fils, 
who wrote La Dame aux Camélias). Alexandre père's father (or, if you prefer, 
the père's père), General Alexandre (Alex) Dumas, was black Haitian, the son of 
an aristocratic French father, Marquis Alexandre Davy de la Pailleterie, and a 
freed slave, Marie-Cesette Dumas. And he was a general in Napoleon'sgrande armée
.

Certainly, Howard Charles is aware of that ancestry. In a recent interview in 
the Cambridge News 
<http://www.cambridge-news.co.uk/Entertainment/Television/Howard-Charles-on-bringing-Musketeer-Porthos-to-life-13012014.htm>
 the actor said he had been inspired by reading The Black Count,Tom Reiss's 
recent book on the life of General Alexandre (Alex) Dumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/28/black-count-tom-reiss-review>. 
"He was a general, when I guess there weren't many brown people around in 
uniform, so I was really attracted to that element," said Charles. Alex's dad 
sold the boy as a slave to pay for his passage to France (that's remedial 
parenting classes for you, Marquis de la Pailleterie) before buying his 
freedom. Later, Alex rose through the ranks of the army to become a general 
before he was 30. He was so effective that that the Austrians called him Der 
schwarze Teufel ("the Black Devil"). During the French revolution fought with 
other black men in a unit called the African Legion.

But does any of this legitimise having a mixed-race Porthos? If it confounds 
the unwarranted presumption that he was white, then why not? What this casting 
does, helpfully, is challenge the increasingly implausible myth of a Europe 
that was altogether white before large-scale 20th-century immigration from 
former colonies. The "historical accuracy" that some people want from 
Sunday-night costume dramas may demand that Europe was whitewashed, but that 
doesn't mean the rest of us have to follow suit.

We've been here before. I once wrote about claims that George III's consort 
Charlotte had African ancestry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/12/race-monarchy>. We'd had 
theories – shattering to white supremacists, intriguing to the rest of us – that
Beethoven was black 
<http://open.salon.com/blog/ronp01/2009/09/27/the_african_heritage_of_ludwig_van_beethoven>
, so why not a black queen of England? What was most striking to me in all this 
was that the US city named after her (Charlotte, North Carolina) had used these 
claims to help improve race relations. Perhaps Queen Charlotte's story could, I 
argued then, do the same over here. It hasn't, as you'll have noticed. That, I 
suspect, is why it's worth casting a mixed-race actor as Porthos – to shake 
some Europeans out of their racist delusions.

• This article was amended in 29 January 2014 to correct references to 
Charles's ethnicity from black to mixed-race
 