
For all the national outrage over the Tucson massacre, and renewed appeals by 
well-meaning politicians like Michael Bloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/24/michael-bloomberg-gun-checks>, 
everyone knows that sentiment will not translate into commonsense gun control 
laws.

As after the Columbine massacre in 1999, national polls show a majority of 
Americans favouring stricter gun control laws 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-503544_162-20029126-503544.html>, yet as with so 
many other issues,majority support does not necessarily lead to congressional 
action 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/bensmith/0111/Arizona_shooting_hasnt_changed_views_on_gun_control.html>
. How can there be such an ongoing disconnect between popular opinion and 
public policy?

Many gun control advocates blame it on the power wielded by the National Rifle 
Association and its campaign war chest. But the fact is that theNRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra> has power not so much because of the 
deep pockets of its political action committee, but because of the fundamental 
architecture of our antiquated winner-take-all elections that give overwhelming 
power to a tiny minority of people known as "swing voters".

It turns out that NRA voters are disproportionately swing voters – among that 
5-10% of voters who will change sides in a close election. Many are classic 
ReaganDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> and union 
members who fear infringement on gun ownership. These NRA voters form a potent 
single-issue voting bloc.

Moreover, NRA voters live disproportionately in battleground states and swing 
congressional districts and therefore decide the handful of congressional and 
presidential elections that are won by five percentage points or less. As
Republican strategist and NRA board member Grover Norquist has said 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/nra-wants-you?page=0,2>, "The question is 
intensity versus preference. You can always get a certain percentage to say 
they are in favour of some gun controls. But are they going to vote on their 
'control' position?"

Though most voters back gun control, says Norquist, their support doesn't move 
them to the polls. "But for that 4-5% who care about guns, they will vote on 
this." And in the battleground states and swing congressional districts, a 
change in 5% of the vote can make all the difference. So the NRA's influence 
has come from its capacity to move its supporters in these key swing districts 
and states – with its message, more than its money.

The task of the NRA, then, is to target their resources to the 15 battleground 
states and 40 battleground House districts like squares on a checker board, and 
try to alarm just enough swing voters in these. This is a task rendered much 
easier by the geographic-based political map of our winner-take-all system.

Note that some of its targeting is directed at precise constituencies. For 
years, the NRA has been instrumental to the GOP electoral strategy because up 
to one fifth of union members in battleground states are NRA members. Union 
leaders are not afraid of the NRA's money – unions have plenty of their own – 
but they are afraid of the pro-gun side's support among union members in key 
races.

Many Democrats believe that strong support for gun control has cost their 
party elections in such rural swing states as West Virginia, Missouri, Ohio, 
Arkansas, Colorado and elsewhere. They believe that Al Gore lost the 
presidential election in 2000 in his home state of Tennessee because he was on 
the wrong side of this issue. The patrician John Kerry ridiculously trumpeted 
his own prowess as a gun owner, and Barack Obama has completely reneged on his 
campaign promises, most notably failing to reinstate an assault rifle ban that 
had expired. He has received an "F" grade from theBrady Campaign to Prevent Gun 
Violence <http://www.bradycampaign.org/media/press/view/1214/>. With the 
Democratic party running from this issue, there is no viable electoral 
alternative such as a third party to hoist the pro-"gun control" flag.

The reality is that the dynamics of winner-take-all elections allow gun 
control opponents – just like anti-Castro diehards in Florida – to form a 
potent single-issue voting bloc that far outweighs their minority status. 
American pundits and analysts often portray multiparty democracies elected by 
proportional representation, such as Israel and Italy, as being beholden to 
tiny political parties of extremists who hold hostage their coalition 
governments. Yet, they fail to recognise how the dynamics of our own electoral 
politics allow well-organised political minorities like the NRA to leverage 
disproportionately significant "swing voter" constituencies to push their 
radical agendas on the mainstream.

If we don't understand how our system works, we will miss the mark when we try 
to improve it.
 