
Some journalists, especially libertarian columnists, may well dislike the fact 
that thePress Complaints Commission has censured writer AA Gill and the Sunday 
Times <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/sep/17/pcc-aa-gill> for remarks 
about the TV presenterClare Balding.

They will argue that they (we, everyone) have a right to be offensive. To deny 
that right compromises press freedom. In effect, the PCC decision amounts to 
censorship.

They might also point to an apparent contradiction between the commission's 
decision to uphold Balding's complaint and itsrejection of complaints 
<http://www.pcc.org.uk/news/index.html?article=NjIyOA==> earlier this year over 
an article byJan Moir about the death of singer Stephen Gately. 

Both aroused widespread condemnation. Both were deemed to be offensive. Both 
hinged on remarks about a person's sexual orientation. So what was it about 
Gill's television review that merited censure?

The key lies in the interpretation of clause (12) of the editors' code of 
practice <http://pcc.org.uk/cop/practice.html> - about discrimination - under 
which Balding made her complaint.

It states that the press must avoid prejudicial or pejorative reference to an 
individual's sexual orientation.

In the Moir case, the commission took the view that "it was not possible to 
identify anydirect uses of pejorative or prejudicial language in the article." 
[my italics] Moir did not use pejorative synonyms for the word "homosexual".

In the Gill case, however, the description of Balding as a "dyke on a bike" 
was deemed to be a pejorative reference to her sexuality. He then compounded 
the offence in a mock apology by observing that she looked "like a big lesbian".

Unsurprisingly, the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> defended its iconoclastic 
columnist on freedom of expression grounds. "Dyke", it said, was an empowering, 
rather than an offensive, term.

I'm not sure that's true. However, it does raise an interesting point. I've 
certainly heard lesbian friends call each other dykes (just as I've heard gay 
men talk about other gays as "queens" or even "pooftahs").

But we have to realise that there is a difference between the use of such 
languagewithin a group that has previously suffered (or still suffers) 
discrimination and its use by "outsiders."

Why? Because it draws the sting of the discriminatory terms. Note, for 
example, how many African-Americans in the United States refer openly to each 
other with the N-word. Yet they would object violently if a white person used 
it.

The use of "dyke" within the lesbian community has nothing to do with 
empowerment. Anyway, Gill didn't use it - as the commission ruling rightly says 
- for that reason.

Consider also a further defence offered by the Sunday Times that nowadays 
homosexuality carries little social stigma. That's true, if we compare today 
with, say, 30 years ago.

Surely, though, the real point of Gill's remark is all about playing to a 
gallery of people who retain a lingering prejudice about lesbianism.

Having said all this, you may well feel that I agree whole-heartedly with the 
PCC's ruling. In truth, I am unhappy about it.

I have a lot of respect for Clare Balding. She is a terrific TV presenter. I 
sprang to her defence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2003/nov/17/mondaymediasection.privacy> in 
November 2003 when theDaily Mail first "outed" her as a lesbian 
<http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-109973576.html> in a meretricious nudge-nudge, 
wink-wink article.

I also happen to like Adrian Gill (which, I would guess, places me in the 
overwhelming minority atThe Guardian. So be it). And I don't believe he is at 
all homophobic.

Most importantly, I like the exercise of press freedom. Though I can 
understand Balding's hurt and I would rather Gill had not made such a cheap 
jibe, I have to side with the right of writers to offend.

I would guess that the commission agonised over its decision (at least, I hope 
it did) and, as I've explained above, I can understand why it reached its 
decision.

I just find it sticks in the craw to deny journalists (anyone, comedians, 
bloggers, the Pope) the right to be wrong.
 