
Happy Ada Lovelace <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> Day 
everyone! Today is a day to celebrate inspirational women in science, 
technology, maths and engineering, in the hope that by shining a light on such 
people and increasing their visibility, they can inspire future generations.

Ada Lovelace Day was founded in 2009 by Suw Charman-Anderson 
<http://findingada.com/about/meet-alds-founder/>, and part of her reason for 
doing this was a worry that women in tech were invisible. The idea was a 
positive one - rather than highlighting the problem, highlight the unseen women 
and shout from the rooftops about all the amazing things they’ve achieved. Ada 
Lovelace was an obvious choice of mascot for such an endeavour.

Lovelace was Lord Byron’s daughter, though she didn’t know her father very 
well. She was schooled in maths and science, unlike the majority of girls at 
the time she was growing up. Her social circle included Charles Babbage, and 
her grasp of the potential for his Analytical Engine has led her to be hailed 
as the first computer programmer.

Ada Lovelace, trailblazer of science, brought to life in exhibition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/ada-lovelace-exhibition-science-museum>
Coming from a psychology background, I’m luckier than women in many other 
fields of science in that I’ve been surrounded by girls and women throughout my 
scientific education and academic career so far. My lab group is predominantly 
women, and my first first-author paper has an all-female author list.

However, the role models as I advance in my field get slightly thinner on the 
ground. There’s only one female professor in my department at Bristol. This 
isn’t to say there aren’t many brilliant women in psychology, though (I’ve
written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2013/oct/15/medical-research-health>
about 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/10378299/Ada-Lovelace-Day-Where-are-the-women-in-science-Right-here-...-My-top-10-female-scientists.html>
plenty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2014/oct/14/illness-adventure-statistics-jean-golding-my-inspiring-scientist-ada-lovelace>
 before), and this is great, because there’ssome evidence 
<http://findingada.com/about/our-mission/> that it’s more important for women 
to see female role models than it is for men to see male ones. But even in 
psychology there’s an imbalance, and it’s much more pronounced in other fields 
of science and tech.

We know that women are underrepresented in science, and because of initiatives 
like Ada Lovelace Day, and organisations likeScienceGrrl 
<http://sciencegrrl.co.uk/>, there are more and more people attempting to do 
something about the unconscious biases that may well be responsible for the 
discrepancy. But women are not the only group underrepresented.

Ada herself was a wealthy and highly educated woman. And these days academia 
still has more than its fair share of white, middle class employees. Perhaps as 
well as Ada Lovelace Day we need a day championing scientists, engineers and 
mathematicians who don’t fit this mould, in the hope that increasing the 
visibility of these people will encourage more diversity in future.

Of course, more needs to change than just visibility. The culture of academia 
needs to change in order for it to be a place that everyone can thrive. 
Unconscious biases are problematic and hard to remove precisely because they 
are unconscious. I may have been overlooked or belittled because I’m a woman - 
equally it’s likely I may have unconscious biases of my own. It isn’t just men 
who rate CVs with women’s names at the top as being of lower quality, the study 
that investigated this found that women did so too.

The harder question is how do we counter and overcome these unconscious 
biases. Being aware of the problem is the first step. Professor Athene Donald 
has apractical list of suggestions 
<http://occamstypewriter.org/athenedonald/2015/06/15/what-next-after-tim-hunt-just1action4wis/>
 that I think is brilliant - and most can be applied to equality and diversity 
in science beyond gender. Encouraging diversity in academia benefits everyone, 
so what better time than Ada Lovelace Day to highlight the work of a woman that 
you think is inspirational, so that her achievement can inspire others.

With Athene’s permission, I have listed her suggestions 
<http://occamstypewriter.org/athenedonald/2015/06/15/what-next-after-tim-hunt-just1action4wis/>
 below:

 * Call out bad behaviour whenever and wherever you see it – in committees or 
in the street. Don’t leave women to be victimised; 
 * Encourage women to dare, to take risks; 
 * Act as a sponsor or mentor (if you are just setting out there will still 
always be people younger than you, including school children, for whom you can 
act); 
 * Don’t let team members get away with demeaning behaviour, objectifying 
women or acting to exclude anyone; 
 * Seek out and remove microinequities wherever you spot them; 
 * Refuse to serve on single sex panels or at conferences without an 
appropriate level of female invited speakers; 
 * Consider the imagery in your department and ensure it represents a diverse 
group of individuals; 
 * Consider the daily working environment to see if anything inappropriate is 
lurking. If so, do something about it. 
 * Demand/require mandatory unconscious bias training, in particular for 
appointment and promotion panels; 
 * Call out teachers who tell girls they can’t/shouldn’t do maths, physics etc;
 * Don’t let the bold (male or female) monopolise the conversation in the 
classroom or the apparatus in the laboratory, at the expense of the timid 
(female or male); 
 * Ask schools about their progression rates for girls into the traditionally 
male subjects at A level (or indeed, the traditionally female subjects for 
boys); 
 * Nominate women for prizes, fellowships etc; 
 * Tap women on the shoulder to encourage them to apply for opportunities they 
otherwise would be unaware of or feel they were not qualified for; 
 * Move the dialogue on from part-time working equates to ‘isn’t serious’ to 
part-time working means balancing different demands; 
 * Recognize the importance of family (and even love) for men and women; 
 * Be prepared to be a visible role model; 
 * Gather evidence, data and anecdote, to provide ammunition for management to 
change; 
 * Listen and act if a woman starts hinting there are problems, don’t be 
dismissive because it makes you uncomfortable; 
 * Think broadly when asked to make suggestions of names for any position or 
role.  