
Anthropologists and geneticists had a problem. And the farther back in time 
they looked, the bigger the problem became.

For the past several years, there have been two main genetic methods to date 
evolutionary divergences - when our ancestors split fromNeanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals>, chimpanzees, and other 
relatives. The problem was, the results of these methods differed by nearly 
two-fold.

By one estimate, modern humans split from Neanderthals roughly 300,000 years 
ago. By the other, the split was closer to 600,000 years ago. Likewise, modern 
humans and chimps may have diverged around 6.5 or 13 million years ago.

Puzzled by this wild disagreement, researchers with diverse expertise have 
been studying it from different angles. Their combined discoveries, recently 
reviewedhere 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.2000744> 
andhere <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959437X16301010>, 
have shed light on how genetic differences accumulate over time and have 
advanced methods of genetic dating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fwhy-were-closer-than-ever-to-a-timeline-for-human-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbaad3687a48501e06173fec8c44e0e24ae5c8e3%2F0_0_1875_1125%2F1875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we're%20closer%20than%20ever%20to%20a%20timeline%20for%20human%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fwhy-were-closer-than-ever-to-a-timeline-for-human-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%27re%20closer%20than%20ever%20to%20a%20timeline%20for%20human%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fwhy-were-closer-than-ever-to-a-timeline-for-human-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbaad3687a48501e06173fec8c44e0e24ae5c8e3%2F0_0_1875_1125%2F1875.jpg>
 Primate evolutionary relationships. Photograph: Bridget Alex 
And if you’re in suspense, yes, they’ve also pinned down important events in 
our evolutionary timeline. Everyone alive today seems to share ancestors with 
each otherjust over 200,000 years ago 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v538/n7624/abs/nature18964.html> and with 
Neanderthalsbetween 765,000-550,000 years ago 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v531/n7595/abs/nature17405.html>. 

Dating with the molecular clock

Go back in time and you’ll find a population of Homo sapiens who were the 
ancestors of everyone living today. Go back farther and our lineage meets up 
with Neanderthals, then chimps, and eventually all primates, mammals, and life.

In order to date these evolutionary splits, geneticists have relied on the 
molecular clock - the idea that genetic mutations accumulate at a steady rate 
over time. Specifically this concerns mutations that become neutral 
substitutions, or lasting changes to letters of the genetic code that do not 
affect an organism’s chances of surviving and reproducing.

If such mutations arise clocklike, then calculating the time since two 
organisms shared common ancestors should be as easy as dividing the number of 
genetic differences between them by the mutation rate - the same way that 
dividing distance by speed gives you travel time.

But you need to know the rate. 

For decades, anthropologists used fossil calibration to generate the so-called 
phylogenetic rate (a phylogeny is a tree showing evolutionary relationships). 
They took the geologic age of fossils from evolutionary branch points and 
calculated how fast mutations must have arisen along the resulting lineages.

For example, the earliest fossils on the human branch after our split with 
chimps are identified by the fact that they seem to have walked on two legs; 
bipedalism is the first obvious difference that distinguishes our evolutionary 
lineage of hominins from that of chimps. These fossils are 7-6 million years 
old, and therefore the chimp-human split should be around that age. Dividing 
the number of genetic differences between living chimps and humans by 6.5 
million years provides a mutation rate.

Determined this way, the mutation rate is 0.000000001 (or 1x10-9) mutations 
per DNA base pair per year 
<http://www.genetics.org/content/genetics/156/1/297.full.pdf>. Applied to 
genomes with 6 billion base pairs, that means, over millions of years of chimp 
and human evolution, there have been on average six changes to letters of the 
genetic code per year.

Why archaeology needs to come out of the cave and into the digital age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/21/why-archaeology-needs-to-come-out-of-the-cave-and-into-the-digital-age>
This rate can be used to date evolutionary events that are not evident from 
fossils, such as the spread of modern humans out of Africa.

But genetic dating got messy in 2010, when improvements to DNA sequencing 
allowed researchers to determine the number of genetic differencesbetween 
parents and their children 
<http://www.nature.com/nrg/journal/v13/n10/abs/nrg3295.html>. Known as pedigree 
analysis, this provides a more direct measurement of the current mutation rate 
within one generation, rather than an average over millions of years.

Pedigree analysis counts 60-some mutations every generation; that converts to 
a rate approximately half the phylogenetic estimate—meaningevolutionary events 
would be twice as old 
<http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v48/n8/full/ng.3597.html>.

The erratic molecular clock

Resolving this disagreement propelled researchers to reassess and revise their 
starting assumptions: How accurately were they counting the small number of 
differences between genomes of parents and children? Were fossils assigned to 
the correct branches of the evolutionary tree? And above all, how constant is 
the molecular clock?

It turns out that among primates, the molecular clock varies significantly by 
species, sex, and mutation type.A recent study 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/113/38/10607.full> found that New World monkeys 
(i.e. monkeys of the Americas like marmosets and squirrel monkeys) have 
substitution rates about 64% higher than apes (including humans). Within apes, 
rates are about 7% higher in gorillas and 2% higher in chimpanzees, compared to 
humans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fwhy-were-closer-than-ever-to-a-timeline-for-human-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32824539af72a5daec2fc03a91c2702e4cbe95c9%2F0_25_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we're%20closer%20than%20ever%20to%20a%20timeline%20for%20human%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fwhy-were-closer-than-ever-to-a-timeline-for-human-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%27re%20closer%20than%20ever%20to%20a%20timeline%20for%20human%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fwhy-were-closer-than-ever-to-a-timeline-for-human-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32824539af72a5daec2fc03a91c2702e4cbe95c9%2F0_25_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Calculating the date of the human-chimp split. Photograph: Bridget Alex 
But even among humans, mutation rates differ, particularly between the sexes 
with age. As fathers get older, they gain about one additional mutation per 
year in the DNA they can pass on to children. Mothers, on the other hand, 
accumulate considerably fewer mutationswith each passing year 
<http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v48/n8/full/ng.3597.html>.

These species and sex differences make sense when you consider how mutations 
form. Most heritable mutations occur from mistakes when DNA copies itself in 
the germline, or cells leading to eggs and sperm. The number of times germline 
DNA has to copy itself depends on developmental and reproductive variables 
including age at puberty, age at reproduction, and the process of sperm 
production.

These traits vary across primates today, and certainly varied over primate 
evolution. For instance, average generation times are six years for New World 
monkeys, 19 years for gorillas, 25 years for chimps, and 29 years for humans.

And those extra mutations as fathers get older? Sperm are produced 
continuously after puberty, so sperm made later in life are the result of more 
rounds of DNA replication and opportunities for replication errors. In 
contrast, a mother’s stock of eggs is formed by birth. The small increase with 
maternal age could be due to mutations from DNA damage, rather than replication 
errors.

Ways forward for dating backwards

It’s now clear that one mutation rate cannot determine the dates for all 
divergences relevant to human evolution. However, researchers can secure the 
timeline for important evolutionary events by combining new methods of genetic 
dating with fossils and geologic ages.

Innovative computational methods have incorporated reproductive variables into 
calculations. By taking into account ages of reproduction in both sexes, age of 
male puberty, and sperm production rates, researchers have estimated split 
times thataccord with the fossil record 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/113/6/1588.short>.

Another new approach has analysed mutations that are mainly independent of DNA 
replication. It seems that certain classes of mutations, related to DNA damage,
do behave more clocklike <http://www.pnas.org/content/113/38/10607.full>.

And some researchers have focused on ancient DNA. Comparing human fossils from 
the past 50,000 years to humans today, suggests a mutation rate thatagrees with 
pedigree analysis 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v514/n7523/abs/nature13810.html>.

At least one evolutionary split was pinned down in 2016, after ancient DNA was 
extracted from 430,000 year-old hominin fossils from Sima de los Huesos, Spain 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v531/n7595/abs/nature17405.html>. The 
Sima hominins looked like early members of the Neanderthal lineage based on 
morphological similarities. This hypothesis fit the timing of the split between 
Neanderthals and modern humans based on pedigree analysis (765,000-550,000 
years ago), but did not work with the phylogenetic estimate (383,000-275,000 
years ago).

Where do the Sima hominins belong on our family tree? Were they ancestors of 
both Neanderthals and modern humans, just Neanderthals, or neither?

DNA answered this definitively. The Sima hominins belong to the Neanderthal 
branch after it split with modern humans. Moreover, the result provides a firm 
time point in our family tree, suggesting that the pedigree rate works for this 
period of human evolution.

Neanderthals and modern humans likely diverged between 765,000-550,000 years 
ago. Other evolutionary splits may soon be clarified as well, thanks to 
advances brought about by the mutation rate debates. Someday soon, when you see 
a chimp, you may be able to salute your great, great… great grandparent, with 
the correct number of “greats.”

Thanks to Priya Moorjani and David Pilbeam for their input on this piece.
 