
I love Broad City <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broad-city>. 
Thanks to the hipster buddy comedy that focuses on two young Brooklyn women and 
their friendship, a younger generation of television watchers are learning 
about street harassment, rape culture and patriarchy in a way that’s accessible 
(and hilarious). It’s this feminist’s dream come true.

The genius of Broad City: at last, a comedy that speaks to my world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/14/broad-city-comedy-genius>
Here’s the problem: when I watch the show I feel a bit like an imposter, or 
worse, the “cool mom”, who wants to shop at the mall with her daughter. At 36, 
it’s not that I’m generationally much different than stars Ilana Glazer and 
Abbi Jacobson – it’s just that my Williamsburg days are behind me. I’m more 
about parent-teacher conferences and shopping at Whole Foods than having
drug-induced adventures there. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DhGHu-3asWU>

That’s why I’m so grateful for the fantastic feminist sitcom Playing House. 
It’s a brilliant show for those of us who are a bit too old tosmuggle pot in 
our vaginas <http://www.cc.com/video-clips/nlnr4u/broad-city-nature-s-pocket> or
peg our male neighbor with a strap-on dildo 
<http://jezebel.com/last-nights-broad-city-was-all-about-pegging-1683966138> 
(actually, you’re never too old for that). The USA series that debuts its 
second season today may be one of the funniest – if underappreciated – shows 
out right now.

As comedian Jamie Kilstein <http://jamiekilstein.com/> wrote last year 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/06/02/playing_house_is_the_best_female_comedy_no_one_you_know_is_watching/>
: “I was late to this show because I literally thought the only person that 
watched USA [Network] was my mom.” Kilstein calls the show “a hidden delight” 
and he’s right – the success of Playing House has been much more low-key than 
that of its comedy counterparts.

Playing House focuses on the friendship between show creators and stars Lennon 
Parham and Jessica St Clair. St Clair’s character, Maggie, leaves her job in 
China to help Parham’s Emma raise her daughter after she finds her husband 
cheating with a cam-girl.

Parham and St Clair, who have been writing partners for years 
<http://splitsider.com/2014/04/talking-to-jessica-st-clair-and-lennon-parham-about-playing-house-ucb-and-female-friendships/>
, met over a decade ago while they were at the Upright Citizens Brigade and 
co-wrote and starred in the short-lived sitcom, BFFs. Their improv background 
shows - the writing is sharp andthe guest stars are stellar. 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/usas-playing-house-sets-all-675733> 
(One stand-out co-star is Keegan-Michael Key as St Clair’s high school 
boyfriend.)

Key & Peele: kings of football comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/30/key-peele-kings-football-comedy>
As in Broad City, there are plenty of hijinks, but they’re centered around 
not-so-young-adult themes – like becoming friends with your first love’s wife 
and having sex with a divorce lawyer. But the real draw is the relationship 
between Parham and St Clair, who hit the nail on the head when it comes to 
depicting female friendship and its endurance through romantic relationships, 
careers and children.

We’re in the middle of an incredible feminist comedy moment. Between Amy 
Schumer, Mindy Kaling, Tina Fey, Amy Poehler, and Jessica Williams, it’s an 
embarrassment of lady-riches. (Though let’s not forget thatWanda Sykes and her 
detachable vagina got there first <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jv5pjSRSLGQ>
.)

But Parham and St Clair have put together something brilliant, and deserve the 
same kind of accolades being showered on Schumer, Glazer and Jacobson. There 
may not be sex while Skyping orcelebratory twerking 
<http://giphy.com/gifs/broad-city-ilana-glazer-wexler-RepzNOboFxAli>, but for 
this 30-something Playing House is playing it just right.
 