
To mark its 70th birthday, Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour has released a definitive 
version of its annual power list 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38303886>, choosing “the seven 
women who’ve made the biggest impact on women’s lives over the last 70 years”. 
For the first time, women who are no longer alive were considered, as were 
women from outside the UK, if their impact could be demonstrated here. It is a 
loose set of guidelines, but the panel – including The Apprentice star and 
businesswomanKarren Brady <https://www.theguardian.com/football/karren-brady> 
and screenwriterAbi Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan> – have 
really gone to town with the brief. The results are in:Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, Bridget Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-diary>, Germaine Greer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/germainegreer> and Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> are among those who have had the 
greatest impact on the lives of British women today.

To claim the Power List as a definitive ranking of anything is as daft as the 
second Bridget Jones film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-the-edge-of-reason>. Lists such 
as this have an impact only if they are divisive and provocative – and nothing 
says “Let’s celebrate women” like getting people to argue about how rubbish 
some women are.

What did Margaret Thatcher do for women?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/09/margaret-thatcher-women> 
Inevitably, there will be debate around even the most obvious inclusions 
because, in some cases, these are controversial figures. Yes, Thatcher 
symbolises the attainability of female power, but the former prime minister was 
notoriously indifferent to advancing other women (“What did Margaret Thatcher 
do for women? Nothing,”wrote Woman’s Hour presenter Jenni Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/09/margaret-thatcher-women> in 
2013). Yes, Greer wrotean iconic feminist tract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-female-eunuch>, but she is supportive of 
women only if they don’t happen to be trans women. The Bridget Jones films, 
directed by a woman and based on books written by a woman, are some of the most 
underrated British comedies of recent times – but the books are dated and the 
idea that she is some sort of template for modern womanhood is an anachronism 
at best.

The list also includes, and draws attention to the work of, Barbara Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/may/03/obituaries.anneperkins>, who 
introduced theEqual Pay Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/08/emily-thornberry-equal-pay-act-overhaul>
; Helen Brook, who set up theBrook Advisory Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/dec/01/charitymanagement.publichealth>
, offering contraceptive advice to unmarried women; andJayaben Desai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/28/jayaben-desai-obituary>, who 
campaigned against low pay for female and immigrant workers in the 1970s. 
Naturally, they have been squeezed in to leave space for a fictitious diarist 
obsessed with calories and an outstanding pop star who certainly made my life 
better for the two hours of paradise that was her last arena show, but whose 
contribution to British women’s daily existence may not be the most significant 
we’ve seen since 1946.

Still, it is a shame that some of these women are no longer with us, because I 
would love to see this list come together to discuss what exactly is going 
wrong in Britain today, and how to fix things such as the pay gap and 
discrimination. Because, between them, I have no doubt that Beyoncé and Barbara 
Castle could hammer it all out.
 