
Rutting deer, newborn seals and a couple of million (probably) migrating 
birds: it can only be one thing – BBC2'sAutumnwatch 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/autumnwatch/> is back. Except this year, it is going to 
be slightly different.

We knew there would be no Bill Oddie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/jan/30/bill-oddie-leaves-bbcs-springwatch>
 - he was replaced on this year's Springwatch byChris Packham 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/mar/18/springwatch-chris-packham-martin-hughes-games-bbc2>
, who remains with the show – but what we didn't expect was a controversial 
scheduling switch that hasgot birders' binoculars all steamed up 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/mbsn/F14197738?thread=6946352>.

Instead of going out at 8pm every weeknight for a fortnight, it will now go 
out at 9pm every Friday for eight weeks. So it won't be as much of an event as 
it used to be, but it will,as presenter Kate Humble explained 
<http://www.bbccountryfilemagazine.com/katehumble>, allow the programme to 
"reflect the whole journey of autumn as it sweeps over Great Britain".

That may be true – but it's not so good if you have young children who enjoy 
the show, as 9pm might be a little late for them. Which would explain the 
Saturday daytime repeat. "For me, the family audience is absolutely core," said 
Packham. "And if we don't get them for the Saturday repeat,I'm going to be 
mortified 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv-entertainment/tv/tv-land/2009/09/23/autumwatch-only-a-weekly-show-115875-21694594/>
." Time will tell.

Packham slipped seamlessly on to Springwatch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2009/jun/09/chri-packham-springwatch-natural>
 when hetook over from Oddie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/mar/18/springwatch-chris-packham-martin-hughes-games-bbc2>
, even if the comedy Smiths references went from amusing to ever so slightly 
irritating.

So what can we expect from this year's show, which will be based at the BBC's 
natural history unit in Bristol? Migrating birds on the south coast, wading 
birds in north Norfolk (I can recommend Snettisham 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BY3nC7R2tJY&feature=fvw>), autumn woodlands in 
the Lake District, the dramatic Pembrokshire coast … you get the idea. And 
rutting deer on the webcams for the first time.

The Friday night scheduling means the show comes straight after Gardeners' 
World – which, alas, I gave up on after about three episodes of the current run 
– and,according to executive producer Tim Scones 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/autumnwatch/2009/09/welcome_back_to_autumnwatch.html>
, is intended to "set you up for your own wildlife weekend by showcasing the 
very best of the wildlife action happening around you".

If that's not enough, Autumnwatch Unsprung, the rather chaotic interactive 
behind-the-scenes show that you previously had to access via the red button,
will follow on BBC2 at 10pm 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/autumnwatch/2009/09/new_improved_unsprung_programm.html>
. Now that'sdefinitely too late for the young 'uns.

The one phenomenon we are guaranteed to see is those giant flocks of starlings 
swooping and soaring across the late autumn sky. Every year I vow to see this 
for myself. Every year I barely make it out of the armchair. Maybe this year 
will be different. But if I miss it, I can always watch it onAutumnwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXH-groCeKbE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXH-groCeKbE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXH-groCeKbE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Autumnwatch starts on BBC2 at 9pm on Friday.
 