
Two nights in Bujumbura, two assassination attempts on high-profile figures 
from opposite ends of the political spectrum. One succeeded, the other failed. 
Together these add up to bad news for a country reeling fromweeks of street 
violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/burundi-election-polls-open-president-nkurunziza-violence>
, as hopes for a peaceful resolution dim and the international community runs 
out of ideas.

Rumours and violence are fuelling the uncertainty in Burundi | Carina 
Tertsakian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/rumours-violence-fuelling-uncertainty-burundi>
Over the past few months President Pierre Nkurunziza has tightened his grip on 
power, culminating in his disputed re-election on 21 July. As his opponents 
seek to resist him, residents of the Burundian capital have become increasingly 
used to the sound of gunfire at night – and the reports of deaths in the 
morning. But even by Burundi’s increasingly low standards, the attacks on two 
high-profile figures from opposite sides of the divide came as a shock.

The first attack was on Sunday evening. General Adolphe Nshimirimana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/02/burundis-de-facto-internal-security-chief-killed-in-rocket-attack-on-car>
, a colleague and confidante of the president, was attacked in his car by men 
in military uniforms. The general was killed, as were his bodyguards.

Nshimirimana wasn’t just any old general. He was the president’s right-hand 
man, his war buddy, perceived by many to be the power behind the throne. 
Whoever killed him – and speculation ranges from armed opposition to plots from 
within the government’s inner circle itself – struck a devastating blow against 
the heart of the regime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fburundi-african-union-assassination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438769362428%2F1297abed-ba9e-4078-bb78-591a9aee3416-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20crisis%20in%20Burundi%20is%20tying%20the%20African%20Union%20in%20knots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fburundi-african-union-assassination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20crisis%20in%20Burundi%20is%20tying%20the%20African%20Union%20in%20knots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fburundi-african-union-assassination%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438769362428%2F1297abed-ba9e-4078-bb78-591a9aee3416-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pierre Claver Mbonimpa Photograph: Carl De Souza/AFP/Getty Images 
The second attack was on Monday evening. Human rights activist Pierre Claver 
Mbonimpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/04/assassination-attempt-burundi-human-rights-activists-pierre-claver-mbonimpa>
 was also in his car, near his home, when he was surrounded by motorcyclists 
who fired into the vehicle. Mbonimpa didn’t die, but he was seriously injured 
and rushed to hospital. It’s believed his injuries are not life-threatening.

Mbonimpa wasn’t just any old human rights activist (although there are 
precious few of them left in Burundi). “I would say he is Burundi’s leading 
human rights activist. [He] has been threatened by all sides, but he’s carried 
out his work regardless, and I think the authorities just can’t handle that,” 
says Human Rights Watch’sCarina Tertsakian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/rumours-violence-fuelling-uncertainty-burundi>
. Mbonimpa was also a leading critic ofNkurunziza’s decision to run for a third 
term in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/protest-burundi-president-third-term-bujumbura-pierre-nkurunziza>
.

Whether by coincidence or design, there’s something ominous about the symmetry 
of these assassination attempts. It’s hard to escape the feeling that they 
presage a new and disturbing chapter. “Up until now I’ve been resisting the 
more alarmist interpretations of what’s been going on, but in the last few days 
the situation is really spinning out of control. These two dramatic and quite 
shocking incidents are a sign that the violence is likely to escalate,” says 
Tertsakian.

Her fears are echoed by the International Crisis Group’s Thierry Vircoulon. 
“The re-election of Nkurunziza has put Burundi on the path of war,” he says. 
“It sent the signal to the opposition that there is nothing left to negotiate 
and all they can do is to accept his ‘victory’. As a result, the opposition is 
trying to unite on the political front (withthe creation of an opposition 
coalition 
<http://www.dw.com/fr/au-burundi-lopposition-choisit-sa-strat%C3%A9gie/a-18624957>
 in Addis Ababa) and some parts of the opposition have opted for the armed 
struggle and decided to strike at the top of the Burundian regime’s power 
system. The change of the pattern of violence, from street demonstrations to 
targeted assassinations is a clear sign of things to come.”

Intervention

While the signs aren’t good, it’s important to note that the violence is still 
relatively small-scale and targeted. Burundi has yet to become the bloodbath 
some have been predicting.Comparisons with Rwanda in 1994 remain off the mark 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/burundi/11605199/Burundi-shares-ethnic-balance-that-led-to-Rwanda-genocide-but-this-conflict-is-different.html>
 – for now.

“What you see now is really very similar to what you saw 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2010/07/01/burundi-violence-rights-violations-mar-elections>
 following [the]2010 elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/28/burundi-vote-referendum-pierre-nkurunziza>
. But concern is that you have high-level targets, compared to mid to low-level 
targets previously,” says Yolande Bouka, senior researcher with the Institute 
for Security Studies. “Until you see an escalation of violence in the street or 
in up-country violence, then we’re not at the worst-case scenario.”

"In such choppy waters, more or less everybody believes they can lay their 
hand on the tiller"
Domitille Kiramvu 
Naturally, attention turns to what comes next, and specifically what can be 
done to prevent that worst-case scenario. Options are dangerously limited for 
the international community, which remains reluctant to be drawn into a costly, 
open-ended military intervention.

Moreover, it is hamstrung by its reliance on Burundian soldiers to keep the 
peace in Somalia 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-07-06-analysis-why-somalia-is-the-burundian-presidents-trump-card/>
. Amisom, the African Union Mission in Somalia, has sent 22,000 peacekeepers 
from around the continent to fight against al-Shabaab – and more than 5,000 of 
these are from Burundi.

If Nkurunziza withdrew these troops or Burundi’s membership of the African 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> was suspended, it would 
be a major blow for Amisom, the continent’s flagship peacekeeping operation. 
The chances of finding any country willing and able to replace this commitment 
at short notice is slim. As the AU and the international community considers 
how to deal with Burundi, they must also consider how any action taken against 
Nkurunziza will negatively affect Somalia.


To complicate matters, the measures that are being taken are failing: neither 
the regional East African Community nor the chief mediator, Ugandan President 
Yoweri Museveni, have been able to make any headway in negotiations. And while 
the African Union has been vocal in its condemnation of the assassination 
attempts, its military observers – deployed only late last month – have been 
powerless to prevent the violence.

Power struggle in Burundi - the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/14/power-struggle-in-burundi-the-guardian-briefing>
The last word goes to Burundian journalist Domitille Kiramvu, who reported for 
Deutsche Welle until she was forced out by the violence. In amoving op-ed 
<http://www.dw.com/en/opinion-burundi-defeated-and-desolate/a-18625896> for the 
German news organisation, she describes just how chaotic the situation remains 
– and, in these circumstances, how easily power comes and goes: “In such choppy 
waters, more or less everybody believes they can lay their hand on the tiller. 
Former henchmen who helped create the repugnant apparatus of repression now 
cloak themselves in innocence. Former politicians choose to remember their past 
deeds in a positive light, forgetting that the people rejected them for their 
authoritarian and tyrannical excesses. New arrivals to Burundian politics 
promise everybody everything... One can only hope that with the passage of 
time, political realism will triumph over the villainy, egotism and thoughtless 
speculation.”

A version of this article originally appeared Daily Maverick 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-08-04-is-burundi-really-on-brink-of-a-bloodbath/#.VcHSnipVhBc>
 