
I know, I know - I'm late. It's been nearly a month since my last update but I 
promise there are some really good reasons. But instead of boring you with 
them, let me get straight to it.

I'm getting fed up. Not in an "Atkins-diet-is-evil" way but more in an 
"Atkins-takes-the-pleasure-out-of-life" way. Let me explain.

For the last two weeks I've been in the United States, spiritual home of 
Atkins and where a full-scale low-carb revolution has already taken hold. While 
some health magazines in the UK are busily arguing about the relative benefits 
of the diet, the US is replete with magazines that have bitten the bullet and 
based their entire existence on living a low-carb lifestyle. Every supermarket 
or corner store has a low-carb aisle, full of meal replacement bars, sugar-free 
chocolates and various flavours or cake or biscuit mix. There are low-carb 
drinks, cereals and ice cream. Restaurants have special low-carb sections with 
nutritional information printed right next to the details of exactly what is in 
the sauce or dressing you're about to eat.

This is not to say that everybody there felt strongly about living a low-carb 
lifestyle - the restaurant owners and supermarket managers I spoke to were 
mostly ambivalent about eating the Atkins way. But they were certainly aware 
that lots of people were doing it and, this being America, they were just happy 
to cash in.

My first week there saw me entering the Ongoing Weight Loss phase (OWL) phase 
of the diet (for those of you who don't know what this is, please see my last 
article), where I could eat more carbs and so I happily munched away on some 
sugar-free chocolates (with almond pieces) that I had found in the local 
supermarket. I was doing the healthy Atkins thing but I was also eating 
decadent food - this had to be perfect, right?

But, after I finished the last one, I chanced a look at the ingredients. Sure 
enough, the carb content was satisfyingly low. But the fat content was through 
the roof; and it was stuffed full of sugar alcohols to sweeten it (not a bad 
thing per se but eat too much of these and your digestive system won't be too 
thankful). The cereal bars I was eating for breakfast every morning were also a 
nightmare - all sorts of artificial flavourings and colours as well as fake 
flour and fake sugar.

One thing I had liked about Atkins was that it forced me to eat more 
vegetables and real food. I managed to start cutting out the processed and 
chemical-filled stuff of my previous eating life. But these low-carb snacks 
were just putting these artificial chemicals right back in.

Why eat them then, you might argue? Well, because the low carb life takes so 
much of the pleasure out of eating, that I was really, honestly, hankering 
after anything slightly decadent. Something, anything different to the steaks, 
omelettes and salads that made up the rest of my regime.

And occasionally, you need comfort food. A whole day walking around a big city 
needs a cup of coffee and a slice of cake waiting at the end; breakfast at a 
lonely roadside diner demanded that I ate some of the tempting buttermilk 
pancakes; and what's better than mashed potatoes when you're sheltering from 
the rain in a cozy caf√Ä?

But these things are all banned with Atkins. Sorely tempted as I was in all 
the restaurants, bars and cafes I ended up in, you'll be pleased to know I 
didn't cave. Not even when a waiter placed a bowl of freshly made tortilla 
chips and gorgeous-looking dip at my table in a Mexican restaurant whilst I was 
waiting for my steak and salad. I hadn't eaten at all that day and the chips 
would have been the equivalent of water to a parched desert traveller. I must 
have been staring at them hard because, when my order finally arrived, the 
waitress had to shout three times before I removed my newspaper from the table.

Not even in that lonely diner did I buckle. And my decaf coffee was always 
drunk whilst reading a book, not cutting up a cake.

Every time I ordered from a low-carb menu, I wasn't pleased that I had a 
select menu of my own to choose from. Instead, I was getting jealous of the 
vast array of foods available to everyone else. Everywhere I went, I 
increasingly felt like I was out of the loop, isolated from the real world, 
unable to fit in.

The plane was the worst thing. On the way over, I managed by eating around the 
potatoes and other carbs but that left barely anything. And it wasn't as if I 
could shop around and find something else to eat, either. For the return 
journey, I asked the airline for low carb foods but they basically said no. 
Again, there wasn't much I could do. I thought about buying some snacks but was 
reluctant just to eat artificially-made low-carb foods. Even so, how many of 
those do you find in airport shops?

I know that my complaints are just expressions of frustration. I know that my 
desire for mashed potatoes and cake is probably a result of the carbohydrate 
cravings that Dr Atkins mentioned in his book. I still can't deny some of the 
benefits of my new way of eating - I don't have afternoon lulls, I'm eating 
more whole foods and vegetables, I'm not eating so much junk food - and so I'm 
prepared to ride the cravings for the sake of this seemingly healthier 
lifestyle. And with any luck, the cravings will get bored and leave me alone 
soon.
 