
“Daily acts of kindness.” That’s the way to build artists and audiences, 
suggested Derby theatre’s artistic directorSarah Brigham 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/magazine/263/my-gurus/sarah-brigham>, at the 
end of theA Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/24/a-nations-theatre-battersea-arts-centre-bac>
 debate on artist and audience development last Friday. It was part of 
DEparture Lounge, a short season of new work that comes out of Derby’s ongoing 
professional development programmeIn Good Company 
<https://www.derbytheatre.co.uk/artist-development/good-company>, supporting 
artists making work in England’s east Midlands.


A Nation's Theatre: explore the UK's dramatic landscape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/24/a-nations-theatre-battersea-arts-centre-bac>
Welcome to Brighton: a town in search of a new wave of artists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/25/welcome-to-brighton-a-town-in-search-of-a-new-wave-of-artists>
Brigham’s philosophy may sound idealistic, but what’s happening at Derby – 
increasingly the most crucial theatre in the region because of its emphasis on 
learning, nurturing and nourishing – proves it’s a very good way to run a 
theatre. The artistic director and producers of any building should be found in 
the foyers and cafe regularly talking to audiences, and should be available for 
artists who want to make an appointment for a cup of coffee. And seeking out 
artists everywhere, including in the youth and community theatreson their 
doorstep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/01/want-to-develop-and-diversify-artists-start-on-your-doorstep>
. And ensuring that those initiatives are welcoming to those from many 
different backgrounds. As Brigham said during the debate: “Let’s stop saying 
‘emerging’: an artist is an artist whether they are 12 or 40.”

I’m constantly hearing theatre-makers and those running buildings talking 
about theatre being a conversation. It should be. But the conversation can’t 
just be taking place in the auditorium on performance nights. It has to take 
place all over the building and beyond its walls. You can tell an awful lot 
about the culture of an institution through the visibility of its leaders – not 
just on press night – and the happiness, enthusiasm and involvement of those 
working there. (I don’t just mean the producers and the associates but the 
marketing, bar and front-of-house staff too.)

We all know that theatres and arts organisations need to look out, not in. 
It’s whatBattersea Arts Centre <https://www.bac.org.uk/> is doing with A 
Nation’s Theatre – an initiative that is now attracting interest from other 
London-based venues – and it’s whatDerby theatre 
<https://www.derbytheatre.co.uk/> is doing with its artist development 
programme. That includes bringing work to Derby, giving artists the support and 
space that they need to make work, taking them out across the country so they 
get a real sense of the shows being made elsewhere, and letting them make the 
work they want to make, not work management instructs them to make. Artist 
development is very unlikely to feed a theatre’s main stage, but it’s still 
worth doing properly and in a genuine spirit of generosity.

What marks out In Good Company is that Derby began by asking artists what it 
was they wanted and needed rather than simply telling them what they had 
planned for them, and the scheme continues to consult. It comes from Brigham’s 
own experience of knocking on doors to be let in, and from her background in 
youth theatre. Now she’s got the keys, her philosophy is to let as many people 
in as she can and to look for them far and wide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Ftheatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438072384047%2F1b9e7bb7-22fd-4ada-8da5-4f8f8e2869cd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20radical%20kindness%20is%20the%20key%20to%20artistic%20development&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Ftheatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20radical%20kindness%20is%20the%20key%20to%20artistic%20development&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Ftheatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438072384047%2F1b9e7bb7-22fd-4ada-8da5-4f8f8e2869cd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lyn Gardner discussing artistic development with theatre-makers in Derby. 
Photograph: Derby theatre 
In recent years we’ve come some considerable way in turning a no culture into 
a yes culture;supporting and cherishing artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/27/investment-in-the-arts-emotional-financial>
 is seen as fundamental to an organisation’s mission. So why is it that across 
the country so many artists and companies feel as if they are being granted a 
favour? The latter are often very quick to boast to theArts Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england> of what they are 
doing for artist development and sometimes rather less quick to actually 
deliver something tailored to the needs of that particular artist and company.

As Paul Warwick, of the excellent producing outfit China Plate 
<http://www.chinaplatetheatre.com/>, observed during the discussion at Derby 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-developing-artists-and-audiences-are-we-getting-it-right-17427035733>
: “A multiplicity of specific opportunities is better than trying to be all 
things to all people.” He said organisations had to recognise that “developing 
art and developing artists are not always the same thing. Giving loads of money 
to already successful artists or companies to make a show is not artist 
development, it’s a commission. Artist development is risky and it won’t all 
work.”

So why do I still hear so many stories of outrageous box-office deals, of 
rehearsal space becoming mysteriously unavailable, of young companies charged 
for technical advice and support?

The Leicester-based artist Trina Halder 
<http://mashi-theatre.co.uk/author/trinahal/> quite rightly says those trying 
to make theatre need to take responsibility for their own development journey 
and that means being active, networking and asking people for advice. But at a 
time when the entire theatre sector faces increasingly testing financial times 
– the Department for Culture, Media and Sport has been asked, like all 
un-ringfenced government departments, to modela 40% cut 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/dcms-told-model-cuts-40> – it makes 
sense for energies to be put into developing not just individual artists but an 
entire ecology of them. Because they are the lifeblood of theatre and while 
they desperately need money, they also need kindness, generosity and 
organisations prepared to take a risk. Those things cost nothing.

The A Nation’s Theatre 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-developing-artists-and-audiences-are-we-getting-it-right-17427035733>
 event was run in association withGuardian Live 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/events>. Tickets are now on sale for A 
Nation’s Theatre: Edinburgh 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-edinburgh-the-impact-of-the-edinburgh-fringe-on-uk-theatre-and-beyond-17673564106>
 - The impact of the Edinburgh Fringe on UK theatre and beyond.
 