
Germany has proved its global footballing eminence by winning the 2014 World 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
, yet soccer is just one of many things Germans excel at. There's also art.

What is the most exciting show coming up in Britain this autumn? No question – 
it is the German artistAnselm Kiefer's exhibition at the Royal Academy 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/20>. Kiefer is one of the most 
imaginative, original and serious artists alive. History hangslike snow-laden 
fir branches <http://wessweb.info/wessimages/d/d7/Varus.jpg> in the haunted 
forest of his art. He is a magic realist whose way of seeing makes most of our 
feted British artists look silly.

In fact, England (or even the whole of Britain) would have little chance 
against Germany in an artistic World Cup. Against a team of modern German 
artists that could boast the likes of Kiefer,Gerhard Richter 
<http://www.dallascontemporary.org/artthink/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/Zwei-Candles.jpg>
,Joseph Beuys  <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/beuys-felt-suit-ar00092>, 
Sigmar Polke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/17/alibis-sigmar-polke-moma-exhibition-review>
, Max Ernst, Kurt Schwitters andOtto Dix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/14/first-world-war-german-art-otto-dix>
, who could weput up 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/display/tate-britain-displays>? 
Overpaid stars like Damien Hirst and Marc Quinn, plus a few old-timers such as 
Stanley Spencer (whose name actually sounds like a 1930s football player) and 
Henry Moore (surely a Leeds goalkeeper in the days of long shorts).

Look further back in history and the contrast hardens: who would we play 
against such German legends asAlbrecht Dürer, 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/18/D%C3%BCrer_Melancholia_I.jpg>
Lucas Cranach the Elder 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/lucas-cranach-the-elder-cupid-complaining-to-venus>
 andMatthias Grunewald 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/20/Mathis_Gothart_Gr%C3%BCnewald_030.jpg>
? Well, we hadall time ace 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/hans-holbein-the-younger> Hans 
Holbein ... oh, but wait a moment. He was German too.
 'German artists get on with the work': Gerhard Richter painting in his 
studio. Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
To be fair, ours is not the only national art team that shrinks before the 
mighty Germans. Even France can hardly match the enduring excellence of German 
art. While Parisian modernism paled after the first world war, the German 
dadaists 
<http://www.blackmagazin.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/artwork_-George-Grosz-1893%E2%80%931959-A-Victim-of-Society.-Remember-Uncle-August-the-Unfortunate-Inventor-1919.jpg>
 brought a vicious honesty into art in the Weimar age. Even though the French 
kicked off surrealism, the greatest surrealist art was made byErnst 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/ernst-celebes-t01988>. And Germany has 
been endlessly creative in art since 1960, too, as the Kiefer show will 
demonstrate. In short, there is every reason to see Germany as the greatest 
artistic nation in Europe.

The World Cup display of German talent is the moment for Britons to put aside 
the prejudices and scars left by 20th-century wars and wake up to the fact that 
Germany is not just modern Europe's economic powerhouse, but its cultural 
workshop, too, creating everything from beautiful football tosublime art 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b9/Caspar_David_Friedrich_-_Wanderer_above_the_sea_of_fog.jpg>
.

English art really is like English football, too commercial and too 
celebrity-fixated, without producing the results to justify the fuss made about 
it. Meanwhile, German artists, like their footballers, get on with work of true 
merit. It's time to acknowledge and learn from the genius of Germany.
 