
Asif Kapadia on Amy: ‘The drinking, the bulimia, the drugs – nobody stopped it’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/27/asif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc> 
In our image-saturated culture, where we sit drooling at our computer screens 
hungry for the latest bit of celebrity gossip, it’s no wonder that we are all 
fascinated by theAmy Winehouse <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/music/amywinehouse>
 story. Graphic and upsetting in equal measure, the narrative of the talented 
yet troubled artist who struggles to reconcile her artistic ambitions with 
society’s demand for celebrity satisfies our hunger on all counts. Just like a 
car crash, we want to look away but we simply can’t.

If you think I’m being disrespectful in reducing an upsetting story of 
self-destruction into a bite-sized bit of gossip then I would have to agree 
with you. Unfortunately, this seems to be the attitude of the new documentary 
Amy, which compiles personal footage and talking heads to canonise Winehouse. 
Critics have applauded it – Mark Kermode calling it a “sober, unsensational and 
overwhelmingly sad film 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/film/2015/jul/05/amy-winehouse-documentary-asif-kapadia-review>
” and Robbie Collin from The Daily Telegraph “piercingly sad and honourable film
 <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/film/amy/review/>” – seemingly to focus on the 
heart-wrenching nature of the story and empathise with the subject rather than 
the form.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-documentary-clip-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430992019308%2FKP_219162_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%3A%20Asif%20Kapadia's%20documentary%20on%20Amy%20Winehouse%20%E2%80%93%20exclusive%20clip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-documentary-clip-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%3A%20Asif%20Kapadia%27s%20documentary%20on%20Amy%20Winehouse%20%E2%80%93%20exclusive%20clip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-documentary-clip-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430992019308%2FKP_219162_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Amy: Asif Kapadia’s documentary on Amy Winehouse 
Crucially, all the critics seem to overlook the film’s exploitative lens: a 
lens that lingers on intimate images of Winehouse gaunt and high, or on the 
shocking footage of her body being removed from her Camden home in a body bag. 
One that leers at her bulimia-wrecked form or even more questionably, uses 
paparazzi footage in the same breath as explaining how being hounded by the 
press drove her closer to breaking point. The documentary lacks a voice, 
supplementing this void with a tabloid-esque scrapbook timeline transposed to 
screen. Using personal footage and amateurishly inscribing her lyrics across 
the stage as she sings them, it is reminiscent of a fan-made YouTube video. The 
documentary seems to lack any moral control, instead stacking one image of a 
drunken Winehouse on top of another, gradually effacing its own credibility.

The reluctance to call out the film for being tragedy porn misplaces the 
sensitivity we should feel when dealing with the Winehouse story. I’m unsure 
why the reviews fail to address it: probably as a result of conflating respect 
for Winehouse with respect for the film. In fact, I think the inverse should be 
true here – anyone who wishes to be considerate of the posthumous star and her 
family should strongly question the film. Indeed, how can anyone familiar with 
the story feel comfortable watching footage of her in such vulnerable 
condition? It is footage that contributes nothing aesthetically or narratively 
to the film, working only to accentuate the shock factor.

Amy review – a harrowing account of Winehouse's tragic destiny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/amy-winehouse-review-documentary> 
Amy poses important questions about the way we memorialise artists, and 
indeed, whethergender plays a part 
<http://pitchfork.com/thepitch/808-amy-winehouse-kurt-cobain-and-the-gendering-of-martyrdom/>
 in the way we remember them, or even deal with them when they’re alive. Part 
of me would have felt better consuming something that gave the graphic imagery 
a value, though this in itself is not watertight ethically. Why is it 
acceptable to show images of Winehouse slurring her lyrics on stage high or 
drunk or both, under the guise of art?

The truth is, I felt no artistic catharsis to justify the images I saw. 
Instead, I was left feeling uncomfortable, ashamed that I’d been complicit in 
the tabloid culture that in part pushed Winehouse into exactly the darkness 
that the film attempted to document.
 