
When Trayvon Martin was shot to death by an overzealous neighborhood watchman 
in 2012, no one knew much about the American Legislative Exchange Council 
(Alec) and the kinds of laws they secretly push –including the now-infamous 
“stand-your-ground” laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/alec-funding-crisis-big-donors-trayvon-martin>
 that allow Americans to shoot first and ask questions later.

It was a devastating wakeup call – but Alec and its corporate lobbyists and 
state legislators, who advance lawsthat benefit corporations at the public’s 
expense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/06/conservative-group-alec-city-local-government>
, was exposed. Slowly, my colleagues and I in Congress have been chipping away 
at this secret cabal ever since.

When another unarmed black teenager was shot and killed this August in 
Ferguson, Missouri, most Americans – my colleagues in Congress included – knew 
nothing about the militarization of our local police forces. In the days that 
followed, of course,the world witnessed a shocking display 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/14/ferguson-cops-military-weapons-michael-brown-shooting-protests>
: peaceful protesters being met with equipment and tactics that we expect in 
Baghdad, not on Main Street. The already tense situation in Ferguson escalated
when cops climbed aboard heavily armored vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/14/ferguson-police-military-restraints-violence-weaponry-missouri>
, withmilitary-style weaponry 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/police-militarization-ferguson-2014-8>. 

Michael Brown’s death should have led to mourning and positive change; 
instead, the infantry came in.

Now that a grand jury has decided to not indict police officer Darren Wilson 
in Brown’s killing,the armored vehicles have returned to Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2014/nov/25/michael-brown-darren-wilson-ferguson-protests>
 but Congress is returning home for the holidays. It’s time for the debate to 
continue; it’s time to stop serving warrants with flash-bang grenades and 
meeting protest with military might.

In a fundamentally misguided effort to wage a war on drugs, the US Department 
of Defense has providedsome $5bn in surplus military-grade equipment 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/08/14/the-pentagon-gave-nearly-half-a-billion-dollars-of-military-gear-to-local-law-enforcement-last-year/>
 – often from overseas battlefields – to local police since the late 1990s. 
This so-called “1033 Program” has secretly helpedmilitarize our police forces 
over the last 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/26/pentagon-war-zone-main-street-america-militarized-police-forces>
.

Excess military equipment – such as Mine-Resistant Ambush Protected vehicles 
(MRAPs) and other weapons – get transferred to police departments, to 
communities large and small across the country, for free. The citizens of these 
communities too often have no idea their police department requested – and 
received – military gear from the Pentagon.

Increasingly, this equipment is being used for basic police activities such as 
serving warrants, patrolling streets and responding to peaceful protests.

While these military-grade weapons are much-needed by our armed forces in 
places like Iraq and Afghanistan,they are mostly ill-suited for use by local 
law enforcement 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2014/08/14/military-veterans-see-deeply-flawed-police-response-in-ferguson/>
, whose purpose is to protect American civilians – not turn American towns and 
cities into war zones.

Earlier this year, I spoke out about the militarization of police 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2014/03/10/america-police-military-weapons-column/5789445/>
. After the shooting in Ferguson, Iintroduced bipartisan legislation 
<http://hankjohnson.house.gov/press-release/reps-johnson-labrador-introduce-bill-de-militarize-police>
 that would rein in the 1033 program and stem the free flow of military-grade 
weaponry to local police who have little or no training or understanding of how 
or when to use it.

The Stop Militarizing Law Enforcement Act has 45 bipartisan cosponsors in the 
House. It would, among other things, require each recipient agency to account 
for all military grade equipment it receives, to ensure that the equipment 
received is not lost or sold.


This may shock your conscience, but the bill would end a statutory requirement 
that local law enforcementmust use the military gear they receive under the 
1033 program within a year – or forfeit it.

You read that right: Right now, local cops are required to use that free MRAP 
or grenade launcher. Right now, Congress is producing a perfect storm for 
police violence, not ending it. We owe that much to the lessons of Ferguson: 
Stop forcing the use of military weaponry on Main Street!

The 113th Congress may be coming to an end, but I’m working hard to educate my 
colleagues on both sides of the aisle. Expect more policy hearings on 
militarization in Washingtonsuch as the one I held two weeks ago 
<http://hankjohnson.house.gov/press-release/rep-hank-johnson-headlines-policy-hearing-police-militarization>
.

In the new year, I plan to reintroduce the Stop Militarizing Law Enforcement 
Act 
<http://hankjohnson.house.gov/press-release/reps-johnson-labrador-introduce-bill-de-militarize-police>
, and I will continue to build a bipartisan coalition to make these 
common-sense reforms a reality. I hope my colleagues on the House Armed 
Services Committee – and in the entire House – will agree, becausemost 
Americans think demilitarization of local law enforcement is a no-brainer 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/191271995/Reason-Rupe-December-2013-Poll>. Already 
more and more Americans are making their voices heard throughan online petition 
to raise awareness of this pressing issue <http://dontmilitarizemainstreet.com/>
.

In the meantime, I am writing a letter to the Department of Justice asking 
detailed questions so that we can better understand exactly how much training – 
if any – law enforcement agencies receive before they are enabled to deploy 
military-grade weapons, often by way of Swat teams which may not even be 
justified or necessary.

Because this isn’t just a Ferguson problem: In 2014 alone, there have been 34 
deaths resulting from Swat raids 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-watch/wp/2014/10/06/meet-59-year-old-david-hooks-the-latest-drug-raid-fatality/>
, and I’m concerned this number will continue to grow. I’m alarmed by cases of 
officers raiding the homes of civilians who are wrongly suspected of being 
involved in drug-related activity. I’m worried that RoboCop attitudes will 
infest local law enforcement when officers are handed the tools of war, free of 
charge.

Just this year, an 18-month-old baby was badly burned and disfigured when 
police dropped a flash-bang grenade in his crib during an early-morning drug 
raid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/jun/24/military-us-police-swat-teams-raids-aclu>
 in the small town of Cornelia, Georgia. Tonight, the MRAPs could reappear on 
the streets of Ferguson. And until Congress wakes up to real, systemic reform, 
I sadly wouldn’t be surprised at all to see another example – in some town 
somewhere else, where an MRAP never needed to be – simply because we continue 
to overlook the true value of local law enforcement.

 * Share your Ferguson solutions: No justice, no peace, what now? Join the 
conversation with#FergusonNext 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FergusonNext?f=realtime> and at FergusonNext.com 
<http://www.fergusonnext.com/>  