
Once again, religious fundamentalists in India are threatening to disrupt the 
Jaipur literature festival. <http://jaipurliteraturefestival.org/> The festival 
has grown over the years to be among the world's largest such gatherings, 
bringing together writers from all continents, and, more important, showcasing 
South Asian writing talent, including the rich and diverse universe of regional 
languages. The festival has not been without controversies. Last year,Salman 
Rushdie withdrew after he received credible death threats from a Muslim group. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/26/salman-rushdie-jaipur-literary-festival>

Five writers protested Rushdie's absence by reading out excerpts from The 
Satanic Verses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/22/i-quoted-satanic-verses-suport-rushdie>
. Politicians filed lawsuits against the organisers and four of the authors –
Jeet Thayil (whose novel,Narcopolis, was shortlisted last year for the Man 
Booker prize) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2012/oct/12/narcopolis-2012-booker-prize-video>
, Ruchir Joshi, Hari Kunzru and Amitava Kumar – and investigations are ongoing. 
On the last day of the festival, Muslim fundamentalists refused to let the 
organisers even telecast a conversation with Rushdie. On 21 January, a few 
self-described Muslim scholars asked the festival to disinvite the four this 
year. Of the four, Thayil is the only featured speaker. The organisers have 
held firm – he should attend.

In parallel, and in a pattern that's now increasingly, and dismayingly, 
predictable, the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, which is India's 
main opposition party, has warned Pakistani writers not to participate in this 
year's festival. Among those expected areMohammed Hanif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mohammed-hanif>, Nadeem Aslam 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/catalog/author/nadeem-aslam> (see the interview on page 
12),Jamil Ahmad <http://www.manasianliteraryprize.org/jamil-ahmad/>, Fehmida 
Riaz <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahmida_Riaz>and Musharraf Farooqi 
<http://www.manasianliteraryprize.org/musharraf-ali-farooqi/>. To their credit, 
the organisers have also refused to buckle under this threat. The BJP's demand 
is technically unrelated to the Muslim call, but it is in line with the 
fundamentalist Hindu aim, to stop all cultural and sporting contacts with 
Pakistan, because tensions along the "line of control" – the de facto border 
that separates Kashmir into parts controlled by India and Pakistan – 
have escalated. In a series of confusing events, both sides have accused the 
other of violating long-standing agreements by undertaking construction, 
firing, and beheading soldiers along the border.

Hindu activists succeeded in stopping two talented Pakistani theatre groups 
from staging plays of the late Saadat Hasan Manto 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2012/08/the-seer-of-pakistan.html>
, a Pakistani writer who grew up in pre-partition India and is regarded as one 
of the most poignant chroniclers of the partition of 1947. Activists also 
succeeded in gettingIndian Hockey League teams to drop Pakistani players 
<http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2013-01-14/top-stories/36353771_1_kashif-shah-mumbai-magicians-team-pakistani-players>
 they had acquired in the region's first professionally run hockey league. Now 
it is the turn of the Pakistani writers to bear the brunt of Hindu wrath.

This is deeply troublesome, given the vitiated state of relations between the 
neighbours who have fought four wars since independence. The party-wreckers 
seek to weaken the festival because it has become one of the few intellectual 
spaces in India where it is possible for Indian and Pakistani writers to 
interact meaningfully with one another and their readers. Much to the chagrin 
of the fundamentalists, Pakistani writers are popular inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, and attract a fond following.

Hindu apologists claim they are only reacting to Muslim intransigence, 
but that is preposterous. Intolerance cuts across all religions (as we have 
argued in our respective books,Offence: The Muslim Case and Offence: The Hindu 
Case(Seagull), outlining fundamentalist attacks on freedom of expression). 
What's peculiar in the Indian instance is the notion of competitive 
intolerance, due to which each side tries to outdo the other in demanding 
restrictions, narrowing the discourse. That's terrible for India, forPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and for literature.

Over the years, the Jaipur festival has earned the reputation of being an 
important destination on the global literary map. Any steps politicians 
and politically inclined groups take to stamp their authority on it diminishes 
the world. India and Pakistan may have legitimate grievances with each another, 
but a literary festival, like a stage or a hockey field, is no place to settle 
them – on the contrary, those spaces exist so that both countries can expand 
their views of each other beyond the rhetoric of politicians and generals.

Moreover, both Hindu and Muslim groups who want to keep authors away from 
Jaipur are hurting India's long tradition of intellectual freedom. It is for 
the organisers to remain firm in their resolve and stay on the path and stare 
back at their philistine critics. And it is for the Indian government to ensure 
that the festival takes place without any restrictions.

• Pakistan-born Kamila Shamsie and India-born Salil Tripathi are co-chairs of 
English PEN's Writers at Risk 
<http://www.englishpen.org/campaigns/international/> committee.
 