
It’s nearly end-of-year “listicle” season, and 2016 has offered plenty of 
fascinating archaeological discoveries - my favourite is theNeanderthal-made 
stalagmite construction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/neanderthals-built-mysterious-cave-structures-175000-years-ago>
, which truly deserves the epithet “mysterious”. But let’s look beyond the past 
12 months for a tale of hope amidst fear: the most important human origins 
discovery of the past three decades, and why it matters now more than ever.

Test-tubes, not trowels, have provided the greatest advances in prehistoric 
research in the past 30 years. The “Oldest X”, or “Earliest Y” isn’t our most 
important discovery, instead it’s the profound connectedness of humanity we’ve 
discovered through genetics. Everyone alive today is deeply and closely related:
we are more similar to each other than two groups of chimpanzees 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/03/120302101706.htm> separated only 
by a river. Even more important, most of our differences in genetic terms are 
found within populations, not between them.

Wartime shipwrecks are being illegally salvaged. Are we powerless to stop it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/20/can-anything-be-done-to-stop-the-vanishing-wwii-shipwrecks-of-java>
The explosion of DNA studies as it has become cheaper and easier has led to a 
seismic shift: a whole new class of questions are possible, that stone tools, 
no matter what new analytical techniques we invent, could never answer. We can 
now discernmultiple phases of dispersal  
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1040618213000244>from Africa,
probably beginning two million years ago 
<http://discovermagazine.com/2015/april/18-our-first-winter>. Population 
diversification and interaction was taking place throughout the Old World, over 
a colossal amount of time, with local trajectories leading to Neanderthals in 
Europe, Homo sapiens in Africa, yet others in Asia, all at the same time.

It’s dizzying stuff, and that’s before we take into account our own species’ 
scenic route <https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/origin-our-species>: over the last 1500 
centuries humans like us spread across mountain ranges, deserts and even seas, 
reaching the furthest stretches of the Old Worldbetween 55-50,000 years ago 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03122417.2014.11682025>. But these 
were not empty lands; all those pre-existing archaic populations were still 
there. In Chinaa “mystery” species 
<http://www.bbc.com/earth/story/20150122-is-this-a-new-species-of-human> shared 
the landscape with thefirst Homo sapiens migrants between 120-80 Ka 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2015/10/trove-teeth-cave-represents-oldest-modern-humans-china>
, whilethe first 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v538/n7624/full/nature18299.html> 
Australians 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v539/n7628/full/nature20125.html> have 
met the diminutive H. floresiensis en-route in Indonesia. And the old debates 
about Neanderthals and us may need to be reversed: their dominancemight have 
prevented Homo sapiens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/17/neanderthals-kept-early-homo-sapiens-out-of-europe>
 entering Europe until after 50,000 years ago.

Ancient genetics effectively provides a new wavelength of data, allowing us to 
scrutinise previously invisible details of those 5-6000 generations. Two cases 
illustrate the jaw-dropping impact this technique has had. Over the past six 
years Denisova cave, Altai, has repeatedly produced amazing findings: not only 
didNeanderthals 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v505/n7481/full/nature12886.html> and 
Homo sapiens live here at different times during a 100,000 year window, but a 
third population with deep non-African roots also existed.Identified purely 
through DNA analysis 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v468/n7327/full/nature09710.html> of bone 
fragments and teeth, we have no idea what these people looked like or exactly 
what their culture was. Yet these populations cannot have been truly alien to 
each other as genetics showsthree-way interbreeding 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v505/n7481/full/nature12886.html> between 
Denisovans, Neanderthals and Homo sapiens, atdifferent times 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v530/n7591/full/nature16544.html> and in 
differing amounts 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v514/n7523/full/nature13810.html>.

Just last year another astonishing result came out. We already knew that 
Neanderthals were ancestral to some modern populations, but in 2015one of a 
number of hybrid-looking fossils from eastern Europe was genetically tested 
<http://www.nature.com/news/early-european-may-have-had-neanderthal-great-great-grandparent-1.17534>
. That individual had a Neanderthal ancestor within just a few generations, an 
extremely unlikely result if interbreeding had been a rare occurrence.

As our ability to analyse DNA becomes more nuanced, we’re assembling an 
increasingly high resolution map of multiple interactions across time and 
space. The remnant archaic DNA in living people of just a few percent sounds 
tiny, but it represents thousands of individual unions, and children raised, 
rather than a few chance encounters.

Yet this fascinating record of unity is not helping people today to feel or 
act inclusively. A couple of weeks ago, following a bizarre tweet, I ended up 
down a rabbit-hole of modern white supremacist propaganda. Amidst a morass of 
racism, homophobia and paranoia, prehistory and human origins were repeatedly 
referred to. Just one example is the use of the so-calledSolutrean hypothesis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solutrean_hypothesis> to claim that America was 
first colonised by a European culture. This theory is genuinely debated by 
archaeologists, but it certainly does not support white supremacy.

The murky far right twists a broad range of modern archaeology for its 
propaganda. A few weeks ago, young men givingNazi salutes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
in Washington DC were claiming that evidence of cultural adaptations to 
different environments proves racist evolutionary theories. British far right 
groups are no different, claiming that the “British race” goes back to the 
Palaeolithic.

But racial “purity” has never been part of our story. 21st century genetics 
has unveiled a fractal landscape, where at every scale we find both diversity 
and relatedness. Stone tools are the collective dust of generations, but 
ancient DNA tunes us into the songs of families and individuals as well as the 
chorus of populations.

It’s easy for researchers to keep their studies aloof from the messy, wider 
world. But when we increasingly have tojustify our funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/29/war-against-humanities-at-britains-universities>
, archaeologists need to step up and show that discoveries about our remote 
past are vital in steering our future course. Despite paranoid far right claims 
about academia censoring history, andfears of a “post fact” era 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/24/opinion/campaign-stops/the-age-of-post-truth-politics.html>
 drivingonline radicalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/alt-right-manosphere-mainstream-politics-breitbart>
, the existence of curiosity about, rather than indifference to, our past 
offers a way to open minds. If we hold our own expertise in any regard, this 
goes beyond outreach or science communication. We have a duty to amplify the 
research we dedicate our lives to, and ensure there is more real information 
than fake facts.

Our deep history as a species has a lot in common with us as individuals: it’s 
scattered with innovations that fluoresced and faded like supernovas, 
accidental explorations that trail-blazed thenbacktracked across entire 
continents 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v505/n7481/full/nature12736.html>, and 
myriad couplings under night skies. It’s time that prehistory came out of the 
shadows on the cave wall, and reclaims our global heritage as one that 
emphasises unifying love and trust over divisive fear and hate.
 