
In one respect Antony Worrall Thompson's snaffling of low-value goods from 
Tesco 
<http://www.express.co.uk/posts/view/294670/Antony-Worrall-Thompson-Cheese-bread-onions-why-why-why-did-I-take-them->
 was bang on trend: the celebrity chef also nicked cheese.

"I have been Edam fool," was the Sun's front-page headline, amid much 
conjecture about the disaffected middle-classes chasing thrills, and luxury 
items that they can supposedly no longer afford.US statistics 
<http://globalretailtheftbarometer.com/pdf/GRTB-2011-summary.pdf> show 
shoplifting is on the rise 
<http://articles.nydailynews.com/2011-11-29/news/30456534_1_shoplifters-hot-toys-career-criminals 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2050841/Cheese-shoplifted-commodity-This-recession-clearly-beginning-grate-.html#ixzz1j3eOjTdt>
 with austerity. And cheese was last year found to bethe most pilfered food in 
the world <http://www.retailresearch.org/grtb_currentsurvey.php>.
 Cheese: easily concealed by shoplifters. Photograph: Mark Weiss/Getty Images 
Cheese – and raw meat in the US – is stolen at a much higher rate than other 
foods, according toGlobal Retail Theft Barometer and Checkpoint Systems 
<http://globalretailtheftbarometer.com/high.html>. "The reasons why are 
reasonably clear, including high demand, easy 'disposal' by thieves and small, 
mobile formats that make it easy to conceal," say the US consultants in a2011 
report <http://globalretailtheftbarometer.com/pdf/GRTB-2011-summary.pdf> about 
what the industry euphemistically calls "shrink".

While some of what the criminologist Ron Clarke termed Craved items 
(Concealable, Removable, Available, Valuable, Enjoyable and Disposable), such 
as razor blades, DVDs and bottles of spirits are protected with security tags, 
supermarket cheese is rarely given the same protection, according to Lorraine 
Gamman,director of the Design Against Crime Research Centre 
<http://www.designagainstcrime.com/about-us/team/#core-staff>.

She points out how cheese conforms to the Craved acronym: widely enjoyed, easy 
to conceal and kept in fridges rather than shelves that are subject to more 
extensive surveillance.

So how did Worrall Thompson shoplift cheese? Not caerphilly enough, as the 
tweeted jokes cruelly suggested.
 