
You’d never guess, from the public face the Democratic party presents, that 
atheists are a loyal and increasingly important constituency.

At the Democratic National Convention last week, God and religion were front 
and center. Clergy members gave fiery addresses. Hillary Clinton avowed her 
Methodist faith, while her running mate, Tim Kaine, spoke about his work as a 
Catholic missionary in Honduras. Almost every speaker ended with the rote and 
obligatory “God bless America”.

The official 2016 Democratic party platform 
<https://www.demconvention.com/platform/> isn’t any more encouraging. Arguably 
the most inclusive in the party’s history, it prominently mentions racial 
minorities, the LGBT community, the disabled and many other marginalized 
groups. But in spite of all this inclusion, it somehow couldn’t find the space 
to nod to the millions of Americans who hold no religious faith. Instead, it 
singles out “people of faith and religious organizations” for praise, and 
emphasizes helping people to achieve their “God-given” potential.

Several atheist groups voiced frustration 
<http://www.bustle.com/articles/174960-the-dnc-platform-is-ultra-inclusive-this-year-unless-youre-a-member-of-this-demographic>
 that nonbelievers weren’t acknowledged at the DNC. Most dispiriting of all, we 
saw in hacked emails that a DNC official suggested attacking Bernie Sanders as 
an atheist, although that suggestion never went anywhere and the party later 
repudiated it.

Atheists could be forgiven for feeling snubbed this election season. This, 
even though there areas many secular Americans as there are white evangelical 
Americans 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2013/06/there-are-now-as-many-nonreligious-americans-as-evangelicals/>
, and “no religion” is now themost common affiliation of registered voters 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/07/14/the-non-religious-are-now-the-countrys-largest-religious-voting-bloc/>
, surpassing Catholics, evangelicals and mainline Protestants.

And we vote Democratic by huge margins. In 2012, the nonreligious vote put 
Barack Obama over the top 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/itsallpolitics/2012/12/09/166753248/add-this-group-to-obamas-winning-coalition-religiously-unaffiliated>
 in swing states like Ohio, Virginia and Florida. You would think that basic 
political tactics and electoral self-interest, if nothing else, would lead 
Democratic officials to do more to speak up for and celebrate this major and 
important part of their coalition.

That doesn’t seem likely to happen anytime soon, but we atheist Democrats 
still have reason to be optimistic about our party. Even if we are neglected in 
official rhetoric in favor of ostentatious piety, there’s little sign that 
religious conservatism has had any influence on thesubstance of the party’s 
principles. Much to the contrary, the 2016 Democratic platform isboldly, 
unapologetically liberal 
<http://religionnews.com/2016/07/25/dnc-platform-plenty-for-religious-progressives-to-love/>
.

It’s unambiguously supportive of marriage equality and LGBT rights and opposes 
the freedom-to-discriminate laws passed by some red states. It’s fiercely 
pro-women’s-rights and pro-choice, with none of the “religious liberty” 
loopholes that the Christian right has loudly demanded. It’s a welcome change 
to see a major party stake out a truly progressive stance on these issues, 
without all the hedging and equivocation that used to typify the party rhetoric 
in a misguided attempt to appease religious conservatives.

Plus, when all the other candidates or parties are spreading vaccine 
misinformation or sowing doubts about climate change, the Democrats alone are 
declaring that they “believe in science 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/hillary-clinton-declares-i-believe-in-science/>
” and calling for “ambitious” public support for research and clean energy. All 
these are priorities that nonbelievers support by huge majorities. Groups like 
the Secular Coalition for America have even gotten state parties toadopt their 
policy language 
<https://www.secular.org/news/texas-democrats-adopt-secular-policy-resolutions-party-platform>
.

It would be nice if the Democrats’ rhetoric would catch up with the reality, 
but we can’t expect change to come overnight. Both parties, and Americans in 
general, have a long tradition of equating patriotism with religious faith – 
whether it’s adding “In God We Trust” to money or appending “under God” to the 
originally secular Pledge of Allegiance – and politicians are clearly reluctant 
to break with this precedent. We can and should press for more inclusive 
language and more fearless secularism, but that would be a huge change and, 
realistically, will only happen gradually.

Even so, we atheists would appreciate it if the party would acknowledge 
nonbelievers a little more often. It would be nice if they’d recognize us as 
patriotic Americans who contribute to this country and deserve equal rights. 
However, I care more about whether the party represents my interests in 
concrete ways and fights for principles I value. On that score, I’m encouraged 
to see theDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> making 
strides, even if their word choice from the lectern lags behind.
 