
It's silly to get upset about awards ceremonies, we all know that. Every 
award, from the Turner prize to the Oscars, is just the result of four or five 
people getting together in a room, eating curly sandwiches, disagreeing with 
each other about something, and then agreeing. If a different group of people 
were in that room, the award would go to someone else. Possibly if you had 
differentsandwiches, the award would go to someone else. Awards are not 
entirely haphazard, but getting wound up about them is as clever as shouting at 
your horoscope.

So why did this year's Sony Radio Academy awards make me, and many others, so 
cross?"The year of the lad", it was deemed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/may/09/sony-radio-awards-ronnie-wood?intcmp=239>
, with TalkSport winning station of the year, 5 Live'sFighting Talk 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0070hvs> bagging a gold and Absolute's 
celeb-jocks Ronnie Wood and Frank Skinner also winning big. Host Chris Evans 
displayed his familiar "chivalry" (canany woman feel comfortable when a man 
bangs on about how much he fancies her, to her face, in front of an audience?). 
Jenni Murray and Annie Nightingale won special awards: well deserved, but 
outside regular categories. And lots of great women got up on stage: Sophie 
Ellis-Bextor, Kirsty Wark, Mariella Frostrup, Moira Stuart. Unfortunately, they 
were there to hand over gongs, to men.

'When I first approached Radio 1 about being a DJ [in the late 1960s], it was 
an all-male enclave. I asked why that was and was told, in all seriousness: 
"DJs are husband substitutes." Things have changed considerably since then. 
Hopefully, in the future everyone with talent and dedication to music 
broadcasting will get a chance to give it a go'Annie Nightingale, DJ, Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 1, Thursday evenings

Was this any laddier than usual? Sadly, no. There was more of what we might 
call saloon bar banter, but actually, the Sonys are always pretty much the 
same; and that's what really irritated. That, and the fact that while women 
form just over half of radio listeners, they don't formanything like half of 
programme makers, or presenters.

Anyway, I made mention of my feelings in my radio column and Maria Williams 
got in touch. A respected executive producer who's worked at Radio 1 andWoman's 
Hour, she said she was thinking of forming a group for women in audio. Would I 
like to be involved? I wasn't sure. Feminism sits easy, but I'm not much of a 
joiner-in. I was persuaded when she pointed out that radio – lovely, lovely 
radio, your friend in the kitchen, in the car – doesn't have an organisation 
looking out for women's interests, such asWomen in Film and TV 
<http://www.wftv.org.uk/wftv/>, or Women in Advertising and Communications. To 
be honest, I was shocked by that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7U6HKIKuyZU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7U6HKIKuyZU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7U6HKIKuyZU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
But now – ta-da! – radio does. Williams gathered together more radio ladies, 
we held a few meetings, and the result is Sound Women.Sound Women 
<http://soundwomen.co.uk/> will soft-launch at annual industry conference the 
Radio festival <http://www.radioacademy.org/events/radio-festival-2011/> this 
week. We've made a promotionalfilm <http://soundwomen.co.uk/> and have a 
website. More importantly, Skillset,the skills council for the creative 
industries <http://www.skillset.org/>, has gathered together existing research 
on women in UK radio into a report, which we're also launching on Tuesday; and 
we've set up a mentoring scheme for women in radio, to be run by the BBC. On 
our to-do list is creating a network of contacts, so that employers and 
conference organisers in radio can easily track down brilliant females; funding 
more targeted research; and possibly, eventually, an annual glitzy do.

'I've got the best job in the world! The Today programme has a healthy mix of 
men and women behind the scenes, but when you listen, you don't always hear 
that. Today recognises that as a problem. SoundWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> is clearly an organisation 
that is trying to help work through such dilemmas'Sarah Montague, presenter, 
Radio 4's Today programme

Early on, we approached more than 200 women in the industry to see if Sound 
Women seemed on their wavelength (a radio joke, there). The likes of Sarah 
Montague, Lisa Snowdon, Zoe Ball, Margherita Taylor, Gemma Cairney,Victoria 
Derbyshire <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/victoria-derbyshire>, 
Angie Greaves, Annie Mac, Annie Nightingale, Lauren Laverne, Edith Bowman and 
many more said yes. All said they loved radio, and they loved their job, but 
that the medium still felt male-dominated. And you only have to look at the 
roster at stations as varied as 1Xtra, Absolute, Capital and Magic to see that 
they're right. Most presenters – way over half of those on air – are men. 
Presenters can be hard to shed a tear over (they're the successful ones, after 
all) but some of the statistics are stark. Magic 105.4's Angie Greaves is one 
of a handful of women who presents a drive-time show on her own in London. Of 
BBC local radio breakfast shows, 82% are hosted by a lone man. Just one is 
presented by a solo woman.

Perhaps it's unfair to pick on the BBC, which works harder than most 
organisations to make sure women are fairly represented, but, with that last 
stat, it's interesting to wonder why. Do listeners just want to hear male 
voices? Do women not want to work on breakfast shows? Do controllers find 
females a pain to employ?

The reason may not just be sexism. The recession has meant cutbacks, and two 
co-presenters are more expensive than one. And if the least experienced 
presenter is dumped, it's the woman that goes, as almost every breakfast show 
sticks to the older man/younger woman cliche. After all, the remaining man can 
banter with the travel lady, or weather girl, can't he?

'I don't wake up with headphones on. I wake up with my husband and my kids at 
home, and I try to bring that to my presenting. It's always baffled me why the 
majority of listeners to radio are women but they're a minority of presenters'
Angie Greaves, DJ, Magic 105.4, weekday afternoons

Behind the scenes, there's the familiar scene of women being mostly employed 
in "other occupations, including HR, finance, IT and secretarial/admin" and 
hardly at all in anything techie (just 1% are editors). This may change, as a 
new generation of computer babies move in. But at the moment, women – not just 
presenters – are dropping out of the industry after the age of 35, and only 16% 
of those who don't are living with dependent children. Radio, it seems, isn't a 
flexible enough working environment for mothers. This fallout means that the 
further up radio's management structure you look, the fewer women there are. At 
board level, they make up just 17%, far fewer than in TV.

But then, radio is very different from television, and not just as an 
employer. Its commercial sector is harder pressed than, for instance, BSkyB. 
Its digital evolution has been bumpy and is still far from perfect. It's 
underrated as a creative medium (no one gets agitated about radio plays in the 
way they do aboutDownton).

And… so what? We audio buffs know that radio, when it's good, is the most 
intimate of all media. Presenters feel as though they're our friends; we take 
schedule changes to heart; we feel possessive about it, in a way we never do 
about TV. So to discover that radio doesn't really like us, merely because of 
our gender: well, that's personal too.

Radio reaches an astonishing number of people. In this country, we all listen 
to the radio at some point during the week. Young and old, men and women. So it 
would be nice if all of us were represented. It wouldn't stop some people (me) 
getting annoyed at ceremonies. But it might mean that the sandwiches were 
organised by someone else.

Fi Glover: 'The pay imbalance is just extraordinary. On average, women earn 
£2,200 less'
 Fi Glover, BBC journalist and presenter. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the 
Guardian 
A former BBC trainee, Fi Glover (above), 41, cut her teeth in local radio, 
winning a Sony award for her GLR breakfast show before moving to 5 Live. From 
2007, she presented Radio 4'sSaturday Live programme but stood down earlier 
this year. Most recently, she has presentedGenerations Apart, also on Radio 4.

A former BBC trainee, Glover, 41, cut her teeth in local radio, winning a Sony 
award for her GLR breakfast show before moving to 5 Live. From 2007, she 
presented Radio 4's Saturday Live programme in a slot previously hosted by John 
Peel, but stood down earlier this year. Most recently, she has presented 
Generations Apart, also on Radio 4.

My personal experiences in broadcasting have actually been pretty good: I had 
my own show aged 26. But one of the reasons I'm on the board of Sound Women is 
that I've seen an awful lot of gender inequality in broadcasting, which 
audiences probably do not realise still exists.

The pay imbalance, for example, is just extraordinary. On average, women earn 
£2,200 less per year than their male counterparts. I have never felt in a 
newsroom, a production room or a studio where women are doing less work, or are 
less able to do it, than men, so that's absurd.

In my youth I certainly witnessed, and was part of, radio stations where there 
is a male drinking culture. That can be quite intimidating for young women. I 
have had many great nights in the pub after radio programmes – I'm no angel – 
but looking back on it, it was a very male environment, and I felt I had to ape 
that behaviour, even though sometimes I'd have liked to have walked away from 
it.

On the national BBC networks, mainly thanks to fantastic controllers, women 
are well represented on air. But in local radio it's appalling: only 2% of all 
breakfast shows are presented by a solo woman. That is rubbish. I don't really 
understand what's happened over the past 20 years because when I started out, 
there were a lot of women working as reporters and producers. If you don't get 
those women presenting on local radio, learning the craft, how are they going 
to make it to national radio?

Also, if you look at how many women work in the broadcasting industry, there's 
this strange drop-off halfway through their careers. What troubles me is not 
that women might leave for a while, it's if they never manage to get back in. 
That needs a bit of investigating. Radio should be an industry where part-time 
workers flourish. There is something going wrong with that structure if it 
can't accommodate people who also have other responsibilities.

I speak as a 41-year-old mum of two who has just given up a prime-time show to 
spend more time with my kids. I really hope that I can go back to radio in a 
couple of years, and would find it heartbreaking if I couldn't, but I take that 
chance, as many women do.

Interview by Gemma Kappala-Ramsamy
 