
Richard Lester, the director who brought the Beatles to the big screen, has 
revealed his determination to capture the Liverpudlian soul of the band in his 
filmA Hard Day's Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ag8_cfmjdD4&feature=youtu.be>, made in the 
months before the group became internationally famous.

"It had to come from Liverpool," said the 82-year-old this weekend, before the 
London premiere of adigitally-restored version 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=B83DCBA8-4AF8-4B98-BFDC-F963962AFB19&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=EF0950B6-A640-461A-87C7-8E3E2B2F7372>
 of his influential film, first released 50 years ago at the height of 
Beatlemania in Britain.

Lester, who is widely credited with inventing the music video, as well as 
bringing a surreal brand of British humour to the cinema, told theObserver that 
he saw the band members change after their pivotal first visit to America and
appearance on theEd Sullivan Show in February 1964 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=It3Cctk6BRs>. "When they came back from 
America, I didn't notice that much difference at first," he said. "It was a 
gradual process, and there were other reasons for it than just international 
fame, pharmaceutically speaking. But there was just a gradual sense they were 
developing, musically, as people and in their confidence."

Lester, who went on to make Help! with the Beatles, then the Three Musketeer 
films and the hit Superman films of the 1980s, said he had wantedA Hard Day's 
Night to capture the essence of the band's natural wit, so he chose Merseyside 
screenwriter Alun Owen to write the film. "We had all started working on this 
fictionalised documentary about them before they went out to have their 
watershed moment on American television."

John Lennon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnlennon>, the director said, 
remains one of "two or three people to have shaped my character", adding: "John 
did not suffer fools gladly, and I probably fell into that category. He always 
wanted to skewer any pomposity around him, and there can't be any more pompous 
person on a film set than the director. But I could take all his criticism."

Paul McCartney was more difficult to handle because he was so enthusiastic, 
recalled Lester. "He tried harder than he should have." Ringo, who has a key 
solo sequence in the film, proved himself more than capable of projecting his 
sympathetic persona for Lester's camera, but it wasGeorge Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgeharrison> who was the easiest to 
direct. "George was the most effective actor. He attempted less, but he always 
hit it in the middle, so I knew what I would be getting."

When it came to sticking to the script, the Beatles were professional, Lester 
said. "They left all of that to us. They would have complained bitterly if they 
thought it was wrong, I think, or if they felt we didn't have their interests 
at heart, but I did my best to show on screen what had impressed me so much 
about them â€“ to recreate their "all for one and one for all" attitude."

Lester said the group functioned like "a four-headed hydra" and did not trust 
people easily. "But they always had the ability, if they found someone they 
thought they could trust, to let them get on and do it for them. I was blessed 
with being one of those people for a while. And George Martin was certainly 
one, and Brian Epstein too. But with me they soon felt they could control 
things on their own instead. And when that time comes, you just say: 'Thank you 
very much, it was a lovely ride.'"

Although Lester was to go on to make the film How I Won the War 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KEZFe94xpkk> with Lennon in 1967, he 
remembered noticing "the change in them all" afterHelp!. "They had earned the 
right to do it their way."

The director won the prestigious job with the band because of his television 
work with the Goons. After meeting Peter Sellers and Spike Milligan when he 
arrived in London, he had been entrusted to bring their successfulradio comedy 
to ITV <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Idiot_Weekly,_Price_2d>. As a young 
man in his native America, Lester had been a fan of the silent film star Buster 
Keaton and of the television comedian Ernie Kovacs, so he believes his interest 
in anarchic comedy was as much due to an American tradition as to a ready 
understanding of quirky British humour.

Lester's lasting impression of the Beatles, he said, was of their generosity 
to each other. "They had that great thing of gangs that when one of them was 
stoned, or hungover, they automatically protected them. The others would do the 
jokes and then the next night it would work in a different way. I watched it a 
great deal and there was a sense of "us against the world". As an only child 
myself, I found it absolutely staggering."
 