
Although a traditional CV and cover letter combination is still the standard 
job application method, the growing popularity and clout of social networks has 
made a supplementary,online presence 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/guide-to-online-cvs> vital in many industries. 
With potential employers and recruiters going online to scout for (or verify) 
talent, savvy job seekers have bolstered their applications through developing 
LinkedIn profiles and an active social media presence.

But other trends are beginning to emerge (as reported by the Careers Thought 
Leaders Consortium <http://www.careerthoughtleaders.com/whitepaper/>) for job 
seekers who want to differentiate themselves even further in a crowded job 
market. Two of these trends are creating different types of CVs for different 
audiences, and developing "leave-behinds" for meetings and interviews.

How many different types of CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> 
should you have?

A range of formats (such as one-page bios or mobile-friendly CVs) are 
effective in different situations. For example, a beautifully designed and 
formatted paper CV can make a great impact if handed over in a meeting with 
prospective employers, recruiters and networking contacts.

But if your CV is going to be viewed on a screen, ease and speed of reading 
becomes more important. Make sure your CV can be read clearly by using 
headlines and bold font to draw your reader's eyes down the screen. Be as 
concise as possible: use very short sentences and abbreviations, and leave out 
words such as 'I' or 'we' and unnecessary adjectives.

On the other hand, if you're applying via a job board, you'll need to keyword 
your CV to avoid it being filtered out. Don't sacrifice readability in the 
process: stuffing your CV with keywords to the point that it reads awkwardly 
might get it binned when it's read by human eyes.

A shorter (one-page, for example) CV or biography can be more appropriate than 
a "full" CV at industry events such as conferences when you might want to give 
only a brief overview of your career and stand-out achievements – especially if 
your CV is then going to be passed on to another person. For careers or job 
fairs, where a standard A4-size CV risks being lost among all the others, an 
effective alternative is a business card with your name, contact details and 
job title on the front, and key skills or a career achievement on the back.

Don't neglect your online presence. A personal blog or online portfolio is a 
good way to provide extra information about your background and links to your 
work. Platforms such as LinkedIn also allow you to embed information via 
slideshare presentations, files, and multimedia content.

Video presentations can also work well – if professionally done. Meet The Real 
Me <http://www.meettherealme.co.uk/> allows you to upload short video clips 
alongside your CV.

Leave-behinds

Help potential employers remember you after an interview or meeting. In a Q&A 
on branding 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/branding-careers?commentpage=all#start-of-comments>
, Shaun Westgatesuggests 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/15132177> creating an 
engaging PDF to showcase your work.

Emily Carrick gives an example 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/15132531> of a mini CV 
designed as a perforated booklet. "It was such a simple idea but felt more 
special and 'premium' than a A4 piece of paper," she says.

If that's not your style, you can also leave behind a simple portfolio, such 
as a page of project highlights, orany other material you prepared 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/career-job-seeking-standing-out> for the 
interview, such as a presentation or consultancy-type proposal.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 