
March 2015 saw the splashy beginning of Zoolander 2’s relentless buzz-building 
campaign as starsBen Stiller and Owen Wilson appeared in character at Paris 
fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/10/zoolander-returns-ben-stiller-and-luke-wilson-bring-blue-steel-to-paris-fashion-week>
. It was covered extensively by both film and fashion press, and kicked off an 
exhaustively well-sustained assault on anyone with an internet connection all 
the way through to its release in February this year.

Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie review – absolutely fatuous, thank God
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-review-absolutely-fatuous-thank-god>
Given the first film’s cult following and how surprisingly well it stands up 
to repeat viewings 15 years later, expectations were high for another quotable 
combination of well-measured silliness and sharp fashion-industry satire. But 
it was a washout, a tiresome and aggressively unfunny mis-step, the sort of 
lazy rehash that makes you question whether you even liked the original.

Five months later and we have another couple of fictional fashionistas dusted 
off and resurrected for those blessed with a good memory.Absolutely Fabulous: 
The Movie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie> 
brings back Patsy and Edina, originally on the BBC in 1992, and catapults them 
to the big screen following in the footsteps of The Inbetweeners and, most 
recently, Dad’s Army. The campaign was far more modest, cheap even, and the 
buzz was notably less feverish, not helped by the film’s first press screening 
taking place just two days before its release.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&media=>
Absolutely Fabulous: the Movie: Edina and Patsy in big screen debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/27/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Yet, against all odds, it works. The comic timing of Jennifer Saunders and 
Joanna Lumley has been curiously underutilised in the years since Ab Fab went 
off air, and the film, wonderfully short, scrappy and snappy at 91 minutes, 
gives them free rein to remind us of their skills. It’s imperfect (the plot is 
almost an afterthought), but it’s far funnier than it should be, given how 
unnecessary it all seemed on paper.

The pleasure of watching the pair drunkenly embarrass themselves across Europe 
far outweighs watching Stiller and Wilson uncover new levels of idiocy in a 
glossier transatlantic trip. Both films posit their characters as relics, 
struggling to keep up with an industry changed irrevocably by social media and 
populated with those far younger and sharper. But Patsy and Edina were always 
in this mode, obsessed with remaining current, aware of their sell-by date and 
failing, miserably, to succeed in the fashion world. Alternately, Derek and 
Hansel were, bizarrely and comically, at the top of their game in the first 
film, only to be brought back to earth in the sequel.

Has Ben Stiller become Derek Zoolander?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/feb/10/has-ben-stiller-become-derek-zoolander>
When your film receives a green light on the basis of fan service, you’d be 
wise to make sure your most loyal fans are well-served. By changing the 
dynamic, we lost the joke of seeing two middle-aged, above-average-looking men 
touted as gorgeous supermodels and instead in the sequel, they ended up playing 
fortysomething dads failing to comprehend selfie culture. Ab Fab doesn’t 
deviate from its original setup, it merely exaggerates it, an understandable 
decision given the increased gap between the leads and the youthful culture 
they hope to dominate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fwhy-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-is-a-better-fashion-satire-than-zoolander-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff821ab6c8df9264a1594e1eeebaa845240fdbc18%2F0_135_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie%20is%20a%20better%20fashion%20satire%20than%20Zoolander%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fwhy-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-is-a-better-fashion-satire-than-zoolander-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie%20is%20a%20better%20fashion%20satire%20than%20Zoolander%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fwhy-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-is-a-better-fashion-satire-than-zoolander-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff821ab6c8df9264a1594e1eeebaa845240fdbc18%2F0_135_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Joanna Lumley and Jennifer Saunders at the Absolutely Fabulous world premiere 
Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
There’s also a confidence in the characters in Ab Fab thanks to a wealth of 
material, 39 episodes in fact, that have proved their longevity and also the 
actors’ skill at playing them. Zoolander 2 proved that Derek and Hansel have 
less mileage, and despite both films having largely nonsensical and haphazard 
plots, only Patsy and Edina manage to rise above.

The poor box office of Stiller’s sequel was a sign that the fandom wasn’t as 
strong as Paramount had anticipated. On the same budget of $50m, similarly 
belated comedy follow-up Anchorman 2 managed to make almost four times that, 
while Zoolander 2 just about broke even. Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie won’t 
play to huge numbers abroad, but surprisingly strong reviews and a fanbase 
that’s stuck around since the early 90s might make it a modest domestic 
success. By never pretending to be in style, Patsy and Edina have remained more 
fashionable than Derek and Hansel could have ever dreamed of.
 