
I made clear on Monday why I have rejected press regulation as underpinned by 
the royal charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/oct/31/why-i-reject-press-regulation-through-a-royal-charter>
.

This prompted the Press Gazette’s editor, Dominic Ponsford, to ask whether I 
thought the Guardianshould therefore sign up to the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation <https://twitter.com/Domponsford/status/793067339071778816> (Ipso).

Good question. Straightforward answer: I do not. I have no clue about the 
Guardian’s intentions and have not consulted the editor,Katharine Viner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katharine-viner>, about the matter. This is 
my view.

To make my case I need to sketch in a little history, beginning with the fact 
that David Cameron set up the Leveson inquiry because of theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> phone-hacking scandal.*

I wrote many, many times about the NoW being a rogue paper that employed rogue 
journalists (such asMazher Mahmood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mazher-mahmood>, now in jail for conspiring 
to pervert the course of justice). Other staff members went to jail, including 
a former editor, Andy Coulson, for conspiracy to intercept voicemails.

That title was owned by News Corporation, headed by Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>. His rival publishers were 
outraged that their journalism should be the subject of a judicial inquiry 
because of the NoW’s bad behaviour.

But their anger was not directed at Murdoch. Instead, they turned on Cameron 
and on Leveson. I couldn’t stomach that. They had circled their wagons around a 
man and a company that had brought popular journalism into disgrace over a 
prolonged period.

It was hardly a surprise. When the News of the World intruded into the privacy 
ofMax Mosley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley> in 2008, one of its 
greatest defenders was the Daily Mail. (Editors have since had cause to rue the 
day they made an enemy of that man).

Then, during the Leveson inquiry, it was the Mail that sought to assassinate 
the character of one of the inquiry’s advisers, Sir David Bell,with pages and 
pages of innuendo dressed up as a nonsensical conspiracy. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2233684/Leveson-Inquiry-Disturbing-questions-key-adviser-Sir-David-Bell.html>

Down the years, the Mail and Murdoch’s red-top, the Sun, attacked the Guardian 
for daring to hold them, and the rest of the media, to account.

When those publishers got together in an attempt to mitigate the Leveson 
inquiry’s likely effects, the Guardian was rightly sceptical about their remedy.

They decided to ditch the Press Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> in favour of a sort of PCC Mark2. 
Despite Sir Brian Leveson making clear his antagonism towards their initiative, 
which was skilfully piloted by key national press executives, they were not to 
be diverted.

It meant that in the days and weeks after the publication of the Leveson report
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-report>, there was a chasm between 
publishers and Hacked Off, the body representing press victims, who sought a 
more radical solution.

At that point, Cameron’s government failed to show appropriate leadership by 
failing to bring the two sides together to forge an agreement. Each side went 
its own way. Then the government agreed a deal with one side (Hacked Off) and 
turned a blind eye to what the publishers were doing.

It was a giant political error and, in retrospect, an insult to the 
painstaking work of Leveson and his team. After coming up with the idea of a 
royal charter, and devising an incentive to persuade (meaning compel) 
publishers to seek official charter approval, the government washed its hands 
of the matter.

Did it hope all would come right in the end? Did it imagine that publishers 
would buckle? Did it hope that no regulator would emerge to satisfy the charter 
conditions?

Now, four years on from Leveson, the latest culture secretary, Karen Bradley, 
finds herself trying to sort out Cameron’s mess. Hernew consultation process  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/01/leveson-bradley-questions-value-of-press-police-relations-inquiry>
is all about seeking to avoid the consequences of the government’s failure to 
broker regulation that everyone could appreciate.

So I was implacably against Ipso from its formation and, in January 2014, went 
so far as to characterise it asthe PCC with bells and whistles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/08/ipso-press-regulator-pcc-bells-whistles>
. And everyone knows the bells will never ring and the whistles never be blown.

Despite its supporters continually claiming that it has the capability to levy 
fines, the chances of it happening are remote. Similarly, no-one believes its 
whistleblowing hotline, enabling journalists to report unethical demands by 
their editors, will ever be used.

Worse, it has not really come to terms with the necessity of offering low-cost 
arbitration, having taken until July this yearto introduce only a pilot scheme 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/arbitration/>. Similarly, the standards arm has hardly 
been pro-active.

I accept that journalists, whether at national or local level, take great care 
to consult the editors’ code of practice (as inherited from the PCC). It is a 
beneficial part of the Leveson aftershock.

I also concede that Ipso has bedded in better than I initially expected. Its 
entertaining and clever chairman,Sir Alan Moses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses>, has made a good fist of the 
job (although he would be seen as exhibiting greater independence from the 
newspapers he regulates if only he could resist attacking Hacked Off, no matter 
how much they annoy him).

Furthermore, I admire the sincerity with which Ipso’s staff deal with 
complainants. I am aware of members of the public having been grateful for the 
help they have received.

For the most part, it works well and uncontroversially, especially for 
regional and local titles. But at moments when it is called on to adjudicate on 
high-profile complaints involving national papers, its independence is called 
into question.

And there lies the central problem for Ipso: public perception. Whatever the 
reality, how can it persuade people that it is entirely free from interference 
from publishing paymasters, especially those responsible for having created the 
crisis that led to theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>?

You may well argue that the Guardian’s self-regulation system, administered by 
an independent readers’ editor with an appeals panel back-up, is similarly 
compromised. But the Guardian did not indulge in the practices that resulted in 
Leveson.

*At the time, it was not generally known that similar voicemail interception 
had been regularly carried out by staff on the Daily Mirror, Sunday Miror and 
Sunday People.
 