
According to Alfred Harmsworth 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/BUharmsworth.htm>, founder of both the 
Daily Mirror and Daily Mail, news is "what somebody somewhere wants to 
suppress; the rest is advertising". By this yardstick, Harmsworth would have 
agreed that the WikiLeaksAfghan war diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/25/afghanistan-war-logs-military-leaks>
 is a remarkable news event. But he would have had no truck with the argument 
mounted by WikiLeaks' founder Julian Assange that the move represents a triumph 
of transparency over interpretation. "Hard news catches readers," Harmworth 
believed. "Features hold them."

He knew what he was talking about. Without the analyses, comment and 
explanation provided by experienced journalists, the documents would have sat 
on theWikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> website 
attracting the interest only of those with a fervid interest in the conflict. 
The White House and the Pentagon would have barely stirred.

On an infinitesimally smaller scale, I have my own example of the limits of 
data journalism. I'm taking part in a project calledHelp Me Investigate 
<http://helpmeinvestigate.com/>, a collaborative venture that aims to pursue 
matters of public interest, and I recently visited the town hall in Brighton to 
inspect the spending records of parliamentary candidates in theBrighton 
Pavilion constituency 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/election2010/results/constituency/a69.stm> 
during the general election. The council staff were perfectly accommodating and 
pleasant. In other areas of the country, it has been reported, there is some 
confusion over what we are allowed to see and to record. I think this stems 
from the fact that, up to now, very little interest has been paid to this 
frankly less than incendiary topic.

A desk was found for me in a quiet corner, I was handed a ringbinder bulging 
with paperwork and I was left to get on with it. Did I uncover evidence of 
cupidity among our would-be legislators? Sadly, no. It will come as no surprise 
to learn that the main candidates spent their largest sums on flyers, leaflets, 
posters and other bumf destined for the landfill. Unless you are the type to be 
shocked by the fact that Green candidate (and election winner) Caroline Lucas 
received a non-cash donation from thePolitical Animal Lobby 
<http://www.networkforanimals.org/PAL.php> or that Tory candidate Charlotte 
Vere forked out £41 for Google Ads, there is nothing in these documents to stir 
the blood.

That's neither here nor there, say the proponents of data journalism. The fact 
that the expenses forms start life as Excel documents means it shouldn't be 
beyond the wit of our electoral services offices to store the results 
electronically and upload them onto a site where anybody with sufficient 
curiosity can inspect them. Well, yes. But don't imagine that this exercise in 
itself will be sufficient to hold our lawmakers to account. The Apathetic 
Tendency is probably the largest single political group in the country and its 
members have every right to expect the more engaged among us to do their donkey 
work for them.

To take an example from the world of finance and business: for a small fee you 
can sign up toCompanies House Direct 
<http://www.companieshouse.gov.uk/toolsToHelp/chdDirectInfo.shtml> and fill 
your days inspecting the accounts of businesses registered in the United 
Kingdom. Will you do this? Of course not – you have a life. Quite sensibly, you 
will leave it to financial journalists to sift a company's data, compare 
results and call up the financial director to ask impertinent questions.

Data sites are proliferating and many of them are excellent – UN Data 
<http://data.un.org/>, data.gov <http://data.gov.uk/>, and the Guardian's own 
Datablog <https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2009/mar/10/blogpost1> 
among them. But consider this: Julian Assange did not upload the classified 
documents and wait for the world to beat a path to his door. He entered into a 
partnership with media outlets he knew would give prominence to the material. 
Like Alfred Harmsworth before him, Assange understands that without the oxygen 
of publicity, data dies unread.
 