
Google's intervention to stop Acer launching a smartphone with search rival 
Alibaba's "forked" version ofAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> is reportedly causing tension 
with Taiwanese and Chinese handset makers - and might even threaten Android's 
unity in China.

The search giant lobbied Acer last week to halt its scheduled press showing of 
a new smartphone aimed at the Chinese market, pointing out that membership of 
theOpen Handset Alliance <http://www.openhandsetalliance.com/oha_members.html> 
- the group of companies forming the device, carrier, semiconductor, software 
and "commercialisation" sides of the Android ecosystem - forbids Acer from 
making devices that offer forked, or incompatible, versions of Android.

Acer cancelled the launch abruptly, leaving Alibaba fuming publicly at 
Google's actions. John Spelich, Alibaba's international spokesman,told CNet 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-1035_3-57513651-94/alibaba-google-just-plain-wrong-about-our-os/>
 that "Aliyun is different" from Android - dismissingremarks aimed at him by 
Andy Rubin <https://plus.google.com/112599748506977857728/posts/hRcCi5xgayg>, 
head of Google's mobile efforts including Android, saying to Spelich that 
"Aliyun uses the Android runtime, framework and tools. And your app store 
contains Android apps (including pirated Google apps)."

The upshot has been that Acer has withdrawn from the partnership with Alibaba, 
at least for now. But Digitimes, the Taiwan-based news site for the IT supply 
chain there and in China,says 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20120917PD216.html> there is unease on the part 
of a number of ODMs (original device manufacturers) who would otherwise aim to 
benefit from making both Android-compatible and forked versions - the latter 
principally aimed at China.

Some of the China-based smartphone vendors which are building Android-based 
phone and have adopted locally developed application might shift to forked 
versions because "the loss from forgoing Android may be small," the site 
reports, quoting its supply chain sources.

With Alibaba, one of the biggest web destinations in China, seeking to build 
its own fork of Android - rather as Amazon has done in the US -Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> might face a challenge from its 
own creation in the market where it needs unity.

Rubin indicated some of Google's concern, saying in a Google+ post 
<https://plus.google.com/112599748506977857728/posts/H7eC4uaJ12Q> that "We were 
surprised to read Alibaba Group's chief strategy officer Zeng Ming's quote 'We 
want to be the Android of China' when in fact the Aliyun OS incorporates the 
Android runtime and was apparently derived from Android."

But Ming's meaning is clear - that Alibaba wants to dominate the Chinese 
smartphone OS landscape just as Android does the world's.

However for Google, it is important to keep Android unified around the OHA in 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> so that it can continue to 
serve Android handsets - whose activations are now running at over a miilion 
per day - with search results and, in time, garner advertising revenue. If 
Android splits into multiple competing varieties which do not all use Google 
for search, maps and other key functions, Google will have lost out.

The next paragraph of the Digitimes report carries a heavier warning to the 
company about the risks inherent in the market: "Among China-based smartphone 
vendors, only Huawei Technologies, ZTE, Lenovo, Haier, Oppo and a few others 
joined the Open Handset Alliance, the sources noted. As China is the largest 
smartphone market around the world, Google had better pay attention to [the] 
response from web service operators, smartphone vendors and consumers, the 
sources pointed out."

The challenge for Google is that China is the fastest-growing smartphone 
market in the world, and expected to be the world's largest - ahead of the US - 
this year.

Android powers a huge number of the smartphones sold there: according to 
figures provided to the Guardian by research company Gartner, in the second 
quarter of this year 80% of the smartphones sold in China ran Android - or 
30.6m out of 38.2m, going by the shipment figures provided for the same quarter 
by another research company, Analysys International. That means that Android is 
far more used in China than broadly around the world, where it made up 65% of 
shipments in the second quarter according to Gartner.

Analysys said that China's smartphone business more than doubled year-on-year, 
up 127%, and increased sequentially by 22.5% - much faster than the world 
market, where year-on-year growth was only 43%.

Forecasts suggest that the Chinese smartphone market will total 430m in 2012 
<http://www.cbronline.com/news/china-to-sell-430-million-smartphones-in-2012-130712>
, led by Samsung, with Apple in second place - but with Android handsets from 
Samsung, Huawei, ZTE, Lenovo, Coolpad, Motorola, Xiaomi, HTC and dozens of 
others making up most of the balance.

While Google is benefiting enormously in China from the dominance of Samsung, 
and the presence of other OHA members, a growing number of "white box" handset 
makers are focussed almost entirely on the Chinese market - and so will 
gravitate to the biggest app markets, even if they are not completely 
compatible with Google's Android. There are already multiple Android app 
markets in China, with varying degrees of legitimacy.

Alibaba's efforts with Aliyun, which exploits the open nature of Android to 
build its own OS version and app store - in the same way as Amazon has - point 
to the power that strong local brand names have.

The attraction of those app markets could as they grow drive a wedge between 
OHA members keeping world compatibility, and the local players with a keener 
focus on their home market, which will soon be the world's biggest.

In time, that could mean that the emergence of a successful China-only app 
market based around a fork of Android that might be so enticing - and lucrative 
- that it would pull one or more of the OHA members to abandon the group, or at 
least weaken its unity - as nearly happened withAcer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer>.

In his Google+ post, Rubin lobbed some barbed comments at Alibaba, apparently 
warning it off courting Acer: "if you want to benefit from the Android 
ecosystem, then make the choice to be compatible. It's easy, free, and we'll 
even help you out. But if you don't want to be compatible, then don't expect 
help from OHA members that are all working to support and build a unified 
Android ecosystem."
 