
Being an author is the most desirable job in Britain, according to a YouGov 
poll <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/17/author-uk-dream-job>. Not 
so,responded Tim Lott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/20/tim-lott-life-as-an-author>. 
Writers are driven by demons, he wrote, the work is unimaginably hard – as 
complex as brain surgery, apparently – not to mention solitary, and fraught 
with rejection and professional envy. The meagre consolation is the “small 
legacy” we may leave behind us when we go. It’s a dismal prospect - enough to 
have us weeping over our keyboards, while taking nips from a bottle of absinthe.

You think writing’s a dream job? It’s more like a horror film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/20/tim-lott-life-as-an-author> 
Sorry Tim, but we have to disagree. That’s not how it is for every writer.

Take those demons, for example. For some of us, writing is not a matter of 
being driven by them, but casting them out. Difficult family relationships? 
Sort them out on the page. Horrible love life? Write it again with a better 
ending. Feeling your age? Slip into the skin of a 20 year old and go off and 
have some fictional adventures. It’s not a horrible, exhausting struggle; it’s 
therapeutic.

And then there are the rejections and the self-criticism. It’s true that we 
should strive to do our very best. We all know when we haven’t managed it, when 
something needs rewriting or tearing up altogether. But getting a rejection 
slip isn’t the worst thing in the world. In business, there are bosses who have 
the red pen out ready to slash it across your carefully drafted marketing plan 
before they’ve even read it, without any regard for your feelings at all. 
Neither of us has ever had an editor or agent quite as heartless as that, and 
we cherish the whole process of working out problems with ours.

Maybe male writers have bigger problems with those hoary issues of ego and 
insecurity because other male writers, like Orwell, have told them they ought 
to. And maybe they think that if they don’t, they’re not “proper” writers. 
There’s delectable irony in Jenny Offill’s bittersweet portrait of a 
writer-mother inDept. of Speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/14/dept-speculation-review-jenny-offill>
, gloriously intensified by the brilliance of the novel she inhabits:

My plan was to never get married. I was going to be an art monster instead. 
Women almost never become art monsters because art monsters only concern 
themselves with art, never mundane things. Nabokov didn’t even fold his own 
umbrella. Vera licked his stamps for him.”

Funnily enough, you can write and lick stamps. For a woman with children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, there can be few other jobs 
which so easily accommodate school pick-up times, assemblies announced at the 
last minute, and chickenpox. There’s no commute, and no disgruntled boss 
looking at the clock if you try to knock off early. You certainly learn not to 
be precious when working with children around. At times you might feel you’re 
only a good-enough mother, but there’s a consolation in knowing the neglected 
(or at times enslaved – young eyes make very sharp proofreaders) offspring are 
learning how the world of work can operate. They see exactly what you do all 
day. They go into a bookshop, and look! There it is on the shelf.

Writing is also the perfect job for the autodidact. Some people pay thousands 
of pounds to enrol on an MA. If you’re a writer and something grabs your 
attention – whether it’s a German ghost-story, a civil war, a Parisian massacre 
nobody seems to know about, or an electric sex doctor – then get the book 
commissioned, and you can actually be paid to slope off to libraries. There’s a 
rare pleasure to be had in steeping yourself in other worlds and times. And 
when the fictional landscape takes over your nights as well as your days, it 
becomes quite literally a dream job.

As for the solitude, and the backbiting, we’ve both had the opposite 
experience, and this collaboration is the evidence. There’s certainly a 
thriving community of children’s writers out there, many of whom – like us – 
have never met in person, but are happy to exchange ideas, support and 
nourishment. In his piece earlier this week, Tim Lott quotes John Dos Passos: 
“Writers are like fleas, they get very little nourishment from one another.” We 
think worker bees are closer to the truth - with perhaps the odd queen or drone 
thrown in.

• Helen Grant’s books include Carnegie medal-nominated novels The Glass Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/04/teenage-fiction-for-easter-review>
 andWish Me Dead 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/286833/>
• Lydia Syson’s A World Between Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/26/a-world-between-us-lydia-syson-review>
 was longlisted for the Guardian children’s fiction prize
 