
Spoiler alert: this article does its best to explain the plot of Terminator 
Genisys <https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-genesis>. 


Terminator Genisys is not doing terribly well at the box office. Some say this 
is because the insanely complicated plot is too hard to follow; some fault the 
disastrous decision to cast the bland, useless Jai Courtney as Kyle Reese, the 
putative saviour of mankind; some fault the curious decision to cast the perky 
but not especially intimidating Emilia Clark in the role made famous by the 
fierce Linda Hamilton; and some say the series has simply run out of gas. All 
of these criticisms have merit – the film is just plain awful. The question is: 
could this catastrophe have been avoided? The answer is yes. If only the 
producers had used time travel for the benefit of mankind.

Terminator: Genisys review – Arnie's back, in a cynical franchisebot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/terminator-genisys-review-arnies-back-in-a-cynical-franchisebot>
First, a quick autopsy of the $150m cadaver. Movies involving time travel are 
always hard to follow, but Terminator Genisys is demented. In the year 2029, a 
group of feisty rebels finally defeat Skynet, the evil artificial-intelligence 
system that took over the world 12 years earlier. But because Skynet has 
already sent a murderous cyborg back to the year 1984 to kill Sarah Connor, 
mother of the rebel leader John Connor, so that he never gets born, Connor is 
forced to send his best friend Kyle back to that same year to keep his mother 
from being murdered by the original Terminator – the young, glacial, impossibly 
rippedArnold Schwarzenegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger>. Otherwise there will 
be no one to lead the feisty rebels in the year 2029. Clear?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-emilia-clarke-terminator-genisys-video-interviews&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435670097132%2FKP_335939_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%20on%20Terminator%20Genisys%3A%20'Sometimes%20older%20is%20better'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-emilia-clarke-terminator-genisys-video-interviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%20on%20Terminator%20Genisys%3A%20%27Sometimes%20older%20is%20better%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-emilia-clarke-terminator-genisys-video-interviews&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435670097132%2FKP_335939_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Arnold Schwarzenegger on Terminator: Genisys: ‘I could do this movie easy’ 
 There are complications. By the time the Terminator from the future arrives 
in 1984 – or an alternate version of that memorably Orwellian year – the 
original Terminator has switched sides and become a loving, avuncular old coot 
nicknamed Pops. This means that the two Terminators must now face off against 
one another, even though one of them is old enough to have been voted out of 
the California governor’s office after a single term.

 Sarah, still only a teen, wants to travel forward in time to the year 1997 to 
prevent Skynet from ever getting started, but Reese says no, let’s go to the 
year 2017 instead, because then we can disable Skynet forever on the day it is 
supposed to go online and become fully operational. This will give Kyle a 
chance to spend some inter-chronal quality time with himself as a young boy. 
1997, by the way, is the year the original Sarah Connor died of leukaemia, 
somewhere between Terminator 2 and Terminator 3, so technically speaking she is 
already dead. But thanks to the vagaries of time travel, nobody ever stays dead 
for long.

 As if things aren’t messy enough, a scant 12 years in the future, trouble is 
a-brewing. John Connor, the rebel leader, has become an evil Terminator 
himself. He thereupon travels back to 2014 to get a job with the booming 
startup Skynet, help them get Genisys up and running, and then wait three years 
for his mother to blow through town so that he can kill her, even though she 
already died of leukaemia 20 years previously. He does this not because he 
doesn’t like her, but to prevent her from marrying his best friend Kyle, who is 
bland and useless. In other words, Kyle is not only his best friend, but his 
father. Be that as it may, John will not hesitate to engage in deliberate 
self-orphanising. Otherwise, Kyle might go back to 1984 and warn Pops that the 
people of California are secretly planning to vote him out of office.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fterminator-genisys-disaster-could-be-averted-arnold-schwarzenegger-time-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437146104312%2F432fe3d5-11f1-4f9a-a897-e90720df609a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Terminator%20Genisys%20is%20a%20disaster%20that%20could%20be%20averted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fterminator-genisys-disaster-could-be-averted-arnold-schwarzenegger-time-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Terminator%20Genisys%20is%20a%20disaster%20that%20could%20be%20averted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fterminator-genisys-disaster-could-be-averted-arnold-schwarzenegger-time-travel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437146104312%2F432fe3d5-11f1-4f9a-a897-e90720df609a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bland and useless … Jason Clarke and Jai Courtney. Photograph: 
Allstar/Paramount Pictures 
 Without a degree in quantum mechanics, nobody could possibly follow this 
byzantinely moronic plot. But people with degrees in quantum mechanics don’t go 
to see movies like Terminator Genisys, which means there is no one on the face 
of the earth who can possibly explain what is going on in this ridiculous 
movie. Not even the screenwriter, who was probably just winging it.

 This is where time travel comes in. Knowing that Terminator Genisys is a dud, 
the producers need to build themselves a time machine and go back to the past 
to reshoot it. By travelling back to 2013, when the film was green-lighted, 
they could fire the charisma-challenged Jai Courtney and replace him in the 
role of Kyle Reese with someone the moviegoing public finds more attractive. 
Chris Pratt would do nicely, as would Chris Pine, or Chris Walken or even Chris 
O’Dowd. If they wanted to be really daring, they could travel even farther back 
in time and get Chris Farley to play the role before he died.


Arnold Schwarzenegger will be back as the Terminator - but should he be?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/27/week-in-geek-schwarzenegger-terminator-genesis>
 For similar reasons, they should dump Emilia Clarke and replace her with the 
tough-as-nails Jennifer Lawrence. Lawrence spent part of 2014 making Serena, a 
movie so bad no one even wants to admit that it exists. By travelling back in 
time and showing Lawrence footage of the stupefyingly crummy Serena, and maybe 
even a few horrifying movie reviews or blogposts by powerful, prescient amateur 
critics, they could probably persuade her to ditch that film and join the cast 
of Terminator Genisys instead. Bradley Cooper, who co-stars with Lawrence in 
Serena, might also be willing to take the role of John Connor. Or the role of 
Kyle Reese. The possibilities are endless.

One other thought presents itself: if the original Terminator had bypassed 
1984 and traveled all the way back to 1491 to kill Christopher Columbus, the US 
would never have come into being, and Schwarzenegger would have just stayed in 
his native Austria, and perhaps made a German-language version ofThe Terminator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-terminator>, which would have been just 
fine with everybody because nobody in the rest of the world ever sees Austrian 
movies. And if Columbus had never made it to America, I would never have been 
born, so I wouldn’t have had to watch Terminator Salvation in London’s 
Leicester Square at midnight surrounded by a bunch of thugs, much less 
Terminator Genisys in an empty theatre in New York’s suburbs.

 Damn. If only life were like the movies.
 