
As tens of thousands of people gathered in central Moscow for an “anti-Maidan” 
rally recently, the Russian public was being asked to swallow an unsavoury 
pill: apparently the country is in such danger that its own security forces are 
not enough to prevent a coup d’etat. Instead it must rely on ateam of ageing 
B-list celebrities 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/russian-celebs-senator-to-launch-anti-maidan-movement/514447.html>
 to help fight off the west.

The rally, centred around opposition to the protests in Kiev a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/19/ukrainian-protesters-clash-riot-police-kiev>
 that toppled former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych, was organised by a
movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/15/group-anti-maidan-defend-russia-pro-democracy-protesters>
 apparently set up to prevent “colour revolutions” in Russia. But this raises 
the question of what a rag-tag crew of cultural figures could possibly do that 
the FSB, the foreign intelligence agency and numerous other security agencies 
couldn’t? Isn’t it the job of these bodies to preserve stability? Why bother 
having counterintelligence agents if you rely on minor celebrities to do your 
job for you?

Russia already has the framework in place to prevent a popular uprising, even 
one from within. This became clear in thecase against Kremlin critic Alexei 
Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/17/jail-alexei-navalny-10-years-russian-prosecutors>
, who was not only sidelined from the opposition movement thanks to a flurry of 
criminal cases launched against him, but also discredited in the eyes of many 
activists. Theimprisonment of his brother, Oleg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/30/alexei-navalny-sentenced-thousands-expected-protest-putin>
, last December also acted as a powerful deterrent for other activists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Frussia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424887707204%2F2135167c-23a5-443f-8b08-913a57cb386f-2060x1317.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Moscow's%20anti-Maidan%20protesters%20are%20putting%20on%20elaborate%20pretence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Frussia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Moscow%27s%20anti-Maidan%20protesters%20are%20putting%20on%20elaborate%20pretence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Frussia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424887707204%2F2135167c-23a5-443f-8b08-913a57cb386f-2060x1317.jpeg>
 Pro-Kremlin activists from Russia’s Anti-Maidan movement march with a sign 
which says ‘Obama kills Donbass’. Photograph: Sasha Mordovets/Getty Images 
Why bother having counter-intelligence agents if you rely on minor celebrities 
to do your job for you?

But thinking critically about these issues is missing the point. This 
Anti-Maidan movement, spearheaded by Senator Dmitry Sablin, Night Wolves biker 
gang leader Alexander “the Surgeon” Zaldostanov, and mixed martial arts fighter 
Yulia Berezikova, could clearly never prevent any uprisings inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.


That simply is not within Anti-Maidan’s competencies. But it can put on a 
flashy show to draw as many people as possible into its ranks in a bid to make 
fear of the outside world a mainstream preoccupation. It does not seek to 
prevent uprisings; it seeks to malign members of the opposition, create the 
impression that Russia is under siege from the west, and presentVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> as the only solution — all 
in one fell swoop.

Saturday’s rally was the first manifestation of all three. Posters vilifying 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> and opposition 
activists such as Navalny and Boris Nemtsov were in abundance, while pamphlets 
saying “Putin Won’t Allow Maidan in Russia” were handed out near metro stations.

Reports abounded of students being paid to attend and state workers being 
forced to participate — making it clear the organisers knew they had to provide 
an elaborate, sold-out show.

Many demonstrators were convinced that Russia’s government was at direct risk 
of being overthrown.

“We, the people, must fight for our country’s independence from America. That 
is why I came,” said Svetlana, who declined to give her surname. She said she 
also planned to attend an upcoming referendum for Russia’s “independence”.

Many demonstrators at the rally were convinced that Russia’s government was at 
direct risk of being overthrown

When asked who was in control if Russia was not currently independent, she 
said: “The US. Who else wrote our constitution when [Boris] Yeltsin was drunk? 
American ‘aides’. The same people working inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> now.”

Svetlana was not alone. Many other demonstrators said they believed that the 
US had not only been responsible for the bloodshed in Kiev a year ago but had 
also meticulously infiltrated Russia using members of the political opposition.

While conspiracy theories are nothing new, Anti-Maidan’s purpose is to make 
them the norm.

It’s no surprise that Moscow authorities sanctioned the rally — held in the 
very centre of the city — just as it’s no surprise that the protest was 
crawling with state television reporters.

Nor is it a surprise that for perhaps the first time in recent history Moscow 
police overestimated the turnout, putting attendance at 35,000. Many 
journalists put it in the range of 20,000 to 25,000.

If there are enough people congregated in one place shouting “fire!” one might 
actually start to feel the flames.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Frussia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424867474820%2F0e4adbe8-37b2-482b-a4c9-3cd64852ad9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Moscow's%20anti-Maidan%20protesters%20are%20putting%20on%20elaborate%20pretence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Frussia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Moscow%27s%20anti-Maidan%20protesters%20are%20putting%20on%20elaborate%20pretence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Frussia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424867474820%2F0e4adbe8-37b2-482b-a4c9-3cd64852ad9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An Anti-Maidan banner of the Russian president that reads “I support Putin”. 
Photograph: Maxim Zmeyev/Reuters 
And what better time than now, when Russia is stuck in the bowels of an 
economic crisis, to create a bogeyman for the people to stand united against? 
What better time than now, when ordinary Russians are starting to feel the
effects of inflation and rising food prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2014/dec/11/russia-oil-inflation-prices-putin>
?

These are precisely the sort of conditions that make a country ripe for 
popular protests — so what better way to nip them in the bud than by convincing 
the people that voicing discontent with the government would be playing right 
into the enemy’s hands?

Another rally was held over the weekend to mark the one-year anniversary of 
the uprising in Kiev. But that protest, held in Ukraine’s second-largest city 
Kharkiv on Sunday and attended by about 500 people, was not a show intended to 
manipulate public consciousness. It was not staged to direct the public’s rage 
at an abstract bogeyman.

That rally was tainted by very real bogeymen, as the relatives of three people 
killed by a bomb blast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/ukraine-and-pro-russia-rebels-swap-dozens-of-prisoners>
 during the march can confirm. Two policemen died at the scene, and a 
15-year-old teenager passed away later in hospital after the peaceful protest 
was interrupted by an explosion that Ukraine suspects was a terrorist attack. 
At least another 15 were wounded in the blast.
 