
Much like Bojack Horseman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/21/bojack-horseman-season-three-netflix>
 himself,Will Arnett 
<https://twitter.com/arnettwill?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 is finally back on top. AfterArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> made him a 
star, Arnett spent years trying to establish a follow-up. He wallowed in failed 
network sitcoms with names you probably won’t recognize such asRunning Wilde 
<http://www.tv.com/shows/running-wilde/>, Up All Night 
<http://www.tvguide.com/news/up-all-night-demise-1062227/> and The Millers 
<http://www.cbs.com/shows/the-millers/>. He had a few moments in the spotlight, 
like his Emmy-nominated guest-starring role in 30 Rock as Jack Donaghy’s 
arch-nemesis. But Arnett struggled to find another role that traded on his 
unique combination of macho confidence and wounded sensitivity that made him 
the standout of Arrested Development, a show that was composed almost entirely 
of standouts.

Is BoJack Horseman the saddest comedy show ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/21/bojack-horseman-season-three-netflix>
What exactly makes a successful Will Arnett performance? Let’s revisit what he 
brought to Gob Bluth. On paper, Gob could have been the least sympathetic 
character on the show. He was a failed magician who consistently undermined his 
younger brother’s efforts to save the family business with his ill-conceived 
schemes and general selfishness. But Arnett imbued him with real pathos. 
Arnett’s Gob is an egomaniac, but his boastfulness is only a cover for his deep 
feelings of inadequacy and insecurity. His parade of one-night stands displays 
both his need for and fear of real connection. He longs for validation and 
recognition by his colleagues in the Magicians’ Alliance, going to absurd 
lengths to prove his worth to them. He hires prostitutes but spends his hour 
crying to them about his failures. And every time his brother Michael offers 
him a small piece of kindness, Gob tramples on him. To do otherwise would be to 
acknowledge his vulnerability.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po&media=>
It has been a decade since Arrested Development was canceled (not counting its 
mostly forgotten revival on Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/feb/26/arrested-development-one-season-netflix>
), but Arnett’s rare ability to forge those distinct personal qualities into a 
compelling (and comedic) whole are now finally being utilized both on both the 
small and silver screens. The title character on Bojack Horseman, whose 
critically acclaimed third season premiered last week on Netflix, is a 
washed-up sitcom star who has masked his shame and humiliation over being 
famous for a subpar show with years of drinking, drugging and casual sex. Over 
the course of three seasons, Bojack gets in touch with those painful feelings. 
He emerges as a figure filled with pain and regret, and his celebrity-driven 
world is revealed as empty. Similarly, his role as Batman inThe Lego Movie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/dec/01/10-best-films-2014-the-lego-movie>
and its upcoming, Batman-centric sequel, the trailer of which premiered at 
Comic-Con over the weekend, subverts the seriousness of recent Batman 
iterations to reveal a pouty, emotionally stunted man-child who uses his 
superhero status to puff himself up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiMdQXYQ_MD8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiMdQXYQ_MD8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiMdQXYQ_MD8&media=>
To be fair, these roles aren’t outliers in his career. Arnett has never veered 
too far from these strengths. His characters in those mainstream sitcoms listed 
above weren’t so different from his recent, more successful ones. In Running 
Wilde, for example, he was the selfish son of an oil tycoon, which seems almost 
like a carbon copy of Gob Bluth. Those shows failed for reasons that had 
nothing to do with Arnett. In addition to being well suited to Arnett’s 
talents, Bojack and The Lego Movie are exceedingly well written and masterfully 
executed.

And yet maybe the reason that Arnett’s particular brand of boastful idiot is 
so popular right now isn’t just because he finally found some good writers. Pop 
culture has a tendency to produce heroes that reflect the public mood, whether 
it is through some sharp-minded writer’s intent or a more mysterious, 
subconscious process. Right now, we need to subvert and undermine the man who 
might be our next president, and Arnett is uniquely suited to do that.

Let me explain: Arrested Development is often perceived as a criticism of the 
Bush family 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mixed-media/2013/05/arrested-development-politics-bush-iraq-war-wmd>
. In addition to the pointed subplots about the Iraq war (especially in season 
three), the Bluth family was generally symbolic of the cronyism, entitlement 
and incompetence that defined the Bush administration and its corporate arms 
such as Enron. No one character embodied that entitlement more than Gob. Just 
like the older Bluth brother, George W Bush survived (for a while) on pure 
confidence and showmanship. Bush put up a “mission accomplished” sign when the 
Iraq war was far from over (which AD actually spoofed in one episode); Gob held 
a ribbon-cutting ceremony for a model home that had no structural foundation. 
Neither one ended well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fwill-arnett-trump-bojack-horseman-arrested-development%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ee77eb2150c4092df91ac1283ae06c3ab1eb5ed%2F0_0_5629_3840%2F5629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Will%20Arnett%20is%20the%20anti-Donald%20Trump%20that%20America%20needs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fwill-arnett-trump-bojack-horseman-arrested-development%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Will%20Arnett%20is%20the%20anti-Donald%20Trump%20that%20America%20needs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fwill-arnett-trump-bojack-horseman-arrested-development%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ee77eb2150c4092df91ac1283ae06c3ab1eb5ed%2F0_0_5629_3840%2F5629.jpg>
 Will Arnett with Lego Batman at Comic-Con. Photograph: Christy 
Radecic/Invision for Lego 
And so, with Bush out of the White House, maybe Arnett’s persona just wasn’t 
relevant for all those years. Cockiness didn’t need subverting, but in America, 
it’s never far away. Bojack and The Lego Movie franchise launched in 2014, when 
Trump was dropping hints about his impending presidential campaign. He had 
already spent months claiming Obama had been born in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-news-blog/2012/oct/24/donald-trump-barack-obama-records>
 and had been proven false. That didn’t stop him, and it wouldn’t have stopped 
Gob. Trump’s campaign is in fact doubling down on the brash cockiness that Bush 
pioneered in the early 21st century. We know his MO at this point: he lies and, 
when caught in a lie, refuses to admit it. He insults his enemies in the 
coarsest way possible, and he brags about having more money than he does.

But unlike Gob, Trump’s bluster works. While liberal Americans sit back and 
scoff at his juvenile, unpolished demeanor, he just keeps winning. And that’s 
why we need Will Arnett more than ever before. We need him to remind us – 
through Bojack and Batman – that underneath the boastfulness and flat-out 
cruelty is a weak, wounded man. Those who shout about their greatness are 
actually the ones least convinced of it.

To be perfectly clear, none of this is going to make a difference in the real 
world. Arnett is not going to swing this election. First of all, not enough 
people watch Bojack Horseman for his portrayal to have a big enough impact on 
the electorate, and The Lego Batman Movie doesn’t come out until next year, 
well after our next president is chosen. Finally, there’s no evidence that 
Arnett’s persona was designed with political intent. But sometimes, pop culture 
gives us the hero we need, even if it’s not the one we deserve. Americans may 
yet wake up on 9 November thinking they have made a huge mistake, but Arnett’s 
performances will still be there to subvert and poke holes in those symbols 
that, for better or worse, may come to define our political era.
 