
On 7 June 1926 a shabbily dressed old man was knocked down on a busy road in 
Barcelona. Assumed to be homeless, he was given second-rate medical treatment. 
Finally, as he lay dying in hospital, the great architectAntoni Gaudí 
<http://www.tagseoblog.com/images3/Antoni_Gaudi_1878.jpg> was recognised.

The manner of Gaudí's death encapsulated the mystery of a man who never quite 
seemed to fit his time. This is his birthday (he was born on 25 June 1852) and
he has been honoured by a Google Doodle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jun/25/antoni-gaudi-birthday-google-doodle>
. He is famous, but is he any more understood than he was in 1926?

For Gaudí is an anachronistic genius – a modernist giant who was addicted to 
the past. His buildings are at once futuristic and backward-looking. 
Fantastical intruders in their day, they now have a timeless quality that makes 
them profoundly pleasurable. Where other modern buildings proclaim their 
century proudly, his couldequally well come from medieval Africa or 
25th-century Mars 
<http://0.tqn.com/d/architecture/1/0/u/o/Pedrera000000788450.jpg>. He was 
mocked by Picasso for being old-fashioned, and by George Orwell for building 
modern monstrosities.

In fact Gaudí had a lot in common with the British critic John Ruskin 
<http://venice.umwblogs.org/files/2008/12/ruskin-41.jpg> whose book The Stones 
of Venice champions the idea that gothic architecture is more communally 
enriching than the ugly edifices of the commercial age. Gaudí's visionary 
buildings offer a utopian gothic alternative to the businesslike city around 
them. The most renowned are in Barcelona, decorating its streets like mad jewels
 <http://www.efi.int/files/images/casa-mila.jpg>.

Gaudí's most beautiful creation is the Casa Batllo 
<http://www.casabatllo.es/en/>. It has a drop-dead facade, a complex confection 
of skeletal columns framing wavy windows that do much more than connect house 
and street <http://0.tqn.com/d/architecture/1/0/s/o/CasaBatllo.jpg>. Passing 
through it feels like entering another realm. A good analogy is the overture of 
an opera by Wagner, for like a Wagnerian performance, the Casa Batllo is atotal 
work of art that absorbs and consumes you 
<http://www.apartmentbarcelona.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Casa-Batllo-Barcelona.jpg>
. The grandiose facade leads the visitor into another reality – and the 
interior lives up to that sense of wonder. Deep colours, organically orotund 
spaces, and sinuous wood carvings lead you from room to room as ifwandering 
through an undersea palace 
<http://www.soothbrush.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/10/casa-batllo-inside-3.jpg>.

The roof is a fairytale sculpture 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/cb/Casa_batllo_roof.jpg>, 
laden with mosaics. This enchanted realm high above the city is mirrored by the 
public spaces of Park Guell, where glitteringmosaic salamanders, multicoloured 
seats and subterranean terraces create a dream 
<http://us.123rf.com/400wm/400/400/yuriz/yuriz1109/yuriz110900004/10491202-mosaic-roof-fragment-from-famous-barcelona-landmark-park-guell-creation-of-modernism-architect-anton.jpg>
 that restores and liberates everyone who goes there.

Gaudí died alone but his art – including the still-unfinished Sagrada Familia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/apr/24/gaudi-sagrada-familia-rowan-moore>
, his attempt to recreatethe age of the cathedral 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathedral#Late_Middle_Ages:_monastic_and_secular_cathedrals>
 – is for all. He is shared and loved, as he deserves to be. His vision 
humanises the modern city.
 