
Officially, French troops in Ivory Coast are described by their government as 
"impartial forces". This is somewhat disingenuous. French combat helicopters 
played a decisive role in the runup to the arrest on Monday of the outgoing 
Ivorian president Laurent Gbagbo in his Abidjan official residence, and in the 
final victory of his rival,Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>.

This French "victory", as the pro-Sarkozy newspaper Le Figaro described it on 
Tuesday, is a rather unexpected twist for the president, who has been 
struggling to define anAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> policy 
ever since his election. However, it is not necessarily a sign that he has now 
settled upon a policy.

Nicolas Sarkozy hasn't spent much time dealing with sub-Saharan Africa in his 
almost four years in office, unlike his predecessors who have been nicknamed
Africains because of their deep involvement in the continent's affairs. He 
began his relations with francophone Africa on the wrong foot with a 
much-decriedDakar speech in 2007, in which he proclaimed that "the African man 
has not yet entered history" <http://www.standpointmag.co.uk/node/425/full>. 
This alienated African youth and clouded any positive message that the new 
French head of state might have wanted to project.

Sarkozy had a second chance on the continent with a speech in Cape Town, a 
year later, in which he announced the renegotiating of defence agreements with 
former colonies, including secret clauses that allowed interference in their 
domestic affairs. Proudly, he declared that he had not once ordered French 
troops to open fire on African soil. But French helicopters firing on the 
presidential residence in Abidjan have broken this promise, and raised serious 
questions about Sarkozy's policy.

Sarkozy has defended the actions of the French military in Abidjan over the 
last 10 days as sanctioned by a UN security council resolution that called for 
protection of civilian lives. He also justified the central role of French 
troops by pointing to the failure of the African Union and its regional 
grouping to step in and lead the way in removing Gbagbo from power.

Officially this had nothing to do with our not so distant history, when France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was the gendarme of its former 
colonies, appointing French officers at the heart of their armies and French 
advisers in key ministries, and plotting whenever French interests were at 
stake – all of it carried out unilaterally.

France's decisive action in Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> has helped speed the end of 
suffering for millions of people caught up fighting in Abidjan, and chase out a 
politician who refused to accept his defeat at the polls. But at the same time 
it brought back memories of French interference in its former colonies; it was 
a muscular move intended to support political change in a country.

The truth is that Sarkozy's Africa policy is in disarray. In recent years it 
has taken a back seat, as France's economy became more globalised and its 
European dream was still alive. For several months last year there was no 
ministry of co-operation in the French government, and no one seemed to care. 
There is still an "Africa desk" at the Elysée Palace, the French presidential 
office, but it is a far cry from the days ofJacques Foccart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jun/14/londonreviewofbooks> – De 
Gaulle's "Mr Africa" – who was pulling all the strings on the continent.

To his friends Sarkozy is a pragmatist – to those who dislike him, he is an 
opportunist. He plays every move as it comes. Three years ago, he played 
old-style realpolitik to back Gabon's Ali Bongo to succeed his late father,Omar 
Bongo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/09/obituary-omar-bongo> – one 
of the pillars of the incestuous world known as "Françafrique" – with French 
troops ready to step in if things turned sour. But this week, the French leader 
became the champion of African democracy by launching his troops in defence of 
an elected president – Ouattara.

Don't bet on France doing the same elsewhere in Africa. The activity in Ivory 
Coast is the result of a smart move by an opportunist leader, desperately 
looking for foreign policy successes after his government's disastrous 
management of the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions. The French-led effort to 
support the Libyan insurgency is another side of this effort.

Under Sarkozy, France's Africa policy will continue to be a mix of neglect, 
economic self-interest, and political expediency. And it will have no 
understanding of the rapid and deep demographic and cultural changes happening 
on the continent, nor any vision of a renovated role for France in its 
relations with its former colonies.
 