
Helen Lewis

 ‘The suffragettes should not be used as a reproach to modern feminists’

As political movements fade from living memory, they are pummelled and 
marshalled into neatness. At worst, they become a simple story of good versus 
evil, with all their agonised debates, bitter personal rivalries and thunderous 
schisms smoothed out into a easy narrative arc.

But history doesn’t feel like history when it is being made. As a novelist, 
Hilary Mantel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>’s greatest 
achievement has been to put the French revolution and Henry VIII’s break with 
Rome back into the present tense. She strips away the feeling of inertia from 
historical events; she makes us see her characters wavering over the road not 
travelled.

A century on from the suffragettes, we should try to do the same for them. 
There was nothing inevitable about women getting the vote when they did. It 
took Switzerland until 1971 to pass universal suffrage, and Saudi Arabia still 
hasn’t done so (although this year it graciously began to allow women to 
register to vote in municipal elections). There must have been many moments 
when the suffragettes felt dejected and downcast.

There is another temptation: to see their fight primarily through what it says 
about us. That can take the form of congratulations – only a century ago women 
couldn’t even vote! – or recriminations. Watching the new filmSuffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suffragette>, written by Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan> and directed by Sarah Gavron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/sep/07/suffragette-telluride-abi-morgan-sarah-gavron-video-interview>
, my first impulse was to feel sad that my generation has no single defining 
cause to rally round. If only we could stop arguing about shaving our legs and 
wearing the veil and lads’ mags andLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham> and – the list goes on – we 
could get some real work done, surely?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486012024%2F720aa324-25d4-4e96-b869-6151980d99c0-2060x1521.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486012024%2F720aa324-25d4-4e96-b869-6151980d99c0-2060x1521.jpeg>
 Carey Mulligan and Anne-Marie Duff in a scene fromSuffragette (2015). 
Photograph: LMK 
But that is the distorting mirror of history again. The suffragettes 
themselves were bitterly divided on several fronts. They fell out over whether 
all women should get the vote, or just those over 30 who owned property; the 
debate prompted theWomen’s Social and Political Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jun/19/christina-broom-portraits-suffragettes-in-pictures>
 to split from the nascent Labour party, which wanted truly universal suffrage, 
and led to a schism between Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughter Sylvia. There 
were further rows about the use of violence as a political tactic, and bitter 
struggles over whether the movement was dominated by middle-class women. (We 
should also resist the urge to see suffragism as an uncomplicatedly 
progressive, even leftwing, movement. After the first world war – during which 
many activists campaigned aggressively in favour of military action – Emmeline 
Pankhurst become alarmed by the rise of Bolshevism. She stood in Stepney in 
1927 as a Conservative candidate. Other suffragettes went even further right.
Mary Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/02/fateful-year-mark-bostridge-review>
, who slashed theRokeby Venus in the National Gallery, joined Oswald Mosley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oswald-mosley>’s British Union of Fascists.

In other words, the suffragettes should not be used as a reproach to modern 
feminists – a symbol of what could be done if women put aside their differences 
and worked towards a common goal. Instead, they are a reminder of how every 
revolutionary movement has to deal with personality clashes and internal 
contradictions. The best tribute we can pay to the suffragettes is to see them 
as human.

• Helen Lewis is deputy editor of the New Statesman.

Tessa Hadley

 ‘It is as if the suffragettes draw on some deep-hidden reservoir of female 
rage and wrong’

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> would have the vote 
now, wouldn’t they, without the suffragettes? Historians these days tend to 
attribute the eventual achievement of women’s suffrage to the significant role 
they played in the war economy, and to the longer, slower attrition of the 
constitutional suffragists, who didn’t engage in direct action. And then the 
slow tides of economic and social change, moving through the 20th century, 
brought so many more women into the workforce. It is impossible to imagine a 
Britain now in which those economically active, tax-paying women weren’t 
represented in our civic life.

The suffragettes seized our imagination and changed it, however, and that is a 
part of how politics and history work. And they couldn’t have had half their 
effect without photography. The records of violent confrontation are 
unforgettable:Ada Wright collapsed to the ground in her hat amid kicking 
policemen 
<http://www.counterfire.org/articles/75-our-history/7697-the-suffragettes-black-friday-and-the-two-types-of-window-smashing>
, or Sylvia Pankhurst feeble from force-feeding, or the terrible picture of 
Emily Davison tumbled under the hooves of the King’s horse. The Pankhursts in 
particular understood the power of the image; their portraits seem to have been 
passed around, collected and adored like photographs of music-hall stars. They 
were such handsome women: the mother with her Victorian soulful rectitude and 
set jaw; the daughters with their sprightlier or softer 20th-century beauty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486411642%2F8d2a2ca5-d667-43e5-9792-535f913183b3-1606x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486411642%2F8d2a2ca5-d667-43e5-9792-535f913183b3-1606x2040.jpeg>
 Emily Davison’s fatal protest at the Derby on 4 June 1913. Photograph: 
UniversalImagesGroup/Getty Images 
Some of the shock of the pictures is in how they disrupt the securities of 
class. Women whose bearing and costume are redolent of privilege and 
respectability – and those hats! – are screaming and smashing windows, or they 
are lifted struggling into the air by a couple of policemen. These are scenes 
of radical openness, and some revelations – of the sheer brutality of misogyny, 
for instance. Suddenly the world seems to be split vertically, between the 
sexes, disrupting (for a moment) the lateral divisions of caste. For a moment, 
anyway. Some of the suffragette leaders (not all) got mixed up in murky 
politics afterwards. Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst threw themselves 
enthusiastically into the war effort, distributing white feathers to men in 
civilian dress.

Much of the good writing at the time was sceptical about democracy, never mind 
votes for women: the suffragettes in contemporary novels tend to be neurotic or 
comical. One wonderful exception is Valentine Wannop inFord Madox Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ford-madox-ford>’s Parade’s End 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/parade-s-end-5.html>; she is a brilliant 
Latinist and a fan ofRosa Luxemburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/05/rosa-luxemburg-writer-activist-letters>
 and a pacifist, and when we first meet her she is being chased across a golf 
course after haranguing a cabinet minster. Valentine is probably too complex 
and too critical though – not fanatical enough – to have taken a cleaver to the
Rokeby Venus, or even vandalised the orchids at Kew; or for that matter to have 
carved a V on her chest in prison, or tried to blow up a Dublin theatre. These 
excesses are significant in our collective imagination. It is as if the 
suffragettes draw on some deep-hidden reservoir of female rage and wrong: like 
Bacchantes, almost, or Furies. And so they achieve, at least in our 
imagination, what their more sensible sisters never did.

• Tessa Hadley’s latest book is The Past 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323074/s/the-past/> 
(Jonathan Cape).

Jacqueline Rose

 ‘We know in the 21st century that the project of feminist advancement is 
radically incomplete’

It was, of course, first and foremost a demand for justice and equality. But 
it was the bodies of the suffragettes that caused the greatest scandal, and one 
might say, made all the difference, by laying bare what a politically agitating 
woman – on the street, in the courts, on the rooftops, at the racecourse, in 
prison, lying prone on the doctor’s table – brings to the surface of the body 
politic. For the most intense period of the campaign, the decade that ran 
roughly from 1905 to the outbreak of the first world war, no one could avoid 
the violence that an unjust society inflicts on half the citizens, or rather 
the not-yet-citizens, of the world. No one could pretend to believe in two of 
the most debilitating myths of womanhood, then current – woman’s endearing 
frailty, and the seemliness of her ways. When news got out of women forcibly 
stripped in prison, or of campaigning women assaulted in public places with 
clothing slit with a knife from neck to hem, or of women marched to prison with 
blood streaming from their wounds after mounted police hurled back at them the 
slates they had been raining down from the roof of a meeting hall where the 
prime minister was speaking, the people in the streets, rallying in support of 
the suffragettes, shouted: “You curs! You would ride over your own flesh and 
blood!”

There was worse to come. In her 1914 essay on forced feeding 
<https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/How_It_Feels_to_Be_Forcibly_Fed> – to which she 
subjected herself out of solidarity – the writerDjuna Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview32>
 pointed out to the doctor that the sheets in which she was wrapped for the 
procedure looked like a shroud (he agreed). Today, we might read the images of 
male doctors administering tubes into the throats of women, steel gag pressed 
against their teeth, as a gross, no doubt unintentional, caricature of sex; not 
as procreation on behalf of the nation, but as an act of abuse. Nationalism was 
key. It was at the heart of the sexual fear provoked by the gender-confounding 
behaviour of the suffragettes. “The progeny of unmanly men [male suffragette 
supporters] mated to unwomanly women [the suffragettes],” railed one detractor, 
“is unlikely to last out … in the coming struggle for life between Asiatics, 
Africans and white men.” Although the simple idea that united them 
“necessitated”, in the words of Sylvia Pankhurst, “no surrender of prejudice of 
race or of class”, perhaps the worst outrage of the suffragettes was to show 
that women’s bodies could no longer be bound to the task of perpetuating the 
supremacy of the white race.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486313824%2Fa52a94d9-6f45-4d4f-a7c0-163ee69100f3-1322x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486313824%2Fa52a94d9-6f45-4d4f-a7c0-163ee69100f3-1322x2040.jpeg>
 A recruitment poster for the National League for Opposing Woman Suffrage. 
Photograph: Heritage Images/Getty Images 
The slogan “Votes for Women” might, therefore, be as misleading as it was 
necessary and precise. Because, then, as now, there is no viable way to agitate 
for feminist advancement – a project we know in the 21st century to be 
radically incomplete – without keeping other forms of injustice in our sights. 
For a significant strand of the movement, the struggle for the vote was a 
struggle on behalf of all the damaged and exploited people of the world. One 
poster issued by the Suffrage Atelier –“The Appeal of Womanhood” 
<http://history.paratext.com/img/posts//pro-suffrage.jpg> – announced: “We want 
the vote to stop the white slave traffic, sweated labour, and to save the 
children.” AsLisa Tickner <http://courtauld.ac.uk/staff/lisa-tickner> points 
out in her 1987 book on suffragette imagery,The Spectacle of Women, a mother, a 
laundress, a prostitute and a chain-maker can be made out among the group of 
miserable figures sketched against the towers of Westminster behind. Another 
poster showed a dark figure,“Starvation”, with her hand on the back of a woman, 
head bowed, with the inscription “Waiting for a Living Wage” 
<http://lowres-picturecabinet.com.s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/29/main/8/264532.jpg>
 (still waiting, we might say). Sixteen-year-old Dora Thewlis was one of the 
youngest suffragettes and one of many unsung heroines from the north of England 
whose story is told byJill Liddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/01/suffragettes-census-1911-boycott>
 in her 2006 bookRebel Girls, Their Fight for the Vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
. When a Westminster magistrate, Horace Smith, reprimanded her for not being at 
school, her parents wrote respectfully to remind him that girls of her age in 
“this part of Christian England” were compelled in their thousands to spend 10 
hours a day in “health-destroying factories”, “toiling for others’ gain” in 
conditions that were sanctioned by law. They saw themselves as outlaws, but it 
was in the name of a new legal order that they fought: “I am a law breaker,” 
Annie Cobden Sanderson pronounced in court, “because I want to be a law maker.” 
When war broke out in 1914, and many suffragettes rallied to the cause, one
Florence Lockwood 
<http://www.hud.ac.uk/courses/supporting/hist/handsonhistory/florencelockwood/> 
noted in her diary: “War will not help human liberty, I thought, as I folded up 
the banner and put it away.”

There are, then, many lessons still to be learned. Today women have the right 
to vote in most countries – Saudi Arabia, great ally of the west, and the 
Vatican City, at the heart of Europe, being two of the exceptions. But women 
still make up two-thirds of the illiterate peoples of the world. Everyday 
sexism, domestic violence, so-called “honour” killing, FGM, rape as a war crime 
and assaults on women in search of education are more visible today than ever 
before. And as with the suffragettes, feminists have to be very careful to make 
sure that lifting these forms of violence against women to the surface of 
public consciousness does not provoke a thrill at the spectacle as much as 
human compassion (pleasure not pain). In one sense, the suffragette campaign 
was simple. The vote was won. But tempering the iniquity of the law has not 
been enough to secure freedom for women in a world that increasingly thrives on 
the inequalities of its peoples. Today, women’s bodies are still too often the 
scapegoats for a world that is as ruthless as it is out of control. This makes 
the demands on feminism greater than ever before: the ongoing fight for 
equality, backed by endless vigilance in response to the forms of human 
perversity which that fight continues to provoke. “The real question,” wrote 
Harriet Taylor Mill, in words often called on by the suffragettes, “is whether 
it is right or expedient that one half of the human race should pass through 
life in a state of forced subordination to the other half … when the only 
reason that can be given is, that men like it.”

• Jacqueline Rose’s books include Women in Dark Times 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/women-in-dark-times.html> (Bloomsbury).

Sarah Crompton

 ‘The producer of Suffragette <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suffragette> 
wondered why a film had never been made about the campaign before’

Straw hat tipped jauntily on top of her immaculate blond hair, Mrs Winifred 
Banks trips up the front steps of her lovely home, humming happily to herself. 
A sash proclaiming “Votes for Women” is neatly affixed to her immaculate blue 
gown. No matter that her children have gone missing – she knows what is 
important. “We had the most glorious meeting,” she announces breathily. “Mrs 
Whitburn Allen chained herself to the wheel of the prime minister’s carriage. 
You should have been there. And Mrs Ainsley was carried off to prison, singing 
and scattering pamphlets all the way.”

Then, because this is a musical, and a Walt Disney musical at that, she breaks 
into a joyful refrain: “Cast off the shackles of yesterday / Shoulder to 
shoulder into the fray / Our daughters’ daughters will adore us / And they’ll 
sing in grateful chorus / Well done, Sister Suffragette.”

The origins of that song in the 1964 film Mary Poppins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/02/how-we-made-mary-poppins> are 
entirely pragmatic.Glynis Johns <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0424318/> had 
turned up at the Disney studios, convinced that she was to be given the leading 
role. To assuage her disappointment, Walt told her a great new tune had just 
been written for Mrs Banks and she could hear it after lunch; Robert B and 
Richard M Sherman duly obliged with a smart anthem composed while the actor was 
eating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486505810%2F89a21cd5-624b-4918-96c7-8853e73a94e0-2060x1547.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486505810%2F89a21cd5-624b-4918-96c7-8853e73a94e0-2060x1547.jpeg>
 Hermione Baddeley, Glynis Johns and Elsa Lanchester in Disney’sMary Poppins 
(1964). Photograph: Photograph: Allstar/Disney 
As a new film Suffragette <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suffragette>, 
starringCarey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan> as a 
passionate campaigner for votes for women, arrives in cinemas half a century 
later, it is strange suddenly to realise that this song for Mrs Banks, dreamed 
up on a whim, stands as one of the most famous cultural representations of the 
women who, in the early years of the 20th century, fought fiercely and 
resolutely for the vote, breaking laws that they believed were unjust and 
engaging in a campaign of active resistance.

What’s more, the sparky wit of “Sister Suffragette” has helped the musical, 
full of strong, self-motivated women, to be discussed – with some seriousness – 
as a feminist tract, a representation of different kinds of womanhood within 
the candyfloss surroundings of Cherry Tree Lane. Yet in 1964, when women were 
talking about liberation, and the counterculture was in full swing, it can also 
be seen as a slap in the face for their ideals – a throwback to the negative 
image of a suffragette as someone who is prepared to sacrifice everything, even 
her children, for her beliefs.

This sense that suffragettes were deserting their rightful place in the home 
was one of the most powerful smears against them. You can see it in the silent 
films made at the time, now re-released by the BFI in a compilation calledMake 
More Noise 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=makemorenoisesuffragettesinfilm>
. In one short, a husband is left by his hatchet-faced wife, literally holding 
a baby in either arm, while she goes off to campaign. His dreams of revenge 
include putting women in the stocks, or in ducking stools if they offend the 
great male consensus. We are meant to laugh.

Cinema hit its stride more or less around the time, in 1909, that the WSPU, 
founded six years earlier by Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughters Christabel 
and Sylvia, turned to violence in pursuit of its aims. They began by disrupting 
meetings and staging demonstrations, then graduated to smashing plate-glass 
windows, arson and fire-bombing, including an attack onLloyd George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/02/outsider-lloyd-george-hattersley-review>
’s half-built country home at the time he was chancellor of the exchequer. The 
newsreels of the time reveal in flickering silent images the depth of 
resistance, hatred and disdain they faced. They show 2,000 policemen swarming 
around a handful of neatly dressed women attempting to present a petition to 
parliament, and cloth-capped men swamping women who are trying to speak. The
Derby day death of Emily Wilding Davison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/26/emily-davison-suffragette-death-derby-1913>
 under the hoofs of the King’s horse in 1913 becomes a blur in a newsreel more 
interested in the result of the race than her doomed protest.

The top 10 books about the suffragettes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/07/top-10-books-suffragettes-lucy-ribchester>
The film Suffragette recreates and reimagines such scenes as the background to 
its story of laundry worker Maud’s conversion to the militant cause. “I thought 
there might be another way of living this life,” she says, believing that 
suffrage will give women the ability to battle more general oppression. This is 
a theme found, too, in the novels written at the time that – in an ironic 
contradiction of Mrs Pankhurst’s cry of “Deeds not words” – sought to engage 
readers through a light fictionalisation of real events. They function for 
their own age asSuffragette does today; their narratives seek to explain and 
inspire.

The novel that comes closest to pure documentary is Suffragette Sally 
<https://www.broadviewpress.com/product.php?productid=875> by Gertrude Colmore, 
published in 1911, which concludes with a description of the events just one 
year earlier after prime ministerHerbert Asquith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/apr/03/past> scuppered a 
conciliation bill that would have given the vote to around 1 million female 
householders and occupiers. On what came to be known asBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2007/nov/13/research.highereducation>, a 
delegation of WSPU protesters was brutally attacked by 300 police; two later 
died of their injuries. InSuffragette Sally, the names have been changed, but 
the events have not: the kicking of women as they lay on the ground; the 
assaults on their modesty as skirts were hitched high above their heads; the 
beatings in the course of 200 arrests.

Although Colmore’s prose is vivid and straightforward, her characters – the 
Cockney braveheart Sally, the suffragist Edith who believes in peaceful protest 
but has her mind changed – rarely emerge as more than ciphers. But the stories 
the novel tells are gripping, particularly its descriptions of the women’s 
treatment in prison after they go on hunger strike in protest at not being 
considered political prisoners. Sally’s experiences, which indirectly cause her 
death, involve her being dragged down metal stairs on her face, her hands 
handcuffed behind her back, on her way to repeated force-feeding. This actually 
happened to a woman called Selina Martin, arrested in Liverpool after throwing 
an empty ginger beer bottle into Asquith’s car.

The stoicism of the campaigners in the face of unendurable ill-treatment has 
become a lodestone of suffragette mythology. Their passive agony was a weapon 
against the government as much as the acts that led to their imprisonment, and 
probably did more to shift public opinion towards them. It makes an appearance 
in another fictionalised contemporary account,No Surrender by Constance 
Elizabeth Maud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/30/no-surrender-constance-maud-review>
. This is a far cruder book than Colmore’s, although it does have a plot of 
sorts as its heroine, a Black Country millworker called Jenny Clegg, brings the 
love of her life round to her way of thinking by her courage and commitment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442507907213%2Fdf8d8d50-c55d-41fe-93ff-e52256ebff0d-1342x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442507907213%2Fdf8d8d50-c55d-41fe-93ff-e52256ebff0d-1342x2040.jpeg>
 The 1909 ‘Votes for Women’ poster, designed by Hilda Dallas, who was a member 
of the WSPU. Photograph: Heritage Images/Getty Images 
In the course of many long conversations outlining the case for the vote and 
the reasons for militancy, Jenny and her middle-class friend Mary O’Neill have 
to face down not just sceptical men but also the “Antis”, the women who opposed 
the extension of the franchise and criticised the militants for their 
unladylike behaviour. A Miss Crompton is particularly odious. She exclaims: 
“Helpless women! That is the last way you could describe those viragoes. They 
kicked and scratched and hit out with umbrellas. They would have killed those 
unfortunate stewards if they could.”

For all its clumsiness, No Surrender reeks of authenticity and of stories 
begging for a hearing. It is odd then, in the years since women won the vote, 
that their struggle has found so few cultural manifestations. A rather 
unsympathetic suffragette – another neglectful mother – finds a place inTracy 
Chevalier <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tracychevalier>’s novel Falling 
Angels; <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/01/fiction.reviews> the 
deeply sympathetic Catherine Winslow reveals the true meaning of love and 
sacrifice in a vignette inThe Winslow Boy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/339896/>, where 
Terence Rattigan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rattigan>’s compassion 
makes her radicalism part and parcel of her willingness to stand by her family. 
InUp the Women <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2952566/>, a TV sitcom launched in 
2013,Jessica Hynes <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jessica-hynes> 
managed to wrench laughter out of subjects such as hunger strikes and Mrs 
Pankhurst (a star turn in a large hat bySandi Toksvig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/25/sandi-toksvig-trolls-womens-equality-party-bbc-abuse>
), while simultaneously honouring the history and the women who were prepared 
to stand up for their rights even if only “politely requesting” them. 
Otherwise, there is not much, as the makers ofSuffragette have noticed. “We 
wondered why no one had ever made a movie about the suffragettes,” producer
Alison Owen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/04/alison-owen-film-producer-cultural-highlights-serial-podcast-henry-iv>
 has said.

The comparative silence on the subject may be caused by the fact that although 
the broad brush strokes are dramatic, the detailed history is immensely 
complex. It is also far from straightforward, particularly when it comes to the 
divisive effects of the Pankhurst family on the movement they led. That is why 
the key suffragette text for anyone growing up in the 1970s was the 1974 series
Shoulder to Shoulder <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071047/> – six 90-minute 
episodes of closely argued and beautifully acted TV drama that told the story, 
from prewar beginning to postwar end, warts and all.

The series has the scope and the courage to replay the political intricacies 
of the struggle – and the complex personalities that forged its shape. The 
demonstrations, the hunger strikes and the growing militancy are all searingly 
charted; the scenes in which we witness Emily Davison’s fanaticism grow as she 
is subjected to the most incredible cruelty are all but unwatchable. So is the 
distress of Constance Lytton, played byJudy Parfitt 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0661407/>.

But questions about the conduct of the campaign are also raised. Siân Phillips 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0680795/?ref_=tt_ov_st> is a memorably charismatic 
Emmeline Pankhurst, but her willingness always to supportPatricia Quinn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5mnpaKF75RE>’s self-centred and ferocious 
Christabel is revealed as a weakness as well as a strength. Their ruthless 
determination that all the women had to obey their decisions – “We must march 
in step like an army,” Christabel proclaims – means their party fragments even 
as it moves forward.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486719816%2F2a77b4aa-e9c6-4481-acf3-0278e5c2b6df-2060x1548.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486719816%2F2a77b4aa-e9c6-4481-acf3-0278e5c2b6df-2060x1548.jpeg>
 From left: Emmeline Pankhurst with daughters Christabel and Sylvia at Waterloo 
station, London, 1911. Photograph: Heritage Images/Getty Images 
It feels significant that Shoulder to Shoulder emerged in the era of Spare Rib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/spare-rib>, when women were once more 
discussing the nature of activism and different and sometimes competing 
definitions of feminism and its relation to the wider politics of the time. 
Forty years later, a new view has emerged:Suffragette is a perfect film for a 
generation that has lived through post-feminism and now begins to think that 
perhaps they will have to fight once more for full equality. It clearly seeks 
to inspire, smoothing over difficulties, full of passionate indignation on 
behalf of women, ending with a roll call of the years in which they won the 
vote.

This is a film that deals with the arguments about the campaign of increasing 
violence in a single sentence – “the movement is divided now. Even Sylvia 
Pankhurst is opposed” – and Mrs Pankhurst (Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/19/meryl-streep-emmeline-pankhurst-suffragette>
) only appears in one brief scene. Although it pays obeisance to the fortitude 
of the women in prison, its real interest lies not in that passive suffering, 
but in showing women as bold activists, surrounded by men who want “to bring 
these bitches to their knees” yet capable of taking their destinies into their 
own hands. Each generation takes a view of the suffragettes that suits its 
needs. The story is both of its time and timeless, a history that mustn’t be 
forgotten and whose lessons will always be relearned.

• Sarah Crompton is a writer on arts and culture.

Rachel Holmes

 ‘It was working women who taught their middle-class sisters how to organise 
and bargain’

As Sylvia Pankhurst’s biographer, it is my duty to be blunt. She never thought 
Votes for Women her greatest achievement. “Granted,” she said, “the vote has 
brought an all-round improvement in many directions,” but “the improvement has 
been gradual rather than dramatic.”

Some say the suffragettes, led by the Pankhursts, marched out on Millicent 
Fawcett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/apr/15/suffragettes-women-voting-fawcett>
’s moderate voting reform campaign in 1903 because, like so many freedom 
fighters, they realised they wouldn’t achieve their goals by legal, peaceful 
means. Militancy, the story goes, did the cause more harm in the end. In 
reality, there was no choice – patriarchy had been at war with women for a 
millennium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486622046%2F5435d080-df60-4475-bc01-cc799d5ee0ff-2060x1497.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442486622046%2F5435d080-df60-4475-bc01-cc799d5ee0ff-2060x1497.jpeg>
 Sylvia Pankhurst being taken into custody by police during a 1912 suffrage 
protest in Trafalgar Square. Photograph: The Life Picture Collection/Getty 
Militant tactics were acts of self-preservation; resistance against the 
violence and aggression of institutionalised gender discrimination and abuse 
threatening women’s lives and minds. Suffragettes refused to be victims. Women 
of all classes had swallowed the myth that they were second-class humans fit 
only for reproduction and subordination in male society. The violent deeds, not 
just words, used by the suffragettes expressed political revolt against the 
external edifice of domination. They were also an intimate revolution against 
the internalised oppressions inhibiting women.

Great strength came from politicising their bodies. An army without guns, they 
employed methods of non-cooperation and non-violence. Hunger-striking, 
window-smashing, arson, bomb-throwing – their bodies and voices became sites of 
resistance. They shaped modern feminism.

Suffragettes dared to believe in themselves and to act as the equals of men. 
To become a serious threat to the social order, they had to be fearless. To 
make women agents of change in every aspect of our politics, society and 
culture, they had to endure personal sacrifice. They lost jobs, homes, 
families, children – and their lives. This legacy of necessary sacrifice sits 
uncomfortably with some of our current “we-can-have-it-all” forms of feminism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL13b0t9aARY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL13b0t9aARY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL13b0t9aARY&media=>
Suggestions that suffragettes were mostly posh are historical nonsense. As 
brilliantly depicted in the filmSuffragette, working women weren’t only foot 
soldiers of the movement but also its leaders. Many were already in trade 
unions campaigning for universal suffrage and equal pay for male and female 
workers from the 1800s.

There is a tendency to perceive the suffragettes too narrowly. Fawcett said 
smugly in 1911 that her reformist movement was “like a glacier; slow moving but 
unstoppable”. She forgot that glaciers evaporate, melt and retreat. The 
suffragettes who understood theirs as part of the broader fight for equality, 
democracy and social justice – not a single-issue struggle – are far more 
relevant today than their sepia-tinted gradualist sisters. Hence Sylvia 
Pankhurst’s observation on the doomed character of attempts at partial change 
not built on a broad-based and progressive movement.

Suffragettes learned the power of collectivism. Crucially, it was working 
women who taught their middle-class sisters how to organise, assert collective 
rights and bargain. The suffragettes had modest legislative success. Their 
militancy was controversial, not least in their own ranks. Their achievement 
was to force attention to their cause and occupy public consciousness as never 
before. We have yet to finish the job they started.

• Rachel Holmes’s most recent book is Eleanor Marx 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eleanor-marx.html> (Bloomsbury).

Bridget Christie

 ‘The suffragettes were slightly more committed to the emancipation of women 
than I am’

Apparently, Jimmy Savile <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile> 
didn’t run all the charity marathons he said he did. He would run for a short 
distance, then jump into an ambulance or some other type of flashing, wailing, 
inconspicuous emergency service vehicle and be driven, by a headless coachman, 
to somewhere near the finishing line, hop out and run the last bit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500096296%2F9baabb71-9653-441d-955f-8b765f6ff8d8-1362x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20'they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20suffragettes%20still%20matter%3A%20%27they%20dared%20to%20act%20as%20the%20equals%20of%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fsuffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500096296%2F9baabb71-9653-441d-955f-8b765f6ff8d8-1362x2040.jpeg>
 The launch of Care’s 2014 Walk In Her Shoes campaign in London. Photograph: 
Dave Evans/Demotix/Corbis 
Earlier this year, my left foot got jammed in a long, narrow pothole in the 
road. I didn’t see it because I was distracted by a text telling me thatMary 
Beard <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mary-beard> had sent a tweet out 
saying my routine about her was hilarious. I tore all the ligaments in my 
ankle, broke my finger and had to have my engagement and wedding rings sawn 
off. They’re still in pieces in the urine sample bottle the nurse put them into 
for safe-keeping. I expect Beard, the feminist, loves that.

About a month later I was asked by Helen Pankhurst, great-granddaughter of the 
leader of the suffragettesEmmeline Pankhurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/emmeline-pankhurst>, to take part in a 
panel discussion on International Women’s Day, and to walk with her in 
solidarity with all the women around the world facing inequality and injustice. 
I was incredibly flattered and honoured – it was like a descendant of Jesus had 
got in touch.

The walk was to launch 2015’s Walk in Her Shoes campaign for Care International
 <https://walkinhershoes.careinternational.org.uk/>, where Helen is a senior 
adviser, and many brilliant women attended a mass walk along London’s South 
Bank. Arm in arm, they remembered all the thousands of women and girls around 
the world forced to walk for water all day long. I didn’t, though, because my 
ankle was throbbing. I did the talk, then got a taxi to the end of the walk. I 
am the Jimmy Savile of feminist campaigners. And I am ashamed.

The suffragettes were slightly more committed to the emancipation of women 
than I am. Kitty Marion, the music-hall entertainer and militant suffragette, 
was force-fed more than 232 times in prison for her beliefs. On the night of 
the 1911 census, Emily Wilding Davison hid in a crypt at Westminster overnight 
so that on the census form she could legitimately give her place of residence 
as the House of Commons. The suffragettes blew up houses, smashed windows, 
burned down unoccupied buildings, poured chemicals into mailboxes and chained 
themselves to railings outside Buckingham Palace. They were imaginative, 
passionate, fearless, dignified, good-humoured and extremely well organised. I 
deserve to have my T-shirt with the suffragette motto “Deeds not words” written 
across it ripped from my back and thrown into a bin.

• A Book for Her 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306585/s/book-for-her/>
 by Bridget Christie is published by Century.Her comedy show runs at Leicester 
Square theatre 
<http://leicestersquaretheatre.ticketsolve.com/shows/873539028/events?page=1>, 
London, WC2H, from 16 November to 2 December.
 