
Of all the questions raised by the Afghanistan war logs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/afghanistan-the-war-logs>, perhaps 
the most intriguing is this: why would an organisation as independent-minded 
and disdainful of the traditional media asWikiLeaks <http://www.wikileaks.org/> 
seek out those very media as partners rather than going it alone?

My necessarily speculative answer is that WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, 
who's made a speciality of revealing embarrassing governmental secrets, learned 
something important earlier this year. That's when he briefly caused a 
sensation byreleasing video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2010/apr/07/wikileaks-collateral-murder-iraq-video>
 of a US Apache helicopter firing on Iraqi civilians, killing (among others) a 
Reuters photographer and his driver.

The lesson: shocking material and a flair for public relations may be enough 
to get you noticed. But if it's credibility you want, then old-fashioned news 
organisations still have something to offer.

WikiLeaks made some 92,000 documents about the war in Afghanistan available to 
theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/25/afghanistan-war-logs-military-leaks>
, theNew York Times <http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/world/war-logs.html> and
Der Spiegel <http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/0,1518,708559,00.html> a 
month ago, giving professional journalists time to sort, vet and craft 
narratives from jargon-laden field reports compiled by US officials.

The documents add sickening details to the broad outlines of what we already 
knew: that major elements of Pakistan's intelligence forces are in bed with the 
Taliban; that chaos and confusion inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> has led to civilian casualties; 
and that among the burdens the Afghan people must bear is a corrupt and 
ineffective government.

The Obama administration has lambasted WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> for releasing the documents, 
arguing that the situation has improved since 2009, when the most recent of the 
official reports were compiled. But no one has questioned the authenticity of 
the documents themselves, even if the reliability of the information contained 
therein appears to be of variable quality.

In effect, Assange chose to act as Daniel Ellsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/27/daniel-ellsberg-war-logs-pentagon-papers>
, the insider who leaked thePentagon Papers 
<http://www.u-s-history.com/pages/h1871.html> – the US government's own secret 
history of the Vietnam war – to the Washington Post and the New York Times. But 
it was just a few months ago that Assange tried out the role ofBen Bradlee 
<http://www.thevillager.com/villager_358/saga.html>, the Washington Post 
executive editor who published those papers.

In April, you may recall, WikiLeaks uploaded <http://www.collateralmurder.org/>
 two versions of the Apache helicopter video. One was an edited, 18-minute 
version that it titled Collateral Murder, which begins with a quote from George 
Orwell: "Political language is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder 
respectable, and to give the appearance of solidity to pure wind." The other, 
39 minutes long, was raw footage with no commentary.

The American secretary of defence, Robert Gates, denounced the video 
<http://blogs.abcnews.com/politicalpunch/2010/04/gates-on-wikileaks-video-not-helpful-but-should-not-have-lasting-consequences.html>
 as having been taken out of context. No surprise there. But asRaffi 
Khatchadourian notes 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/06/07/100607fa_fact_khatchadourian> in 
a profile of Assange published in the New Yorker, the media turned Gates's way 
within days of the release. And in fact, when you watch the video and listen to 
the Americans on board the helicopter, you can see that the crew members 
believed, rightly or wrongly, that they were firing on a legitimate target.

Even the comedian Stephen Colbert, in an interview with Assange 
<http://www.colbertnation.com/the-colbert-report-videos/270712/april-12-2010/julian-assange>
, dropped his rightwing-blowhard persona momentarily to make a serious point, 
calling the edited version "emotional manipulation" and telling his guest: 
"There are armed men in the group. They did find a rocket-propelled grenade 
among the group. The Reuters photographers who were regrettably killed were not 
identified as photographers. And you have edited this tape, and you have given 
it a title called Collateral Murder. That's not leaking. That's a pure 
editorial."

(An aside for British readers not familiar with Colbert and thus puzzled at my 
quoting a comedian: it is a sad but undeniable reality that the two most 
incisive American media critics today may well be Colbert and his fellow fake 
anchormanJon Stewart <http://www.thedailyshow.com/>.)

Around the time that the video was released, hubris among the WikiLeakers was 
thick. In the New Yorker piece, we hear from a friend and supporter of 
Assange's, a Dutch hacker named Rop Gonggrijp, who smugly says that "we are not 
the press" and "the source is no longer dependent on finding a journalist who 
may or may not do something good with his document".

Yet here we are, several months later, and Assange is acting very much like an 
old-fashioned source, seeking out journalists even as he uploads the raw source 
documents to the web.

In the felicitous phrase of New York University journalism professor Jay 
Rosen, WikiLeaks is "a stateless news organisation 
<http://journalism.nyu.edu/pubzone/weblogs/pressthink/2010/07/26/wikileaks_afghan.html>
". But as the New Yorker piece makes clear, Assange and his fellow activists 
are less interested in news than in making a political impact. And it is an 
organisation only in the loosest sense of the term. Given those realities, it 
makes sense for them to work with journalists rather than to posit themselves 
in opposition to the media.

"WikiLeaks was soaking, drowning in data," Rosen's NYU colleague Clay Shirky 
tells David Carr 
<http://mediadecoder.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/07/26/behind-war-logs-a-new-kind-of-alliance/>
 of the New York Times. "What they needed was someone who could tell a story. 
They needed someone who could bring accuracy and political context to what was 
being revealed."

What I am suggesting is not that old media have triumphed over the new. 
Rather, I'm simply pointing out that each has its place in the media ecosystem.

WikiLeaks, with its singleminded focus on casting about for whistleblowers and 
protecting their identity through encryption and secrecy, can obtain material 
that eludes established news organisations. And professional journalists can 
vet, make sense of and impart credibility to that material in ways that not all 
new-media ventures (at least not WikiLeaks) can.

The result is a powerful indictment of the war in Afghanistan – and a major 
challenge to Barack Obama.

Back in character, Colbert asked Assange: "What is the purpose of letting the 
public know? It's like you're saying it's better to know than not to know. Have 
you not heard ignorance is bliss?"

It's way too late for that now.
 