
It was America’s sweetheart Brooke Shields who said nothing came between her 
and her Calvins, but if an Australian denim brand selected one of us to spruik 
its products, she’d definitely declare “nothing comes between me and my 
skinnies”.

Australian women are obsessed with skinny jeans. While the rest of the world 
has moved on to embrace boyfriend jeans, mum jeans and the return of the 501 
(not that it ever went away, fashion types have simply rediscovered it), 
Australia’s females are still pouring themselves into sausage casings and spray 
ons. But why do we persist with the skinny jean? Skinnies may be easy but they 
can be uncomfortable and unflattering and are so ubiquitous they are now simply 
boring, which on planet fashion is the worst crime of all. So women of 
Australia, let’s try something new. Let’s dare to flare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b5ceeebcdff7e2f2e64e6b0e29d5dbb4d4a8835%2F0_0_1957_2936%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Australian%20women%20still%20obsessed%20with%20skinny%20jeans%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Australian%20women%20still%20obsessed%20with%20skinny%20jeans%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b5ceeebcdff7e2f2e64e6b0e29d5dbb4d4a8835%2F0_0_1957_2936%2F1333.jpg>
 Model Nicole Trunfio wearing her skinny jeans. Photograph: Graham 
Denholm/Getty Images 
Did you see the spring/summer 2015 runways? The seventies are back, baby. The 
decade that style forgot is now foremost in fashion’s mind, as seen on catwalks 
including Gucci, Tom Ford, Balmain, Victoria Beckham and – don’t speak! - the 
fashion holy grail, Celine. These brands are all trying to persuade us that 
flares are a hip and happening thing once again, and as a welcome antidote to 
the all-pervasive skinny jean, I happen to agree. This season I’m trying a 
bell-bottom instead, and I encourage you to do so too.

But wait, I know what you’re thinking. Flares are unappealing and unwieldy – 
did you know they were created for sailors in the 19th century so when they 
fell overboard there was plenty of fabric to grab them with? But you’re wrong. 
Yes, flares can be challenging and must be worn with the confidence of Amy 
Adams in American Hustle, but try a pair and tell me that they don’t perk up 
your bottom, lengthen your leg, shrink your waist and elongate your silhouette.

Here are the keys to pulling off a flare with flair: the shoe, the hem and not 
taking a costume party approach to your top half. Always wear flares with a 
heel to balance out all that excess fabric, and opt for sturdy platforms or 
wedges over spindly stilettos. Take your chosen heel with you when shopping for 
flares, and if the length still isn’t right visit a tailor to have them taken 
up or down so they graze the ground gently, rather than puddling at your feet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F186460e8dbc3fe1f4ef13611c985c614536216ba%2F0_0_2500_1499%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Australian%20women%20still%20obsessed%20with%20skinny%20jeans%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Australian%20women%20still%20obsessed%20with%20skinny%20jeans%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F186460e8dbc3fe1f4ef13611c985c614536216ba%2F0_0_2500_1499%2F2000.jpg>
 Flares making a comeback in the fashion world in 2015. (left) A model walks 
down the runway at the Katty Xiomara runway show at Fashion Week in New York 
City on February 15, 2015; (middle) Diletta Bonaiuti poses wearing a Sandro 
coat, vintage pants and Hermes clutch on January 17, 2015 in Milan, 
Italy.(right) A model poses at the Frame Denim presentation during Fashion Week 
Fall 2015 Photograph: Vanni Bassetti/Getty Images 
Denim flares paired with a bohemian top or a crisp white shirt are great for 
the weekend or a night out, as championed by a young Jane Birkin in the south 
of France in the 1960s, and again by Kate Moss in a high waisted pair and 
simple sweatshirt in the 90s. A high waisted pair of denim flares in deep 
indigo can do double duty at the office when teamed with a blazer and blouse. 
Nothing says sophistication like black silk flares and a tuxedo jacket for 
evening; it was a look so beloved by Bianca Jagger on the dance floor at Studio 
54 that she had Yves Saint Laurent make an ivory version with a flared skirt 
for her wedding to Mick Jagger in San Tropez in 1971.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F1%2F1425253262730%2Fcd834611-18a6-4b47-922e-f52b966efe39-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Australian%20women%20still%20obsessed%20with%20skinny%20jeans%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Australian%20women%20still%20obsessed%20with%20skinny%20jeans%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fwhy-are-australian-women-still-obsessed-with-skinny-jeans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F1%2F1425253262730%2Fcd834611-18a6-4b47-922e-f52b966efe39-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mick and Bianca Jagger outside the town hall in St Tropez after their wedding, 
14th May 1971. Photograph: Reg Lancaster/Getty Images 
Take another leaf out of Bianca’s book and remember that when wearing flares 
one must never overdo the accessories. Pile on a fedora, oversized sunglasses, 
chunky belt and floral shirt and you’ll look more like an extra from Don’s 
Party than someone currently enrolled to vote. Keep it clean and confine the 
party to your pants.



 