. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/euro-ref-finland-zip/giv-125155v8FemRSwTq5>
From relatively large and established companies such as Rovio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/rovio> and Supercell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/24/clash-of-clans-supercell-revenues-2014>
 to small teams of indie developers, there is a remarkable creative ferment in 
this corner of Europe. In 2015, Finnish mobile game companies together 
constituted a €2.4bn business, according to thetrade association NeoGames 
<http://www.goodnewsfinland.com/finnish-game-industry-on-the-rise-by-all-indicators/>
.

As the home of titles such as Angry Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/angry-birds> and Clash of Clans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jul/23/clash-of-clans-supercell-freemium>
, Finland is where many ambitious game developers – not just Finns – go to make 
their mark in the industry. Where I work, at Rovio, nearly 40 different 
nationalities are represented within our workforce alone.

There are many reasons for Finland’s unique position in the sector. Local wags 
have joked that with such long, dark winters, ex-Nokia engineers had nothing 
better to do with their time than shut themselves in and make games. Others 
point to the high quality of education inFinland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland>, or to social arrangements (the 
“Nordic model”) that make entrepreneurship less risky and a more realistic 
option for more people. No doubt there’s some truth in these observations.

But whatever the case, a crucial part of the magic is the openness of Finland 
itself. While Rovio recruits from all over the world, the lion’s share of those 
nearly 40 different nationalities are in fact European. Thanks to Finland’s 
membership of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, Rovio 
and all Finnish companies are able to very easily, with a minimum of 
bureaucratic hassle, draw upon on a high-quality pool of talent from all across 
Europe. In our offices, Finns work in high-performance teams side by side with 
Poles, Germans, French, Swedes, Estonians and Britons, to name a few. Finland’s 
openness to Europe has led to the cosmopolitan clustering of artists, coders, 
engineers and other game professionals that we see in the bars and clubs of 
Helsinki today. Rovio is undoubtedly richer for it.

Brexit could start a disastrous EU drift to the east | Andras Schweitzer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/brexit-eu-east-leave> 
So as the CEO of an entertainment company delivering globally competitive 
products, to me Europe means business. Europe means talent.Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> means that a company based in a 
small country such as Finland has a fighting chance of assembling a world-class 
team that is able to compete head-to-head against the largest companies 
anywhere.

Of the many European countries whose citizens contribute directly to the 
success of Rovio, not least is the UK. In our head office, in Espoo, just 
outside Helsinki, we employ around a dozen British nationals. We also have a 
diverse team working out of a small satellite office in London. And we benefit 
from cross-pollination with the UK’s own fertile gaming scene: our most recent 
game (Angry Birds Action! <https://www.angrybirds.com/games/angry-birds-action/>
) was developed in close collaboration with the fantastic Dundee-based studio
Tag Games <http://www.tag-games.com/>. The UK is very much a part of the 
everyday fabric of our business, and it is a frequent stop on my travels.

What would happen, then, if the UK were to vote to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> the European family? From 
my point of view, at least, it would create a challenging and disorienting 
situation. We would be obliged to review our business arrangements regarding 
the UK, a worrying and potentially costly prospect. And if the law were to 
suddenly force us to restrict British talent from future hiring considerations, 
that would be a sad loss both for Britain and for Finland. That’s my opinion as 
a businesswoman, anyway.

As a Finn, as a person, I would also be saddened that, despite being 
surrounded by the technology and the means to reduce barriers between peoples 
like never before, yet another wall would seem to be going up, when in this 
century, in these thrilling times, they should be going down.

Britain, no matter which way you vote, I hope you find a way to prevent such 
walls from separating us. In Finland’s experience – and I think in yours too – 
being part of a bigger team has allowed us to raise our game.
 