
What’s the name of the show? Wicked City <http://abc.go.com/shows/wicked-city>

When does it premiere? Tuesday 27 October at 10pm EST on ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc>.

What is this show? It’s a 10-episode anthology series about crime in Los 
Angeles during different memorable eras.

Isn’t calling the first season of a show an “anthology series” jumping the gun?
A bit. It’s like when they end an action movie with a set-up for the sequel but 
then it doesn’t make enough money to warrant one. Every time that happens, an 
angel turns into a pair of used 3D glasses.

What is this chapter of the anthology? It’s 1982 on the Sunset Strip and 
serial killer Kent Grainger (Ed Westwick 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/27/ed-westwick-on-playing-wicked-citys-chameleon-killer/>
, dusting off his American accent once again) finds girls in bars, dedicates 
songs to them on the radio and then murders them in his car while the song 
plays. One of the girls, Betty (Erika Christensen), escapes his knife, they 
fall in love and she starts helping him with his crimes. There are also two 
no-good cops on his tail: veteran Jack Roth (Jeremy Sisto) who recently caught 
the “Hillside Strangler” and newbie Paco Contreras (Gabriel Luna).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fx2pz9ff&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fx2pz9ff>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fx2pz9ff&media=>
It’s set in 1982, so the soundtrack must be killer. Totally. The pilot brings 
us songs by Soft Cell, Blondie, Joan Jett, Pat Benatar and a scene set at a 
Billy Idol concert. It really is the best part of the show.

How is the rest of the 80s flavour? Pretty non-existent. Some of the clothes 
and sets give off a slightly vintage feel, but there’s no evidence of a deep 
immersion into the era. In fact, the rest of the action is so bland and the 
style of the direction so similar to that of every other modern TV show that 
when it’s set is entirely inconsequential.

So it’s not good? No. Westwick’s sickly charismatic performance is perfect, 
but the first episode is too sanitised, perhaps due to the constraints of 
network TV. The same goes for Christensen’s Betty. The idea of a wholesome 
mother getting romanced into a crime spree by a serial killer is a really 
interesting one, but so far the show just takes for granted that the 
transformation would occur rather than showing us why.

The cop side of the story is just as bland. Roth is described as a “screwed-up 
mess” and there are some allusions to his crooked ex-partner, but we’re not 
shown why he might be messed up and indeed he doesn’t behave strangely at all: 
he’s just like every other wizened homicide cop with a chip on his shoulder on 
TV. It’s just another tired stereotype of the genre without any meat behind it.

Also, so much of the storytelling is clunky, like the absolutely coincidental 
way the cops’ investigation hinges on a journalist (Taissa Farmiga, who took 
the year offAmerican Horror Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/15/american-horror-story-box-set-review>
 for this dreck). Oh, and let’s not forget about how everyone keeps referring 
to the Sunset Strip in the same way that your aunt uses #blessed way too much 
on Instagrams of her avocado toast.

Is there anything edgy? There’s one scene where Kent has sex with Betty and he 
ties her up and makes her play dead so he can get aroused. That one sick scene 
is everything that this show wants to be, but it needs a whole lot more of 
those moments to be really different.

Can an anthology like this exist on network TV? We need another serial killer 
drama on television like David Beckham needs more tattoos, but I think there is 
room for a stylised crime drama, like NBC’sbetter than average Aquarius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/28/aquarius-david-duchovny-on-the-trail-of-charles-manson>
, that aired to little fanfare this summer. As far as a sophisticated, 
intelligent, groundbreaking, cable-calibre anthology series, ABC already aired 
one: the delicious Emmy winnerAmerican Crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/05/american-crime-classy-drama-multiple-viewpoints>
, which will return later this year.

Should I watch this show? No. Go stream Aquarius on NBC.com and let’s make 
season two of that a hit.
 