
Karlsplatz is one of Vienna’s largest town squares, and its busiest transport 
hub. From the U-Bahn station the state opera and theMuseums Quarter 
<http://www.mqw.at/en/> are each a short walk away; the Kunsthalle 
<http://www.kunsthallewien.at/#/en>, a treasure trove of modern art, and 
Vienna’s mostfamous concert venue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/05/10-worlds-best-concert-halls-berlin-boston-tokyo>
, theMusikverein <http://www.musikverein.at/>, sit on the square itself. This 
is one of the most culturally rich city centres in the world. And just a few 
minutes’ walk south, away from Vienna’s famous attractions, is a very different 
place altogether, the city’s fourth district – Wieden.

The roads that lead there aren’t immediately promising. Operngasse is student 
territory, home to theUniversity of Technology 
<http://www.tuwien.ac.at/en/tuwien_home/>, and Wiedner Hauptstrasse is a 
commercial high street. But either one leads quickly to the heart of a vibrant 
urban neighbourhood, where commercial buildings sit beside baroque 
architecture, and youth culture co-exists with tradition.
 The Urbanauts room at The Tailoress contained a fairly obvious clue to the 
building’s past use 
It is also home to the hotel where my friend Becki and I chose to stay, 
Urbanauts <http://www.urbanauts.at/>, which is so on trend it doesn’t have a 
building at all – it’s, you know, a concept. A group of architects has 
transformed half a dozen commercial premises, former shops and warehouses, into 
five individual “hotel rooms”, which are dotted around the district. Ours, The 
Tailoress, was once a haute couture dressmaker’s studio, and now contained an 
iMac, a typewriter and an espresso machine, though its past use was hinted at 
with an entire wall backlit with a giant photograph of a woman in an evening 
gown. A well-stocked (and happily all-included) minibar completed what Becki 
described as the “bunker chic” look.

The architects behind Urbanauts have co-opted their favourite haunts as their 
“hotel services”. For our breakfast, the bespoke map in the room pointed us 
towardsCafe Goldegg <http://www.cafegoldegg.at/>, an art deco beauty tucked 
away on a street behind the Spanish embassy. It was an instant winner – and not 
just for the generous Viennese omelettes, but also for its panelled booths, its 
billiard table, and the senior gentlemen who frequented it. By our second 
morning we felt like regulars.
 Cafe Goldegg 
Setting off each morning with the Urbanaut’s list of recommendations, and the 
best of intentions to visit them, we inevitably passed somewhere we liked the 
look of more, and felt thrilled by our discoveries.

Conchita Wurst's guide to Vienna: burlesque, bars and Britney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/17/conchita-wurst-vienna-eurovison-song-contest>
If the guiding hand of our unseen hosts hadn’t pointed us towards an earnestly 
alternative creperie calledAromat <http://www.arom.at/> (Margaret Straße 52, 
+43 1 913 2453), we wouldn’t have walked pastZweitbester 
<http://www.zweitbester.at/> (Heumühlgasse 2, + 43 1 945 9386), and jettisoned 
our intended galettes for the risotto, goat’s cheese salad and riesling that 
proved the best meal of our trip. And if we hadn’t got lost on the way to a 
contemporary art space, who knows if we’d have found the store that sold 
second-hand lederhosen. There was a flaw in being dropped into the urbane, 
aspirational Viennese life. Our wallets never felt fat enough to venture to the 
Urbanauts’ suggested couture house, or to visit their international jeweller 
friend, who does a special line in eyepatch bling. But what the concept did 
achieve was to launch us down interesting streets and into areas of town we 
might not otherwise have explored.

Wieden certainly has a younger, edgier feel than Vienna’s smart, moneyed city 
centre. The music advertised around there is not opera but beats, and the 
district is home to one of the city’s best gay clubs,Motto 
<http://www.motto.at/motto/>, where Conchita Wurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/06/conchita-interview-sensitive-insecure-eurovision-gay-pin-up-austrian>
 regularly performed before her Eurovision victory last year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432134726083%2Fcb4ed4e6-d33c-452a-9de0-b37e68f3024c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wieden%2C%20a%20different%20side%20of%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wieden%2C%20a%20different%20side%20of%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432134726083%2Fcb4ed4e6-d33c-452a-9de0-b37e68f3024c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Radlager bike cafe. Photograph: /Bengt Stiller 
On our second day of exploring, we came across a small bohemian enclave around 
Operngasse which provided moments of purePortlandia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/may/12/portlandia-carrie-brownstein-fred-armisen>
. At the bicycle cafeRadlager <http://radlager.myshopify.com/>, we drank 
delicious coffees that took considerably longer to make than they did to drink. 
A run of shops on Operngasse, from vintage menswear to fifties modern 
furniture, looked inviting enough, but even though we studied their complicated 
opening hours carefully, they were still closed on every occasion we visited. 
Perhaps the owners were waiting for their orders in the bicycle cafe.

Wieden isn’t just some hipster paradise. In fact, walking the district 
provided a reminder of how multicultural Vienna is. For all its high art and 
ballgowns, the city that was once the nerve centre of a global empire remains 
varied and cosmopolitan. A few blocks from the grand facades of Austria’s 
diplomatic embassies, whose flags hung damply in the rain, we stumbled across 
pockets of thriving Japanese and Chinese businesses, before reaching the area’s 
celebratedNaschmarkt 
<http://www.austria.info/uk/discover/naschmarkt-vienna-2011039.html>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432134949210%2F3137e8ef-de0d-4da9-87f6-1278d18f4757-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wieden%2C%20a%20different%20side%20of%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wieden%2C%20a%20different%20side%20of%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432134949210%2F3137e8ef-de0d-4da9-87f6-1278d18f4757-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eating out at the Naschmarkt 
Running down a 1.5km strip between two main roads, the 400-year-old market 
originally sold milk bottles. Today it has specialist tea stalls, Alpine cheese 
and vegetables galore, but the colours and smells that dominate are those of 
the Mediterranean and the Middle East. With Italian antipasti and Lebanese 
sweetmeats vying for our custom, we did the decent thing and bought both, and a 
side of “mountain salami”. And while we had no intention of doing anything more 
complicated than scoffing down our treats as an afternoon picnic, we 
nevertheless passed a happy quarter-hour browsing recipes inBabette’s 
<http://www.babettes.at/de> (Schleifmühlgasse 17, +43 01 585 5165), the nearby 
shop-cum-bakery that specialises in cookery books, spices, and delectable 
pastries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432135161761%2F5976dc84-545e-49c6-8c4a-42c893d90c74-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wieden%2C%20a%20different%20side%20of%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wieden%2C%20a%20different%20side%20of%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Femma-john-wieden-vienna-austria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432135161761%2F5976dc84-545e-49c6-8c4a-42c893d90c74-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Belvedere, Vienna Photograph: views.austria.info 
We may have been eating, drinking and shopping like locals, but there was one 
place we simply had to embrace our inner tourists:Belvedere 
<http://www.belvedere.at/en>, the area’s very own Habsburg palace (although in 
the neighbouring Landstraße district). Its extensive art collection had us 
enthralled even before we reached the third floor where, in its own special 
gallery, gleamed Gustav Klimt’s portrait ofThe Lovers 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Gustav+Klimt%E2%80%99s+portrait+of+The+Lovers&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=7WAAVL7GEuWp7Aa8n4CIAw&ved=0CAYQ_AUoAQ&biw=1824&bih=1030#q=Gustav+Klimt%E2%80%99s+portrait+of+The+Lovers&tbm=isch&tbs=sur:fc&facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=-5fEDS61lMeE6M%253A%3B3iKY4Zo2PCHh1M%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fupload.wikimedia.org%252Fwikipedia%252Fcommons%252Ff%252Ff3%252FGustav_Klimt_016.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fen.wikipedia.org%252Fwiki%252FThe_Kiss_(Klimt)%3B1079%3B1080>
, otherwise known as The Kiss.

After a lifetime of exposure to cheap poster reproductions, the most famous 
painting in Vienna did not disappoint. We bathed in its vast, golden glow, then 
headed to a window and looked out on Belvedere’s baroque gardens. Flanked by 
provocative statues of lady-sphinxes, they stretched all the way back to the 
Karlsplatz. Vienna, viewed from a different angle.
• Accommodation was provided by Urbanauts street lofts, available from €108 
for two people, +43 1 208 39 04,urbanauts.at <http://www.urbanauts.at/>
 