
US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> justice 
Sonia Sotomayor has said the court is likely to have to rule on the issue of 
balancing national security and freedom of speech due to WikiLeaks posting a 
cache of US military records about the Afghan war.

Sotomayor said the incident, which has been condemned by the Pentagon, was 
likely to provoke legislation in Congress that would require judicial scrutiny.

Her comments came in response to a question about security and free speech by 
a student at Denver university. The judge said she could not answer because 
"that question is very likely to come before me". She said the "incident, and 
others, are going to provoke legislation that's already being discussed in 
Congress, and so some of it is going to come up before [the supreme court]".

WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> posted more than 
76,900 records of incidents and intelligence reports about the Afghan war on 
its website last month, providing a devastating portrait of the war. They 
revealed how coalition forces have killed hundreds of civilians in unreported 
incidents and how Nato commanders fear neighbouring Pakistan and Iran are 
fuelling the insurgency.

The publication of the files, which were made available to the Guardian, the 
New York Times and the German weekly Der Spiegel, was one of the biggest leaks 
inUS military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> history. The 
Pentagon has said the leak put the lives of US service personnel and Afghan 
informants at risk â€“ a charge WikiLeaks denies.

Sotomayor said the balance between national security and free speech is "a 
constant struggle in this society, between our security needs and our first 
amendment rights, and one that has existed throughout our history."

Sotomayor compared the issue with the debate over allowing publication of the 
Pentagon Papers, a secret study about the Vietnam war. The New York Times 
published those in 1971 after the supreme court declined to block their 
publication over the objections of the Pentagon.

"That was not the beginning of that question, but an issue that keeps arising 
from generation to generation, of how far we will permit government restriction 
on freedom of speech in favor of protection of the country," Sotomayor said. 
"There's no black-and-white line."
 