
WikiLeaks and its editor-in-chief, Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>, have come under attack from 
US officials and their allies for potentially endangering informants and troops 
in Afghanistan by posting the texts of thousands of leaked war logs.

The US defence secretary, Robert Gates, claimed in Washington: "The 
battlefield consequences are potentially severe and dangerous for our troops, 
our allies and Afghan partners, and may well damage our relationships and 
reputation in that key part of the world."

Gates said sensitive intelligence which could endanger informants had been 
widely distributed down to junior level in the US army, in a loose policy which 
might now have to be reconsidered.

"We endeavour to push access to sensitive battlefield information down to 
where it is most useful – on the front lines – where as a practical matter 
there are fewer restrictions and controls than at rear headquarters," he said. 
"In the wake of this incident, it will be a real challenge to strike the right 
balance between security and providing our frontline troops the information 
they need."

Admiral Mike Mullen, who chairs the joint chiefs of staff, said: "Mr Assange 
can say whatever he likes about the greater good he thinks he and his source 
are doing, but the truth is they might already have on their hands the blood of 
some young soldier or that of an Afghan family."

The Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, called the disclosure of the names of 
Afghans who had co-operated with Nato and US forces "irresponsible and 
shocking". He said in Kabul: "Whether those individuals acted legitimately or 
illegitimately in providing information to the Nato forces, their lives will be 
in danger."

WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> withheld some 15, 000 
intelligence reports to protect informants. But some of the posted texts 
contain details of Afghans who have dealt with the coalition.

Assange said today that they had tried to comply with a private White House 
request to redact the names of informants before publication. But the US 
authorities had refused to assist them.

He said in a statement: "Secretary Gates speaks about hypothetical blood, but 
the grounds of Iraq and Afghanistan are covered with real blood."

Thousands of children and adults had been killed and the US could have 
announced a broad inquiry into these killings, "but he decided to treat these 
issues with contempt''.

He said: "This behaviour is unacceptable. We will continue to expose abuses by 
this administration and others."

Meanwhile, both US and UK authorities remained silent about the disclosures in 
the 92,000 war log files that hundreds of civilians have been killed or wounded 
by coalition forces in unreported or previously under-reported incidents. The 
Ministry of Defence withdrew promises to make an official statement about US 
allegations that two units of British troops had caused exceptional loss of 
civilian life.

MoD sources said that at least 15 of the 21 alleged cases had now been 
confirmed, but they were unable to say what investigations had subsequently 
taken place, or when they would now make a statement.

A detachment of the Coldstream Guards was newly arrived in Kabul when innocent 
civilians were shot on four separate occasions in October-November 2007.

Several different companies of Royal Marine commands are alleged to have shot 
civilians who came "too close" to convoys or patrols on eight occasions in 
Helmand province during the six-month period ending in March 2008.

Sources said that the then Labour foreign secretary, David Miliband, was so 
concerned about civilian deaths that he helped push forward a UN resolution in 
2008, setting up an UN system to monitor such casualties.

But it does not function effectively, according to the independent Human 
Rights Watch. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan reported 828 
civilian deaths in 2008, thanks to "pro-government forces", saying force 
protection incidents, "are of continuing concern", where innocent drivers, car 
passengers or motorcyclists, are shot by passing troops.

The US authorities are concentrating their firepower on leakers and their 
friends. Gates said the FBI had been called in to widen the criminal 
investigation into Private Bradley Manning, who is in military custody charged 
with leaking a classified video showing Apache pilots gunning down two Reuters 
cameramen in Baghdad who they believed might be insurgents.

Manning is being moved from a military jail in Kuwait to Quantico, Virginia, 
and the FBI will now be able to investigate civilians such as Assange, for 
possible conspiracy offences. Assange's whereabouts were unknown today.

• This article was amended on 2 August 2010. The original referred to 
Qauntico, Maryland. This has been corrected.
 