
A US army private under investigation for allegedly leaking classified 
material to theWikiLeaks <http://wikileaks.org/> website has been transferred 
from Kuwait to the US amid growing White House and Pentagon anger over this 
week's revelations about the war in Afghanistan.

Bradley Manning, who has already been charged with leaking a video and other 
material relating to the Iraq war, is now said to be a suspected source for 
tens of thousands of documents which made their way via WikiLeaks to theGuardian
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/afghanistan-the-war-logs>, the New 
York Times and Der Spiegel in Germany.

The war logs <https://www.theguardian.com/world/war-logs> revealed civilian 
casualties at the hands of coalition forces that were far larger than 
previously reported, soaring Taliban attacks and frustration at what allies see 
as support for the insurgency from within Pakistan. Critics have claimed the 
leaks put the lives of Afghan informants and coalition troops at risk.

Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, said yesterday 
those behind the leaks might already have blood on their hands and the US 
defence secretary, Robert Gates, promised the criminal investigation would go 
"wherever it needs to go". He did not rule out theWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> founder Julian Assange, or the 
Guardian and other publications being a target.

CNN  
<http:/edition.cnn.com/2010/US/07/30/us.wikileaks.investigation/?hpt=T1#fbid=PSGiHfXJFzf>
 today reported that Manning, 22, who was an intelligence officer in Iraq, was 
being held at a Marine Corps facility in Quantico, Virginia. No decision had 
been made yet as to whether he should face trial for the earlier alleged 
offences, the news channel said.

Mullen told reporters yesterday: "Mr Assange can say whatever he likes about 
the greater good he thinks he and his source are doing. But the truth is they 
might already have on their hands the blood of some young soldier or that of an 
Afghan family."

Gates said: "We don't know how many more there are out there. It could be a 
substantial additional number of documents. And we have no idea what their 
content is, either."

He dismissed the idea of talking to Assange to learn more about further 
information that might be released. "I'm not sure why we would," he said. "Do 
you think he is going to tell us the truth?"

Gates did not mention Manning by name as he revealed that the Pentagon was 
tightening rules for handling classified material in war zones as a result of 
the leak. Pentagon officials said Manning, who had been stationed at a small 
post outside Baghdad, may not be the sole target of the army inquiry.

"If the kind of breach involved in the downloading of these thousands of 
documents had occurred at a rear headquarters or here in the US, there's a very 
high likelihood we would have detected it," Gates said.

Yesterday the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, criticised the publication of 
the war logs, saying that it could endanger Afghans who worked with Nato forces.

"I heard this yesterday â€¦ that names of certain Afghans who co-operate with 
the coalition have been also revealed in these documents. This indeed is 
extremely irresponsible and shocking," he said. "Because whether those 
individuals acted legitimately or illegitimately by providing information to 
Nato forces, they are lives. And the lives are in danger now," he said.

Assange said yesterday that WikiLeaks had contacted the White House via the 
New York Times and offered to let government officials go through the documents 
to make sure no innocent people were identified. The White House did not 
respond to the approach, he told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

Assange dismissed allegations that innocent people had been put in danger. "We 
have yet to see clear evidence of that," he said.
 