
Official America's reaction to the largest leak of confidential government 
files <https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-us-embassy-cables> in history is 
tipping over towards derangement. What the White House initially denounced as a 
life-threatening "criminal" act and Hillary Clinton branded an "attack on the 
international community" has been taken a menacing stage further by the newly 
emboldened Republican right.

WikiLeaks' release of 250,000 United States embassy cables – shared with the 
Guardian and other international newspapers – was an act of terrorism, 
congressman Peter King declared. Sarah Palin called for its founder Julian 
Assange to be hunted down as an "anti-American operative with blood on his hands
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/wikileaks/8171269/Sarah-Palin-hunt-WikiLeaks-founder-like-al-Qaeda-and-Taliban-leaders.html>
", while former presidential candidateMike Huckabee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/01/us-embassy-cables-executed-mike-huckabee>
 has demanded that whoever leaked the files should be executed for treason.

Not much truck with freedom of information, then, in the land of the free. In 
reality, most of the leaked material is fairly low-level diplomatic gossip, 
which naturally reflects the US government's view of the world, and crucially 
doesn't include reports with the highest security classification.

When it comes to actual criminality and blood, nothing quite matches 
WikiLeaks' earlier revelations about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, with 
their chilling records of US collusion with industrial-scale torture and death 
squads, and killings of Afghan civilians by rampaging Nato troops.

Nor, of course, is what US diplomats write necessarily true. But beyond the 
dispatches onPrince Andrew's crass follies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-andrew> and Colonel Gaddafi's 
"weirdness", the leaks do paint a revealing picture of an overstretched 
imperial system at work, as its emissaries struggle to keep satraps in line and 
enemies at bay.

Much has been made of the appalling damage supposedly done to the delicate 
business of diplomacy. No doubt the back channels will survive the shock of 
daylight. But in any case the United States is the centre of a global empire, a 
state with a military presence in most countries which arrogates to itself the 
role of world leader and policeman.

When genuine checks on how it exercises that entirely undemocratic power are 
so weak at home, let alone in the rest of the world it still dominates, it's 
both inevitable and right that people everywhere will try to find ways to 
challenge and hold it to account.

After the Russian revolution, the secret tsarist treaties with Britain and 
France were published to expose and challenge the colonial carve-ups of the 
day. In the 1970s, thepublication of the Pentagon papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/nov/30/wikileaks-secrets-pentagon-papers>
 cut the ground from beneath the US case for the Vietnam war. Now technology is 
allowing such exposures on a far grander scale.

Clinton complained this week that the leaks "tore at the fabric" of government 
and good relations between states. Far more damaging is her own instruction to 
ordinary US diplomats to violate the treaties the US government has itself 
signed andspy on UN officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/us-embassy-cables-spying-un>, 
along with any other public figure they happen to meet: down to their credit 
card details, biometric records – and even frequent-flyer account numbers.

Not surprisingly, US allies and client states come out badly from the leaks. 
The British government is once again shown to kowtow to US demands for no gain, 
first promising to "put measures in place" to protect American interests in the 
Iraq war inquiry, and then colluding in a plan to deceive parliament and allow 
the US to keep banned cluster-bombs in its bases on Diego Garcia (in exchange 
for which Gordon Brown was firmly rebuffed by the US over the extradition of 
the British computer hackerGary McKinnon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/30/wikileaks-cables-gary-mckinnon-gordon-brown>
).

But it is the relentless US mobilisation against Iran that provides the most 
ominous thread in the leaked despatches. The reports that the king of Saudi 
Arabia has called on the US to "cut off the head of the snake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/150519>" and 
launch what would be a catastrophic attack on Tehran, echoed by his fellow 
potentates in Jordan, Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain – and, of 
course, most dangerously by Israel – were yesterday hailed by the Times as 
evidence of a new "international consensus" against Iran.

It is nothing of the sort. It simply underlines the fact that after more than 
half a century the US still has to rely on laughably unrepresentative 
autocracies and dictatorships to shore up its domination of the Middle East and 
its resources. While Arab emirs andelection-rigging presidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/30/egypt-poll-electoral-fraud-claims>
 fear the influence of Iran and only wearily bring themselves to raise the 
Palestinians with their imperial sponsors, their people regard Israel and the 
US itself as the threats to their security and strongly support Iran's nuclear 
programme – as the most recentUS-conducted poll 
<http://www.brookings.edu/reports/2010/0805_arab_opinion_poll_telhami.aspx> in 
the region demonstrated.

The confirmation in the cables that US military forces are indeed secretly 
operating on Pakistan's territory and that Yemen's president Abdullah Saleh 
felt it necessary to tell General Petraeus this year that he would carry on 
lying about US military operations against jihadists in his country – "we'll 
continue saying they are our bombs, not yours" – only emphasises how weak and 
illegitimate US props and allies are across the Muslim world.

But it's those who have helped to expose such lethal campaigns who are now 
charged with "putting lives at risk". Assange is threatened with ever more dire 
retribution andBradley Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/30/wikileaks-cables-bradley-manning>
, the 23-year-old US army intelligence analyst accused of leaking the Iraq, 
Afghanistan and diplomatic cables is already facing up to 52 years in prison. 
Meanwhile the aircrews of two US Apache helicopters who killed a dozen unarmed 
civilians in Iraq in 2007 as they laughed and crowed – the video of which 
Manning is alleged to have leaked – were commended by US central command for 
their "sound judgment".

Manning is reported to have said that the latest leaks show how "the first 
world exploits the third". But they also cast a powerful light on how the US 
empire has begun to flounder as the post-cold war unipolar moment has passed, 
former dependable client states like Turkey go their own way and independent 
regional powers such as China start to make their global presence felt.

By making available Washington's own account of its international dealings  
WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> has opened some of the 
institutions of global power to scrutiny and performed a democratic service in 
the process. Its next target is said to be the leviathan of the banks – 
bring it on.

• This article was amended on 2 December 2010. The original referred to Peter 
King as a senator. This has now been corrected
 