
Had things worked out differently, Alex Gibney and Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> could have been soulmates – 
instead, they've ended up more as enemies. Gibney is one of the most prolific 
documentary-makers of today, and his films often take the perspective of the 
victim or antihero. As such, Assange was hard to resist. "Here's this 
tremendously romantic figure travelling the world with a laptop in his 
knapsack, exposing abuses of power," says Gibney. "That sounds like a pretty 
good story to me."

He's not the only one: the saga of WikiLeaks, the group's part in exposing US 
atrocities in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the subsequent sexual charges levelled 
at Assange, is one of the biggest of our era. It's a real-life, 21st-century 
spy thriller full of twists – and the race to tell it is on. Gibney's former 
colleagueCharles Ferguson <http://www.praxisfilms.org/about/laura-poitras> 
(director of the Oscar-winningInside Job 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/138694/inside-job>) was at one time 
working on an HBO/BBC documentary. Another film-maker,Laura Poitras 
<http://www.praxisfilms.org/about/laura-poitras>, has the co-operation of 
WikiLeaks for her movie, as does Ken Loach. The Hurt Locker writerMark Boal 
<http://www.deadline.com/2011/02/hurt-lockers-mark-boal-at-center-of-wikileaks-movie-deal-as-other-julian-assange-movies-mobilize/>
 is reportedly working on a WikiLeaks script. Steven Spielberg's DreamWorks has 
just wrapped TheFifth Estate, with Benedict Cumberbatch as Assange 
<http://www.dreamworksstudios.com/news/production-begins-on-dreamworks-wikileaks-project-the-fifth-estate>
. And those are just the frontrunners.

But Gibney's documentary We Steal Secrets: the Story of WikiLeaks is first out 
of the gate – though the central subject is conspicuous by his absence. That's 
part of the reason their relationship soured, explains Gibney. The director was 
in talks with Assange for almost a year. Initially, they got on.Jemima Khan 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2013/02/jemima-khan-inside-story-how-julian-assange-alienated-his-allies>
 (one of We Steal Secrets' producers) introduced them – Gibney even attended
Assange's 40th birthday party 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/entertainment/2011/07/dispatches-julian-assanges-lavish-birthday-bash/39793/>
 in Norfolk, along with Vivienne Westwood and Bianca Jagger, not to mention his 
rivals Ferguson and Poitras. "Charles got in trouble because he kept sneaking 
out his camera," Gibney says with a laugh. "Laura always had access to Julian. 
And nowshe's got Snowden 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2013/jun/09/nsa-whistleblower-edward-snowden-interview-video>
" – as in Edward, whose own whistleblowing saga is the next must-have subject. 
Poitras filmed Snowden's Hong Kong interview for the Guardian in June.

But negotiations broke down when Assange told Gibney the going rate for an 
interview was $1m. Gibney said he never paid his subjects. He goes on: 
"[Assange] then came up with an outrageous idea: 'How about you spy on the 
other interview subjects and report back to me, because I want to know what 
they're saying.' I said, 'No. I can't do that for you. I don't work for you.' 
[Assange] said in a huff, 'I don't work for you, either.'"

Even without that interview, We Steal Secrets feels like the inside story. 
It's a typically polished Gibney product, shaped for maximum dramatic impact, 
with swooping CGI representations of cyberspace that wouldn't look out of place 
in a Matrix sequel. And Gibney gets prime material, including intimate footage 
of Assange from another documentary-maker, Mark Davis, and testimony from one 
of Assange's Swedish accusers, from former WikiLeaks spokesmanDaniel 
Domscheit-Berg <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Domscheit-Berg>, and from 
hacker Adrian Lamo – who weeps at the recollection of shopping Bradley Manning 
to the CIA.

Gibney's version of events has drawn the ire of the "Assangistas", as he calls 
them. From their point of view, most of the film's interviewees are its 
enemies. Neutrality seems impossible in this world.WikiLeaks published an 
annotated transcript <http://wikileaks.org/IMG/html/gibney-transcript.html> of 
the film, disputing key points (inevitably, someone leaked it to them). They 
deny Assange asked for $1m. They condemn Gibney's "sensationalist" editing and 
narration. They describe the film's title as "irresponsible libel" (it's 
actually the NSA director Michael Hayden who says "we steal secrets", the "we" 
being the US government). Gibney disputes their points, dismissing many as 
trivial. "I'm satisfied we didn't get anything wrong."

 And one benefit of Assange's non-cooperation was that it pushed Gibney to 
focus on Manning, the soldier on trial for leaking the war documents to 
WikiLeaks. It's here the film is strongest.Manning's online chats with Lamo 
<http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/07/manning-lamo-logs/> are rendered 
full-screen, and the troubled human behind the text shines through. He 
discusses his sexuality and gender-identity issues, his political conscience 
and alienation. "im in the desert, with a bunch of hyper-masculine trigger 
happy ignorant rednecks as neighbors," he types, "and the only safe place i 
seem to have is this satellite internet connection." Manning is the real hero 
and protagonist of the piece.

Gibney has come under fire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/may/30/wikileaks-documentary-we-steal-secrets>
 for focusing on Manning's personality, and even for turning him into, in the 
words of one blogger, "the crudest gay caricature 
<https://jacobbacharach.wordpress.com/2013/01/25/girl-youll-be-a-woman-soon/>". 
Isn't he deploying the same smear tactics as the US government? "That's not 
what the film is doing," says Gibney. He argues that Manning's character is at 
the heart of what went wrong with WikiLeaks' supposedly anonymous system. "If 
there's this perfect leaking mechanism, and Manning therefore could get away 
scot-free, why did he then reach out to Lamo? Manning actually outed himself. 
Because he desperately needed to talk to somebody. Lamo was also openly 
bisexual, and Manning remarks on that. He wanted to discuss these issues and 
found the perfect person – then Lamo lied to him and turned him in. It's an 
important part of the story."
 'He desperately needed to talk' ... above, a passage from Bradley Manning's 
infamous online chat, rendered in We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks. 
As for Assange, Gibney suggests arrogance undid what his genius had wrought. 
"I think he liked living life as if he was in some spy thriller, but the more 
famous he got, the more he came to inhabit this idea ofbeing a spy, as opposed 
to a transparency radical. So now he's 'getting intel' on people and lying to 
throw people off. You don't speak truth to power, you speak lies to power."
Assange's paranoia was not unfounded 
<http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2013/06/wikileaks-mole/>, admits Gibney. At 
least one WikiLeaks volunteer was discovered to be an FBI informant. "But there 
was an element of him that was always in that paranoid zone. I think ultimately 
he flipped over."

It's safe to assume Gibney has been struck off Assange's party invite list. 
But he is used to making enemies, and has a reputation for holding the powerful 
to account. Subjects he's weighed in on in the past decade include theEnron 
scandal <http://www.pbs.org/independentlens/enron/>, Iraq and Afghanistan (Taxi 
to the Dark Side 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2008/jul/10/behindthescenesoftaxitothedarkside>
, for which he won an Oscar),political lobbying 
<http://www.takepart.com/casinojack> and Freakonomics. Most struggle for years 
to make one film, but Gibney churns out several a year. No wonder rivals 
compare him to an old master, who simply puts finishing touches to his studio's 
work as it rolls off the production line. "It's not that bad," he says. "I do 
all the interviewing. I do all the shoots. I write the narration, I'm just not 
in the editing room every day. It's not like we crank them out in a hurry. It's 
just that there are a few going on at once." Already this year, he has given us 
an explosive expose of the Catholic church's complicity in sexual abuse – Mea 
Maxima Culpa: Silence in the House of God – which followed the trail all the 
way to Pope Benedict, andmay even have played a part in his resignation 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/director-alex-gibney-says-popes-421098>. 
Gibney compares WikiLeaks' response to that of theCatholic League, who 
denounced Mea Maxima Culpa as "a fraud" 
<http://www.catholicleague.org/mea-maxima-culpa-is-a-fraud-2/> and even issued 
threats against him. He didn't take them too seriously though. "Usually when 
you get threatened that's not the problem," he says. "What you fear is that 
something unexpected will happen ... but at the end of the day, you drive 
yourself crazy if you think about that shit too much."

That's where he and Assange differ, perhaps. But in the wider struggle for 
transparency and democratic accountability, they are fundamentally in 
agreement. Gibney unequivocally condemns the Obama administration's persecution 
of whistleblowers like Manning and Snowden: "They're trying to send a message, 
and that message is, 'Watch out, because we're coming after you hard.' That's 
not what I would call the rule of law."

The WikiLeaks story is by no means over; it will likely be decades before a 
definitive account can be told. Gibney has at least told his beforeWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> fatigue sets in – though it could 
have a short shelf life as a result. Never mind; the production line rolls on. 
His next film is about disgraced cyclist Lance Armstrong, which will be ready 
for festivals by autumn. He has been following him since well before last 
year's doping scandal, including every stage of the 2009 Tour de France. It 
should be quite a story.

• This article was amended on Wednesday 10 July 2013. The original article 
said director Charles Ferguson is working on a WikiLeaks documentary. We have 
since found out that the project has been put on hold. The article has been 
amended accordingly. It was further amended on 11 July 2013 to clarify that 
Daniel Domscheit-Berg is a former WikiLeaks spokesman and not one of "Assange's 
Swedish accusers".
 