

Genius ... Autumn Moon, The High Sierra from Glacier Point, Yosemite National 
Park, California, 1948 byAnsel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams>. Photograph: Ansel 
Adams/Corbis

Think of 10 inspirational landscape photographers. (No need to confer: if you 
don't already know their names, they're not famous enough.) Chances are that 
your list won't stretch to a second hand - but one set of initials among them 
will nevertheless rise to the top - just as it would in the universal telephone 
directory of artist-geniuses.

At the preview of the Ansel Adams: Celebration of Genius 
<http://www.anseladams.org.uk/> exhibition at Edinburgh's City Art Centre, I 
overheard several visitors speculate as to whether the odd print here and there 
might not be missed. Yet none of the 150 images on display summon up the 
comforting barefoot idylls or romantic rosy sunsets of so much popular 
landscape photography. Here in Adams' hyper-real American wilderness, a sheer 
rock face dwarfs the majesty of the moon.

Adams' first encounter with the forces of nature left quite an impression: 
aged four, the boy who was to grow up to become of one America's finest 
photographers suffered a badly broken nose - destined never to recover its 
former shape - in the aftershocks of the1906 San Francisco earthquake 
<http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/1906/18april/index.php>. Today, more 
than 90 years after Adams took aKodak No 1 Box Brownie 
<http://www.boxcameras.com/brown1900.html> on the first of his annual visits to 
California's Yosemite National Park <http://www.nps.gov/yose/>, the artist's 
legacy of stunning monochrome images continues to inspire in viewers a healthy 
respect and awe for the natural world.

Taking in the exhibition was like going back to nature, only Adams' 
black-and-white representations are perhaps more vivid than the full-colour 
real deal. (I should know - I've slept in the shadow ofHalf Dome 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Half_Dome> with only a layer of canvas between 
the bears and me.) Dense vegetation in one image demanded a second, third and 
fourth look: surely somewhere in the undergrowth fairies were hard at work 
weaving their magic.

For me, the star of the show was undoubtedly the portfolio of Parmelian prints 
- standard silver gelatin process on gossamer-thin paper - that date from 1927 
and can exchange hands today for as much as$28,000 each 
<http://www.afterimagegallery.com/featureparmelian.htm>. Whether or not it was 
Adams' aim in using this specific process, the extraordinarily fragile prints 
portraying stark monoliths reflect particularly well the delicate relationship 
between man and his surroundings.

What I found most astounding, though, was that because of his exacting 
technique, Adams didn't have to "go large" to maximise the impact of his 
prints. As a founding member ofGroup f/64 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/f64/hd_f64.htm>, Adams employed the smallest 
of apertures in his work, resulting in a mesmerising depth of field and 
sharpness. Viewing Adams' work is an intimate and personal experience, and even 
in prints measuring no more than 8x6 inches, I defy even the most elusive of 
nooks and crannies to escape the viewer's gaze.

I left the preview humbled, and thinking that Adams did for landscape what 
Henri Cartier-Bresson 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,,1276164,00.html> did for 
reportage, representing the Californian wilderness (and sometimes beyond) in 
all its grandeur without resorting to elaborate darkroom shenanigans to make 
his audience gasp in admiration. Never mind that Adams' French contemporary 
apparentlylambasted the American 
<http://www.anseladams.com/content/ansel_info/anseladams_biography2.html> for 
his narrow field of vision: "The world is falling to pieces and all Adams and 
[Edward] Weston photograph is rocks and trees." Through his influential images 
and involvement in theSierra Club <http://www.sierraclub.org/>, Adams helped to 
preserve Yosemite and other vital pockets of the world.

In this disposable, digital age, does any other landscape photographer come 
close to having such an impact - emotional or environmental?
 