
Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> programmes have 
totally failed to have an impact on conservation, the presenter of some of the 
UK’s most popular natural history shows has said.

Martin Hughes-Games, presenter of the BBC’s Springwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/springwatch>, Autumnwatch and 
Winterwatch series, told the Guardian that they have instead created “a form of 
entertainment, a utopian world that bears no resemblance to the reality”.

“We were hoping that by making these terribly popular programmes we might have 
had some positive effect on conservation. But sadly the peak of wildlife film 
making – Trials of Life, the most successful blue chip series – has coincided 
with an appalling crash in the number of wildlife around the world,” he said.

“I’ve been doing this for 35 years and we always used to say what Sir David 
[Attenborough] used to say, which was that by making people aware of wildlife 
and conservation issues – that’s the first step – they will get involved,” he 
said. “That’s been the plan but clearly that has not worked; we have failed.”

Earth has lost half of its wildlife in the past 40 years, says WWF
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/29/earth-lost-50-wildlife-in-40-years-wwf>
Half of the planet’s species – across land, rivers and seas – have been wiped 
out since the 1970s,a report  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/29/earth-lost-50-wildlife-in-40-years-wwf>
revealed last year. Humans are responsible for the devastation say WWF, through 
slaughtering animals for food in unsustainable numbers and through pollution 
and destruction of their habits.

Hughes-Games added: “The worry in my mind is that actually we have created a 
form of entertainment rather than a force for conservation, a utopian world 
that bears no resemblance to the reality.”

Hughes-Games was speaking in London alongside his co-presenter Chris Packham 
ahead of the launch of the new series ofAutumnwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch> on BBC Two on Monday.

He arrived at the interview having spent three nights camping on top of a Land 
Rover on the Scottish Isle of Rùm. He believes they have captured the first 
footage of a red deer rut at night, a phenomenon that has so far evaded 
scientific explanation he said.

“Even though we have seen the rut during the day and it’s been studied for 60 
years – it’s one of the longest running mammal studies in the world – the 
scientists have no idea what happens at night, they haven’t had any way of 
peering into the darkness,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fautumnwatch-style-wildlife-programmes-dont-help-conservation-says-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa0e347890faf037f10148042bb99aba79579be9%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20TV%20shows%20don't%20help%20conservation%2C%20says%20Autumnwatch%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fautumnwatch-style-wildlife-programmes-dont-help-conservation-says-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20TV%20shows%20don%27t%20help%20conservation%2C%20says%20Autumnwatch%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fautumnwatch-style-wildlife-programmes-dont-help-conservation-says-presenter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa0e347890faf037f10148042bb99aba79579be9%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 This series of Autumn watch features what may be the first footage of a red 
deer rut at night. Photograph: Ben Pruchnie/Getty Images 
“We saw the stags fighting – can you imagine that in the darkness? It’s 
incredibly dangerous; if they make a slight stumble they could drive their 
antlers into the body. They either have fantastic eyesight or they can hear 
much better than we dreamt – we don’t know.” The footage is now being studied 
by scientists at the University of Edinburgh.

Packham is more excited about Caerlaverock, a vast wetland reserve on the 
Scottish coast that forms the backdrop for this year’s show. Hundreds of 
thousands of wildfowl congregate there every year on their migration from 
Svalbard and Iceland.

It is “one of Britain’s greatest wildlife spectacles”, the equivalent of “a 
mad kaleidoscopic Brigit Riley”, he said, referring to the English painter who 
emerged in the sixties and became known for creating patterns that could induce 
motion sickness or dizziness.

The popular Springwatch, Autumnwatch and Winterwatch series are famous for 
using sophisticated technology to capture unseen behaviour and the high drama 
of the animal kingdom live on air, often attracting more than 3 million loyal 
viewers. Some of the series’ creatures are even celebrated enough to have been 
afforded names andTwitter accounts <https://twitter.com/spinelesssimon> by 
their fans.

But Packham said the fact they film live in familiar locations and signpost 
viewers to volunteering opportunities keeps them coming back for more – and 
encourages them to become conservationists.

“It’s more accessible – it’s not only happening on your doorstep, it’s 
happening now and we tell people how to find it. It makes it easier for people 
to engage. We live in an age where people will gladly watch it on TV but it is 
our job to move them out.”

Yet it is getting harder, he said: “people don’t let their kids out anymore – 
they are not free to run around in the countryside, picking things up, touching 
them, eating them – that doesn’t happen.”

Packham, though somewhat more reserved on the role of wildlife shows is no 
less so on the scale of the challenge. The ex-punk rocker and presenter of the 
popular children’s showThe Really Wild Show is not known for his restrained 
opinions; he berated leading conservation charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/01/chris-packham-slams-shameful-silence-of-britains-conservation-charities>
 in the press two months ago for “fence-sitting, ineffectual risk-avoidance” in 
the fights against fox hunting, the badger cull and to protect England’s rarest 
bird of prey, the hen harrier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fautumnwatch-style-wildlife-programmes-dont-help-conservation-says-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5da1f6b085ad90f34182f2a19862bd5269b77f3%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20TV%20shows%20don't%20help%20conservation%2C%20says%20Autumnwatch%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fautumnwatch-style-wildlife-programmes-dont-help-conservation-says-presenter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20TV%20shows%20don%27t%20help%20conservation%2C%20says%20Autumnwatch%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fautumnwatch-style-wildlife-programmes-dont-help-conservation-says-presenter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5da1f6b085ad90f34182f2a19862bd5269b77f3%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 A hen harrier on Bowland moor, Lancashire. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for 
the Guardian 
But he applauded charities for recently calling on the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/13/nhs-should-spend-millions-on-nature-for-health-plan-say-wildlife-groups>
 to deliver a long-term plan to protect the UK’s natural habitats and species 
and to give it due consideration in a time of austerity. The push is largely a 
response to an unprecedented stocktake of the country’s species in 2013 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/Images/stateofnature_tcm9-345839.pdf>, which revealed 
that 60% of species studied had declined in recent decades, with more than one 
in ten at risk of disappearing from the UK altogether.

“How heartening it was that our principle conservation agencies had the 
courage to put so much bad news into one document. Whilst no one likes being 
browbeaten by prophecies of doom, we are largely in a position where we can 
rectify the problems if we implement the correct measures.”

Now the public needs to respond he said: “It’s all too easy to point the 
finger at government. The job of our programme is to empower yourself to 
realise you can make a difference – don’t think it’s going to be done by a 
conservation agency or the government or anyone else. Just not paving over your 
garden can make a difference. I’m a do-it-yourself ex-punk rocker – I’m going 
to do everything I can and then radiate out.”
 