
Q My wife recently gave birth to our second child and has since been on 
maternity leave which is set to last for a year. However, it looks like we may 
not be able to afford paying the childcare costs for two children if she 
returns to work. Ordinarily this would not have beenÂ a problem but our mortgage 
is up for renewal about one month before my wife has to decide whether to 
resign or return to work. The return to work would be a couple of months 
afterwards.

I wonder if you can help me understand what our options are when remortgaging. 
Should I remortgage with just my income or should I include my wife's even 
though she may be resigning shortly after the mortgage application is granted 
(hopefully). My earnings would be able to cover the mortgage and our outgoings 
especially with the current rates of interest. Nonetheless, is there a risk 
that I may have difficulty remortgaging with either my current bank or other 
banks because I will be the sole earner? If I fail to remortgage due to our 
circumstances, what options will we have? The only one I can think of is to 
remain with our lender's standard variable rate, but of course that would be an 
issue if the rates start to rise.LH

A The fact that your wife is currently on maternity leave will make a 
difference to your ability to get a new mortgage but a lot depends on a 
lender's approach. In the past, some lenders have refused to take the income of 
someone about to take or already on maternity leave into account when assessing 
a mortgage application, on the grounds that the woman might not return to work. 
However, such a practice has been deemed to be discriminatory and so illegal.

In your case, it wouldn't matter as you reckon you can manage the mortgage 
payments on your salary alone. But whether your lender agrees with you is 
another matter. You won't have difficulty remortgaging because you are the sole 
earner, but you could have problems if your income doesn't meet your lender's 
affordability requirements.

So it may be that you do need to include your wife's income in your 
application. Some lenders will only take account of her actual income at the 
time of applying which may be a lot lower than her return-to-work salary unless 
she has a very generous maternity package. However, provided you can produce a 
letter from her employer confirming the date your wife intends to return to 
work and what her salary will be and she'll be returning within three months of 
your mortgage application, most lenders will take her full return-to-work 
salary into account when looking at affordability. But most lenders also factor 
in the extra expense of having children, which includes taking account of 
childcare costs. These costs will affect the amount you can borrow and could 
even wipe out the beneficial effect of having your wife's income included in 
the calculation. You could be better off applying with just your income because 
childcare costs wouldn't then need to be accounted for. You are likely to have 
to do this anyway as it will be hard to get the necessary employer's letter 
since your wife isn't planning to go back to work.

If you don't succeed in getting a new mortgage, you are right that one option 
open to you is to stick with your lender's standard variable rate; a reasonable 
option given that interest rates are not predicted to rise in the near future. 
Alternatively, because you are an existing customer, you may be able to move to 
a different deal with your current lender.
 