Burroughs is famous for pioneering the cut-up technique - literally chopping 
and rearranging words to create new texts. Less famous is the man with whom he 
developed the process. Name him  Brion Gysin  Brian Catling  Brian Moore  Bryan 
Adams Which of these IS NOT a quote from Burroughs' fiction?  Insofar as I 
succeed in Direct recording of certain areas of psychic process I may have 
limited function  A place where the unknown past and the emergent future meet 
in a vibrating soundless hum  Want of a wife, single good fortune, possession 
universally  Squatting on old bones and excrement and rusty iron, in a white 
blaze of heat, a panorama of naked idiots stretches to the horizon Burroughs 
left almost as big a mark on music as he did on literature. Which of these pop 
records DOES NOT draw the name of either the band or the song directly from 
Burroughs' work  The Black Angel's Death Song by the Velvet Underground  The 
Wild Boys by Duran Duran  Reelin' In the Years by Steely Dan  Love Makes Sweet 
Music by Soft Machine Dr Benway is a recurring character in Burroughs' fiction. 
A demented doctor, Benway employs which of these unusual instruments in 
performing heart surgery?  Sticking plasters  A toilet plunger  A crucifix  An 
office stapler Jack Kerouac included a barely fictionalised portrait of 
Burroughs in On the Road. What name did he give him?  The Man  Bill Brown  
Bilbo Bag  Old Bull Lee Written in the 1980s, Burroughs' Red Night Trilogy 
comprises the novels Cities of the Red Night, The Place of Dead Roads and ...  
The Western Lands  A Horse With No Name  What the Thunder Said  City of 
Bacchanal Only one of the following is the title of a Burroughs novel. Which?  
Blade Runner  Running Man  The Big Lebowski  Chariots of Fire Written before 
either of the two had become famous, and published only after their deaths, And 
the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks was written in alternating chapters by 
Burroughs and ... ?  Allen Ginsberg  Gregory Corso  Jack Kerouac  John Updike 
For a German edition of Cities of the Red Night, Burroughs collaborated with 
which cult comics artist?  Robert Crumb  S Clay Wilson  Joe Sacco  Posy Simmonds
At which of these jobs, used as material for his fiction, did Burroughs work in 
real life?  Dentistry  Taxidermy  Pest extermination  Customer service  You gotâ€¦
 You know too much. The language police have been informed, and they're coming 
for your mind  Not bad, but a little conventional, don't you think?  Shocking, 
appalling, disturbing. But don't get cut up about it!  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  