
Will Arnett is having himself a pretty good year. In spring he loaned his 
iron-and-gravel Bond-villain voice toThe Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-lego-movie>, playing an infuriatingly 
pedantic and melodramatic Batman in a delightful movie that made a tasty $468 
million (£290m) worldwide. In the summer he went toe-to-toe with his Lego 
co-star Chris Pratt as their respective movies, Marvel’sGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> and the Michael 
Bay-rebootedTeenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles>, faced off in 
an epic struggle at America’s multiplexes. Guardians may have won the cultural 
moment and the summer box office ($644m/£400m), but don’t sniff at TMNT either. 
Don’t sniff at any movie that makes $350m (£215m) in worldwide receipts on 
largely middling reviews. In a year ofhistorically dismal receipts at the 
American box office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/sep/01/guardians-of-the-galaxy-us-box-office-summer-2014>
, Arnett was in two of the biggest smashes. He also has a new sitcom, The 
Millers, that’s been renewed for a second season. Life is good all over again. 
(He says he did it all for his kids.)

In TMNT Arnett plays Vern Fenwick, hapless and lovelorn cameraman to intrepid 
city desk reporter April O’Neil (Megan Fox), who barely notices his knock-kneed 
crush as they happen upon the titular subterranean superheroes. Vern, snarky 
but likable, infatuated but not creepy, is a step away from Arnett’s usual 
brand of hyper unself-aware egomaniacs and priapically inclined winner-losers.

“Vern’s much less broken than those guys,” says Arnett, “a lot less 
psychologically cracked. That in itself was kind of interesting and important 
to me. I’m not so interested any more in those parts that I already played.”

This, I must admit, is tragic news to me, fan as I am of the entire, seething 
menagerie of dicks, douchebags, dimwits and dunderheads he has created in the 
decade or more since the debut ofArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/arrested-development-episode-by-episode>
. In sitcom after sitcom and movie after movie, and in his other job as a 
voiceover actor and artist, he has staked a place for himself as perhaps the 
most aggressively amusing, terrifying, vanity-free and daring of post-Apatow, 
post-Seinfeld comic actors – an incredibly dependable and omnipresent A-type 
bully and crybaby with a heart of pure mush.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fwill-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412867956499%2Fceb79448-51d0-4286-9d0b-6dc8e05c1477-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Arnett%3A%20'I'm%20done%20with%20super-dumb'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fwill-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Arnett%3A%20%27I%27m%20done%20with%20super-dumb%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fwill-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412867956499%2Fceb79448-51d0-4286-9d0b-6dc8e05c1477-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Once I was in comedy, I was in it for good, and I never imagined doing 
anything else’ … Will Arnett (right) in Arrested Development with Jason 
Bateman. Photograph: Rex 
“I spent a lot of time quasi-fascinated with characters who were super-dumb 
and super-cocky,” he replies. “I always liked that combination. I find that 
lack of self-awareness amazing. But now I’m probably not as interested, it’s a 
new phase. I spent 10 years doing it. With Mutant Ninja Turtles I wanted to 
play a character who lives more in the real world, although yes, I grant you, 
he immediately encounters, um, turtles, of the teenage mutant ninja variety. 
He’s got a thing about Megan’s character, and he doesn’t really go about it in 
the right way. His timing isn’t great. He’s interested in her, but she kind of 
shoots him down or doesn’t even notice, but I like to think of him rising above 
it.”

Director Jonathan Liebesman says Arnett was the studio’s idea, but he couldn’t 
have been happier with what resulted. “I knew him fromArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>, but as 
everybody will tell you, you just wind him up on set and he comes up with so 
many things, an embarrassment of riches to choose from. And the writers had 
given him some great jumping-off points. One throwaway moment with him tossing 
a hat into a van, I thought, well, nothing much we can do with that, but Will 
made it work beautifully. He knows comedy better than I do, so it was good to 
learn from him how it was done, and believe me, he knows how it’s done.”

Arnett, practical Canadian that he is, is pretty “aw shucks” in the face of 
such effusive praise. “The Turtles are a known entity – there’s a fun factor to 
them, almost a parody of superheroes, but they’re still superheroes, just 
jokier, more smart-ass and funny, and you have to keep that balance. My job was 
to make it lighter, to give you a contrast to the more hard-driving action 
scenes. There was a lot of space given to improvisation, to finding things that 
felt fresh, made sense and were funny. They wanted someone associated with 
April who could inject a little humour and levity, not in a farcical way but in 
a real way. And as long as it moved the story forward in some way, there was 
nothing we weren’t prepared to try.”

He also spent a lot of time on set plying the ice cream-addicted but 
lactose-intolerant director with gigantic sundaes to see if he’d ever refuse 
one. “And he didn’t!” says Arnett. “After it became a daily thing, he’d say, 
‘No, no, no, no, NO! I do not want any more ice cream!’ and we’d go, OK, we’ll 
just leave it, uh, right here … and he’d always buckle and eat it – like 
angrily, furiously!”

Arnett’s good year followed a pretty bad year or two. In April 2012 he and his 
wife – and his incestuous skating sister and co-star inBlades of Glory,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/117620/blades.of.glory> Parks and 
Recreation <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation> star 
Amy Poehler – separated after nine years of marriage. In the meantime, his 
well-reviewed new sitcom Up All Night, in which he co-starred with Maya Rudolph 
and Christina Applegate, was meddled with, then cancelled by NBC. A rotten 
time, overall?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fwill-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412872220849%2F355b31f8-6d91-4356-aee3-0bd35b5b291b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Arnett%3A%20'I'm%20done%20with%20super-dumb'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fwill-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Arnett%3A%20%27I%27m%20done%20with%20super-dumb%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fwill-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412872220849%2F355b31f8-6d91-4356-aee3-0bd35b5b291b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Will Arnett with Parks and Recreation star Amy Poehler, from whom he split in 
2012 after nine years of marriage. Photograph: NBC/Getty 
“I think that’s a pretty fair assessment. NBC wanted to breathe some new life 
into it and wanted to switch directions on the show – and we just became kind 
of rudderless at some point. Very strange, it kind of came apart at the seams. 
I looked at Backstage magazine one morning and it said, Christina Applegate is 
out and I thought, well, that’s officially falling apart now. I came through, 
though … I had some difficult times, but really, let’s keep it in perspective, 
nobody died. I’m lucky, I’ve got great kids who are healthy and happy, and as 
far as I’m concerned, the rest is gravy.”

Then, almost the same week, he was sought out and cast by My Name is Earl 
creator Greg Garcia as the lead in his sitcomThe Millers 
<http://www.cbs.com/shows/the-millers/>. “And now Margo Martindale is my mom!” 
His dad is Beau Bridges, Glee’s Jayma Mays is his sister, and one of his oldest 
friends, Sean Hayes, is about to join the cast. The critics have embraced the 
show – most of them were just blown away just by the cast – and it got renewed 
for a second season in March. That, on top of two certified movie mega-hits.

But flash back a decade or more and ask yourself if you can name who Arnett 
played on … The Sopranos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lezadysaw0M>? I can’t 
either, off the cuff, but he was the usually out-of-focus husband of the FBI 
agent who went undercover as Adriana LaServa’s big-hair Jersey-girl gal-pal. 
Two, three episodes, maybe, a tiny role in a historic show. That’s how Arnett’s 
career was then. His early credits demonstrate that casting directors strongly 
believed in him – Sex and the City cameo, Law & Order walk-on, a Third Watch 
part, one in Boston Public – but nobody big was biting. He appeared in four 
pilots that weren’t picked up, in series that were cancelled nearly 
immediately, or where his part was excised after the pilot. He drank a lot, he 
says, and the year 2000 was all about bottoming out then resurfacing with 
renewed commitment and purpose.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Acgb9RsfCI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Acgb9RsfCI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Acgb9RsfCI&media=>
It must have worked, because he next was cast in Arrested Development which, 
while famously anaemic in terms of ratings, was deemed a groundbreaking 
American comedy by critics and cult fans.Arnett’s Gob Bluth – an insanely 
unintegrated magician <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Nvxv2R01po>, clueless 
cocksman and a champion of lachrymose self-loathing in times of crisis – stood 
out as a brilliant comic creation even among the monsters and gargoyles in the 
rest of the cast. Thus began Arnett’s glorious decade of assholes and idiots. 
He followed Arrested creator Mitch Hurwitz to two other shows, Running Wilde, 
in which he was another drunk, degenerate creep, and the animated Sit Down Shut 
Up, in which he played a priapic and self-regarding English teacher. With 
Arrested co-star David Cross he appeared inThe Increasingly Poor Decisions of 
Todd Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/21/one-last-thing-david-cross>, 
as his incompetent, gambling-addicted, whore-mongering boss. And then there’s 
30 Rock, another pinnacle. I could list a half-dozen others, and I wish there 
would be more, so much do I love Arnett in this mode.

And none of it was planned, he says. “When I was a kid I was a fan of comedy. 
I always loved Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, Bill Murray and Dave Letterman – not 
an actor, obviously but I’m still impressed by his wit. I wanted to emulate 
them because they made me laugh. I was probably a bit of a class clown in 
school [he got expelled from one], but I never thought I could do it as a 
living. I grew up in Toronto and that kind of thing didn’t seem available to 
me. I started acting as a teenager, but it wasn’t until I moved to New York 
when I was 20 that I made any kind of commitment. I never thought I was funnier 
than anybody else. Wait – that’s also NOT true!” he chuckles. “I didn’t get 
into acting to be a comedic actor, I wanted to be a dramatic actor. No, I was a 
dramatic actor. It’s just been a while since I did much serious work. I took a 
while to cycle over to the comedy side of things. Once I was in it, though, I 
was in it for good, and I never really imagined doing anything else.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbreaking-bad-arrested-development-stars-line-up-animation-bojack-horseman&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F30%2F1406739033487%2FBojack-Horseman-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20Bad%20and%20Arrested%20Development%20stars%20line%20up%20for%20new%20animation%20BoJack%20Horseman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbreaking-bad-arrested-development-stars-line-up-animation-bojack-horseman>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20Bad%20and%20Arrested%20Development%20stars%20line%20up%20for%20new%20animation%20BoJack%20Horseman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbreaking-bad-arrested-development-stars-line-up-animation-bojack-horseman&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F7%2F30%2F1406739033487%2FBojack-Horseman-017.jpg>
That magnificent macho Blofeld voice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BT00WU7Iss> of his netted him work as the 
signature voice of General Motors a few years ago (it’s one over from his 
Batman voice in The Lego Movie, proof that macho and ridiculous are basically 
twins). And it is the heart ofBoJack Horseman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/29/bojack-horseman-review-curb-your-enthusiasm-daria-netflix-will-arnett-aaron-paul>
, Arnett’s new Netflix animated comedy, in which he plays an alcoholic, 
self-hating equine ex-TV star. Yep, he’s a fading TV horse-celebrity who 
drinks. The cast includes Alison Brie, Paul F Tompkins and Breaking Bad’s Aaron 
Paul. Arnett may say he’s looking to get more serious, and I hope he does, but 
BoJack proves, happily, his reluctance to kill that old creepy Arnett I love so 
much, and for that I’m bottomlessly glad.
 