
Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> banked 
nearly £100,000 from his two winners here on Saturday, but it is the thought of 
what his big-race double may foreshadow at Cheltenham in March that will 
concern bookmakers and Britain’s biggest jumping stables alike.

There was a sense of inevitability as Un De Sceaux and Vroum Vroum Mag went 
about their business in the Clarence House Chase and Mares’ Hurdle 
respectively, and several firms now quote Mullins as joint-favourite withPaul 
Nicholls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-nicholls> to win the British 
trainers’ championship, a feat which has not been achieved by an Irish trainer 
since 1954. Mullins saddled a record eight winners at last year’s Festival. As 
things stand, the ante-post markets already suggest he will reach double 
figures this time around, and his options and expectations seem to increase by 
the day.

Peace And Co switched to Sandown Champion Hurdle trial race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/22/champion-hurdle-hope-peace-and-co-sandown-trial>
Vroum Vroum Mag’s easy win here ensured that, one way or another, he will have 
a major runner in both the World Hurdle and the Festival’s Grade One event for 
mares, while Un De Sceaux is now odds-on for the Queen Mother Champion Chase 
with Sprinter Sacre, now 10 years old and without a Grade One win since April 
2013, the only other contender at a single-figure price.

The exceptional engine that growls inside Un De Sceaux’s impressive frame has 
never been in doubt.His fall at the second-last when a long way clear at 
Leopardstown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/27/un-de-sceaux-arkle-chase-betting-leopardstown-fall>
 last time seemed to nag in backers’ minds, however, and he set off at 1-2, his 
biggest price in three runssince last season’s Arkle Trophy.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/mar/10/cheltenham-festival-2015-opening-day-in-pictures>

Un De Sceaux seemed a little more careful than usual at the first few fences, 
but flew the third-last and then powered home by five lengths from Sire De 
Grugy, theChampion Chase winner in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/12/sire-de-grugy-champion-chase-cheltenham-festival>
. WithDodging Bullets, who took Cheltenham’s two-mile championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/11/dodging-bullets-cheltenham-festival-champion-chase>
 last March, yet to appear this season, a mishap during the race could now be a 
more significant danger for Un De Sceaux at the Festival than any of his 
opponents.

“Unfortunately he had a fall the last day, but he’s probably got a lot more 
respect for fences now,” Mullins said. “You could see him pricking his ears 
going to a fence and sorting out his stride and that’s what he needed to learn.

“He was a lot more settled today, he was in his own rhythm and jumping in his 
own time. Ruby [Walsh] just sat there and let him sort himself out. We’re 
probably happy leaving it at that [before Cheltenham], I wouldn’t be looking 
for a race anyway.

Betfair waiting in wings to snap up Ladbrokes World Hurdle sponsorship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/20/betfair-ladbrokes-world-hurdle-sponsorship-authorised-betting-partner>
“I’m as gobsmacked and our team at home is as gobsmacked as you guys [by the 
strength and depth of the stable’s Festival team]. We don’t take it for 
granted, we look at it and we think it’s unbelievable. We don’t think it’s a 
God-given right or anything, we appreciate the fact that we have some beautiful 
horses.”

Vroum Vroum Mag was equally impressive in her Grade Two event, and her target 
at the Festival is likely to depend on plans for Annie Power, the runner-up in 
the World Hurdle two years ago, who has yet to race this season. “Annie Power 
worked this morning and I didn’t hear that she’d worked badly so I’m assuming 
she worked all right,” Mullins said. “That’s means she’s progressing.

“It would be a much harder task to go there [the World Hurdle] without a prep 
run. Every day she stays right, we have a better chance, but it’s seven weeks 
on Tuesday, and trying to run her in a staying hurdle that close to the 
Festival on her first run of the season could be tough.”

The ante-post markets feel Mullins will struggle to get a run into Annie Power 
and she is a 4-5 chance for the Mares’ Hurdle, with Vroum Vroum Mag next in the 
list at 13-2. Vroum Vroum Mag is a shorter price for the World Hurdle, however, 
in whichColin Tizzard’s Thistlecrack  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/19/thistlecrack-long-walk-colin-tizzard-king-george-ascot>
is the only favourite for one of the Festival’s four feature events that is not 
trained by Mullins.

At Haydock, The New One won the track’s Champion Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/champion-hurdle> Trial for the second year 
running, but once again had to work hard for victory despite setting off as the 
odds-on favourite. It was only after jumping the last that The New One finally 
took charge from the front-running Rayvin Black, and while he was clearly on 
top at the line, the form was well below what will be needed simply to make the 
frame in the Champion Hurdlehad been expected. “Ground-wise today, it is a 
different kind of testing,” Sam Twiston-Davies, who was riding The New One for 
his father Nigel, said afterwards. “It is so lifeless and it just kills all his 
good attributes.

“[I’m] happy, but as always with this race, we’re not coming out fully 
delighted, but there’s a bit to work on yet. Obviously, Faugheen is very, very 
good, but second, third, fourth [in the Champion Hurdle], the crumbs are very 
tasty ones.”

Mullins’s Faugheen, last year’s Champion Hurdle winner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/10/faugheen-wins-champion-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
 is the 8-13 favourite to retain his title ahead of his run in the Irish 
Champion Hurdle at Leopardstown on Sunday.
 