
In a roll call of the pioneers of modern photography, one name is never 
invoked. From the late 1920s to the 1950s,William Mortensen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NVMeoK4rU1s> was one of the most famous and 
celebrated photographers in America. However, his subject matter – which veered 
towards the savage, indecorous, gothic and grotesque – as well as his use of 
montage and illustration, made him a pariah among the puritanical new guard in 
photography, led byAnsel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams>, who tried to write him 
out of history.

For decades, Mortensen’s work <http://www.whmortensen.com/> and ideas were 
kept alive by a small coterie of adherents. Only in recent years has he been 
recognised as a unique and innovative visual stylist, leading to the 
publication this month ofAmerican Grotesque 
<http://feralhouse.com/american-grotesque/>, the first major survey of 
Mortensen’s work and career, which will be marked by retrospectives in New 
York, Los Angeles and Seattle.

Mortensen was the last of the great pictorialist photographers, the movement 
that dominated early 20th-century photography. Working in Hollywood, he shot 
many of the leading stars of his day: Rudolph Valentino, Lon Chaney, Fay Wray, 
Jean Harlow, Clara Bow and Peter Lorre all submitted themselves to the gaze of 
his lens. At the height of his fame, his images were published in Vanity Fair, 
he had a weekly photography column in the Los Angeles Times, and he wrote a 
series of bestselling instructional books.

While much pictorialist photography drew on Romanticism, especially the 
landscape and portrait paintings ofCaspar David Friedrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/feb/19/artsfeatures2> and John 
William Waterhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/pictures/image/0,8543,-10604749279,00.html>, 
Mortensen disdained this, seeing it as belonging to the school of “fuzzy-wuzzy” 
photography. His work was more in tune with the popular taste, unashamedly 
exploring primal images of sex and violence that took their cue from the 
Universal monster movies that reigned supreme in the late 1920s and 30s, and 
the dark, nightmarish German expressionist style that inspired them.L’Amour 
<http://payload.cargocollective.com/1/2/88505/1172524/03William-Mortensen--L-Amour_900.jpg>
, one of Mortensen’s most iconic images, features a semi-naked woman lying on 
the ground, possibly dead, as a monstrous ape leers over her with a club, 
clearly a reference toKing Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/king-kong-science-fiction>, which 
had been released two years earlier in 1933.

He also produced explicit images of torture and death, long before the public 
was exposed to that kind of material daily through war photography and 
televised images of conflict.The Glory of War 
<http://www.thescreamonline.com/photo/photo08-01/mortensen/fig18.html>, from 
1927, depicted a young woman lying among rubble and detritus, dirtied and 
bloodied, seemingly felled by a wooden beam, clutching a crucifix to her 
breast. Religious persecution, especially crucifixion, was a repeated theme, 
usually featuring naked women, chained, shackled and tormented by hooded 
figures. Historical figures, such as Machiavelli and Paganini, were also 
favourites, often personified by Hollywood stars; in one such image, Peter 
Lorre played Napoleon.

Mortensen’s methods often made it hard to distinguish whether the results were 
photographs or not. He used traditional printmaking techniques, such as 
bromoiling, and developed many of his own. He would create composite images, 
scratch, scrape and draw on his prints, then apply a texture that made them 
look like etchings, thereby disguising his manipulations. Consequently, every 
print was unique. Ultimately, Mortensen’s aim was to create something that, for 
all intents and purposes, appeared to be a photograph, yet portrayed scenes so 
fantastic they caused wonder and astonishment in the viewer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F06%2Fwilliam-mortensen-photography-master-macabre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412351090156%2F4575ac6f-d34c-4f3f-b817-43c33f19ffd2-1816x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Mortensen%3A%20photographic%20master%20at%20the%20monster%E2%80%99s%20ball&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F06%2Fwilliam-mortensen-photography-master-macabre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Mortensen%3A%20photographic%20master%20at%20the%20monster%E2%80%99s%20ball&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F06%2Fwilliam-mortensen-photography-master-macabre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412351090156%2F4575ac6f-d34c-4f3f-b817-43c33f19ffd2-1816x2040.jpeg>
 L’Amour (1935). Photograph: William Mortensen 
A native of Park City, Utah, Mortensen had trained in various artistic 
disciplines, including painting, illustration and etching, both there and at 
the Art Students League of New York, before taking off for the west coast in 
1922 at the age of 25. In LA, he worked with directorFerdinand Pinney Earle 
<http://bigerboat.com/indexfx/?p=546>, painting matte backgrounds for The 
Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, a 1922 silent epic starring Ramon Navarro. He also 
persuaded Earle to hire 14-year-oldFay Wray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/aug/11/guardianobituaries.film> for the 
film, her first screen appearance.

Mortensen had brought Wray, the younger sister of his then fiancée, with him 
to Los Angeles, acted as her chaperone and guardian, and introduced her to 
people he thought could further her career. He also took photographs of Wray 
that she would later credit as being influential in the development of her own 
self-image. “There was a person in those pictures I hadn’t seen before,” she 
wrote in her 1989 memoir, “even if I had suspected she could be there.” Her 
mother thought otherwise and – suspecting an improper relationship between the 
two, which Wray denied – angrily confronted Mortensen and destroyed, in his 
presence, all the glass negatives he had taken of her daughter. They were 
separated, but Wray would continue to consider Mortensen her most significant 
mentor.

Through Earle, Mortensen was introduced to Cecil B DeMille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/18/ten-commandments-demille-mccarthy>
, with whom he would work as a set decorator, costumier and set photographer. 
DeMille, an enthusiastic patron of Mortensen’s work, privately published a 
monograph of his photographs from the set of The King of Kings. Mortensen also 
made batik, costume jewellery and papiermâché masks. He produced a number of 
alien-looking tribal masks for the Tod Browning movieWest of Zanzibar 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6YgT-wz8cio>, which starred Lon Chaney as a 
paraplegic magician living in an African village who takes to dressing as a god 
to maintain control over the tribe. Mortensen learned much from Chaney’s 
extraordinary use of special-effects makeup. He was also employed as a 
photographer by the Western Costume Company, who supplied clothing and props to 
all major Hollywood productions. In his 11th floor studio, Mortensen shot 
costume tests and it is this that brought him into contact with many stars. All 
the techniques he had learnt – matte painting, costuming, props, special 
effects makeup – fed into his working methods for making a picture.

Despite the subject matter he was drawn to, Mortensen was far from a vulgarian 
preoccupied with outré material. He was remarkably learned and inquisitive, not 
just about art and culture, but science and religion. Fay Wray recalled that, 
during those early days, he possessed a leather-bound edition of Plutarch’s 
Lives and asked her to read from it. His intellectual curiosity led to a 
friendship withManly P Hall <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0tKq1F_o0W0>, a 
chiselled Canadian philosopher and mystic living in LA. Through studying Hall’s 
voluminous library of books about the occult, Mortensen was inspired to begin a 
series of remarkable images (over a hundred and fifty in number), numbering 
over 150, intended for a pictorial history of witchcraft. With its witches 
flying over rooftops and its portraits of demons, succubi, gargoyles and 
vampires, it owed much to Goya and Bosch.
 William Mortensen self-portrait in the guise of the Mad Hatter, c.1928. 
Photograph: William Mortensen/PR 
In his own writings, Mortensen invoked Hogarth, Beardsley, Daumier and Goya as 
his forebears. But he also had much in common – in technique, style and 
approach – with European outlier artists of the dadaist and surrealist 
movements. In a series of articles for Camera Craft in 1934, Mortensen 
categorically rejected the use of realism for its own sake, calling it a “blind 
alley”. Photographs, he said, should be more than just objects of aesthetic 
beauty to be admired; they should have an effect on the viewer, exploring 
extreme emotions and inspiring extreme reactions.

His love of the fantastic and the grotesque was, then, partly an outward 
expression of his love to shock, but it had another purpose: by giving form to 
such emotions as fear and hatred, Mortensen, a Christian Scientist, believed 
“we are enabled to lessen their power over us”. He added: “When the world of 
the grotesque is known and appreciated, the real world becomes vastly more 
significant.”

It was these kinds of ideas that so angered Adams and his Group f/64 brethren, 
who published their own manifesto in Camera Craft that same year, devoted to 
photography that depicted a pure, unmediated reality. This began a spirited 
debate with Mortensen within the pages of the magazine that became ever more 
vitriolic. However, Adams did not stop there, suggesting in a personal letter 
to Mortensen that he “negotiate oblivion”. When fellow photographer Edward 
Weston wrote telling of his excitement at photographing a “fresh corpse”, Adams 
replied: “My only regret is that the identity of said corpse is not our Laguna 
Beach colleague.”

The critics Beaumont Newhall and his wife Nancy held the same view: Beaumont 
consciously excluded Mortensen from his grandiosely titled 1949 bookThe History 
of Photography, From 1839 to the Present Day 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-History-Photography-From-Present/dp/0870703811>. 
Their distaste would not even allow them to acknowledge Mortensen’s mastery of 
his craft, although Adams would later concede he was “embarrassed” to find out 
Mortensen had “anticipated some of my pet ideas of technique: controlled 
exposure and development of the negative”. The critic AJ Coleman even contends 
that Adams’s “zone system” for exposure was taken largely from articles written 
by John L Davenport, who himself relied greatly on Mortensen.

Even after Mortensen’s death in 1965 from leukaemia, Group f/64 and their 
flunkies the Newhalls could not stop talking of their loathing for him. 
Beaumont described his work as “perverse”; Willard Van Dyke, a founder of Group 
f/64, said “his work was disgusting”; and Adams summed him up with the words, 
“For us, he was the antichrist.”

Ultimately though, for all the griping of Adams and f/64, it turns out that 
Mortensen was the true modernist all along, not them. For today, we are 
surrounded by images of the fantastic and unreal. In comic-book movies such as
Spider-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spider-man> and Rise of the Planet 
of the Apes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/planet-of-the-apes>, special 
effects merge seamlessly into the action and the monsters appear as real as 
humans. A photograph is rarely just a photograph these days, seen without 
filters or retouching. And, thanks to sites like Instagram, many of Mortensen’s 
painstaking techniques can now be applied with the touch of a button.

• American Grotesque, edited by Larry Lytle and Michael Moynihan, will be 
published this month by Feral House <http://feralhouse.com/impure/>; it has 
also republished William Mortensen and George Dunham’s The Command to Look.Read 
more at whmortensen.com <http://www.whmortensen.com/>
 