
Today's order of play:

CENTRE COURT 1pm start

S WILLIAMS (US, 6) v M Czink (Hun); I Karlovic (Cro) v A MURRAY (GB, 4); L 
Rosol (Cz) v R NADAL (Sp, 2)

No1 COURT 1pm

M SHARAPOVA (Rus, 1) v T Pironkova (Bul); J Ward (GB) v M FISH (US, 10); S 
Querrey (US) v M RAONIC (Can, 21); E Baltacha (GB) v P KVITOVA (Cz, 4)

No2 COURT 11.30am

A Keothavong (GB) v S ERRANI (It, 10); D FERRER (Sp, 7) v K De Schepper (Fr); 
B Phau (Ger) v A RODDICK (US, 30); R Oprandi (Swi) v V AZARENKA (Blr, 2)

No3 Court 11.30am

X Malisse (Bel) v G SIMON (Fr, 13); A IVANOVIC (Ser, 14) v K Bondarenko (Ukr); 
J-W TSONGA (Fr, 5) v G García-López (Sp)

COURT FOUR 11.30am

N Broady & J Konta (GB) v K PESCHKE & K SREBOTNIK (Cz/Svn, 3); A Yakimova 
(Blr) v J GORGES (Ger, 22); M CILIC (Cro, 16) v L Kubot (Pol); A Klepac & A 
Rodionova (Svn/Aus) v J Craybas & J Görges (US/Ger)

COURT FIVE 11.30am

R VINCI (It, 21) v M Erakovic (NZ); L Lacko (Svk) v J Melzer (Aut); E 
Daniilidou & A Rus (Gre/Neth) v E MAKAROVA & E VESNINA (Rus, 5); A Amanmuradova 
& K Bondarenko (Uzb/Ukr) v K Barrois & V Diatchenko (Ger/Rus)

COURT SIX 11.30am

S GONZALEZ & C KAS (Mex/Ger, 12) v L Broady & O Golding (GB); L HUBER & L 
RAYMOND (US, 1) v A Cadantu & Zheng Saisai (Rom/Chn); M Barthel & A Kerber 
(Ger) v D Cibulkova & D Hantuchova (Svk); D Jurak & K Marosi (Cro/Hun) v R 
Voracova & K Zakopalova (Cz); S Peer & Y Wickmayer (Isr/Bel) v A Radwanska & U 
Radwanska (Pol)

COURT SEVEN 11.30am

Chan H-c & Chan Y-j (Tai) v N LLAGOSTERA VIVES & MJ MARTINEZ SANCHEZ (Sp, 9); 
B Becker (Ger) v R STEPANEK (Cz, 28); S Cirstea & A Morita (Rom/Jpn) v C 
Dellacqua & S Stosur (Aus); L PAES & R STEPANEK (Ind/Cz, 4) v A Falla & S 
Giraldo (Col)

COURT EIGHT 11.30am

L Dlouhy & M Mertinak (Cz/Svk) v R LINDSTEDT & H TECAU (Swe/Rom, 5); Hsieh S-w 
& S Lisicki (Tai/Ger) v L Robson & H Watson (GB); JI Chela & E Schwank (Arg) v 
A Bogomolov Jr & D Sela (Rus/Isr); G DULKO & P SUAREZ (Arg, 14) v I Falconi & C 
Scheepers (US/SA)

COURT NINE 11.30am

J Nieminen (Fin) v B Baker (US); J Jankovic & V Razzano (Ser/Fr) v S Foretz 
Gacon & K Mladenovic (Fr); E Birnerova & P Cetkovska (Cz) v S ERRANI & R VINCI 
(It, 2); S Stakhovsky & D Tursunov (Ukr/Rus) v Sanchai Ratiwatana & Sonchat 
Ratiwatana (Tha)

COURT 10 11.30am

F Cipolla & F Fognini (It) v B Reynolds & I van der Merwe (US/SA); N PETROVA 
(Rus, 20) v T Babos (Hun); A HLAVACKOVA & L HRADECKA (Cz, 6) v K Date-Krumm & R 
Fujiwara (Jpn); D Brown & O Marach (Ger/Aut) v F CERMAK & F POLASEK (Cz/Svk, 11)

COURT 11 11.30am

P Hanley & M Knowles (Aus/Bah) v S Lipsky & R Ram (US); R KOPS-JONES & A 
SPEARS (US, 10) v N Bratchikova & A Tatishvili (Rus/Geo); I BENESOVA & B 
ZAHLAVOVA STRYCOVA (Cz, 8) v V King & Y Schnack (US); B Becker & C-M Stebe 
(Ger) v JS Cabal & R Farah (Col)

COURT 12 11.30am

F VERDASCO (Sp, 17) v G Zemlja (Svn); M Lucic (Cro) v M BARTOLI (Fr, 9); G 
Dimitrov (Bul) v M Baghdatis (Cyp); A MEDINA GARRIGUES (Sp, 26) v J Cepelova 
(Svk)

COURT 14 11.30am

D Goffin (Bel) v J Levine (US); T Paszek (Aut) v A Cornet (Fr); P 
KOHLSCHREIBER (Ger, 27) v M Jaziri (Tun)

COURT 15 11.30am

J Marray & F Nielsen (GB/Den) v M GRANOLLERS & M LOPEZ (Sp, 9); A PEYA & N 
ZIMONJIC (Aut/Ser, 6) v C Guccione & L Hewitt (Aus); A-L Grönefeld & P Martic 
(Ger/Cro) v CHUANG C-J & V DUSHEVINA (Tai/Rus, 16); C McHale & T Paszek 
(US/Aut) v A Cornet & P Parmentier (Fr); J Cerretani & E Roger-Vasselin (US/Fr) 
v P Lorenzi & B Paire (It/Fr)

COURT 16 11.30am

C MCHALE (US, 28) v M Johansson (Fr); A Falla (Col) v N Mahut (Fr); B Paire 
(Fr) v A DOLGOPOLOV (Ukr, 22); J Benneteau & N Mahut (Fr) v A SA & B SOARES 
(Br, 16)

COURT 17 11.30am

K NISHIKORI (Jpn, 19) v F Serra (Fr); K Bertens (Neth) v Y Shvedova (Kaz); K 
Pliskova (Cz) v F SCHIAVONE (It, 24); A PAVLYUCHENKOVA (Rus, 31) v V Lepchenko 
(US)

COURT 18 11.30am

E Makarova (Rus) v A KERBER (Ger, 8); G Voskoboeva (Kaz) v Y Wickmayer (Bel); 
G Soeda (Jpn) v JM DEL POTRO (Arg, 9); V Dolonc & O Savchuk (Ser/Ukr) v S 
Williams & V Williams (US)

COURT 19 11.30am

A Wozniak (Can) v ZHENG JIE (Chn, 25); K Zakopalova (Cz) v O Govortsova (Blr); 
Peng Shuai & Zheng Jie (Chn) v M Erakovic & T Tanasugarn (NZ/Tha); J Husarova & 
K Pervak (Svk/Kaz) v O Govortsova & M Minella (Blr/Lux)

TBA not before 5pm

D Inglot & L Robson (GB) v S Lipsky & N Grandin (US/SA); P Hanley & A 
Kudryavtseva (Aus/Rus) v J Marray & A Keothavong (GB)

10.54am: Good morning and welcome to day four of the Championships. Four – yes 
four – Brits will today represent our fair isle (are you watching Australia?) – 
Andy Murray, James Ward,Anne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> and Elena Baltacha.

Is that not enough for you? OK, we'll throw in Rafael Nadal, Jo-Wilfried 
Tsonga, Andy Roddick, Juan Martín del Potro, Maria Sharapova,Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>, Petra Kvitova and Victoria 
Azarenka for free too.

10.58am: If you're still catching your breath after yesterday, what with Roger 
Federer's royal performance, Novak Djokovic's late-night victory, Caroline 
Wozniacki's wasteful exit, Sam Stosur's shock defeat and Heather Watson's 
wonderful win, here's Kevin Mitchell's excellent round-up:

The third day of Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> was 
overloaded with such a range of human emotions that the exit in the 
early-evening gloom of the former world No1 Caroline Wozniacki was but a 
footnote to the drama that had gone before, almost certainly a prelude to what 
is to come. If Shakespeare could have invented a sport, he surely would have 
chosen tennis with all its twists and turns, and the demise of the Dane was a 
suitably grim closing scene in Wednesday's rain-swept narrative.

A grey day that offered little prospect of drama, provided enough for a few 
plays in the end. The only match devoid of drama, perhaps, was Novak Djokovic's 
late-night, straight-sets win over the rising young American Ryan Harrison. All 
around the world No1, it was an isle of noise.

You can read the rest of Kevin's article by clicking here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/27/wimbledon-2012-caroline-wozniacki-major>
.

11.07am: Talking of good reads, this article appeared in the New York Times 
last week 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/24/magazine/can-ivan-lendl-lead-andy-murray-to-tennis-greatness.html?pagewanted=all>
 and offers a real insight into the relationship between Murray and his coach, 
Ivan Lendl. It's a long one, but definitely worth a read.

11.19am: Right, prediction time. 

Murray v Ivo Karlovic. Standing at 6ft 10in, Karlovic is the tallest man in 
the men's game and has hit the fastest serve ever recorded at Wimbledon, 
148mph. This is the second-round draw none of the seeds wanted. There could be 
a tie-break or two, but Murray has too much variety for the Croatian.Brit 
through!

Ward v Mardy Fish. The gap in the rankings – Ward is the world No173, Fish is 
the No12 – doesn't tell the full story here. Fish was recently diagnosed with 
cardiac arrhythmia, which forced him to miss the French Open. The American also 
had to pull out of his press conference following his first-round win after 
falling ill in the locker room.Possible upset.

Keothavong v Sara Errani. Errani has had the year of her career, reaching the 
French Open final, before falling toMaria Sharapova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova>. Brit out!

Baltacha v Petra Kvitova. The Wimbledon champion. Brit out!

11.24am: Here's the Voice of Wimbledon, announcing over the speakers: "As you 
can see there's hot sunshine, and temperatures already are 26 degrees celcius. 
There's the slight risk of the odd thunderstorm later this afternoon, but 
generally the weather will remain hot and sunny with a high of 28. So put the 
suncream on and do drink plenty. And I mean water." The joker.

11.25am: Meanwhile in the overly air-conditioned Wimbledon hacks room it's 
about 10 degrees and very un-sunny.

11.32am: Though it has warmed up a little by the ever-youthful 80-year-old 
Nick Bollettieri breezing in. He still has some input in Heather Watson's game, 
and he reckons the Brit has a decent chance tomorrow against the No3 seed, 
Agnieszka Radwanska. So there.

11.37am: On to the first of today's Brits. Anne Keothavong arrives on Court 
Two for her second-round date with the French Open runner-up Sara Errani. 
Elsewhere, ladies man Gilles Simon,having reignited the controversy about equal 
prize money at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/27/wimbledon-2012>, is about to get 
under way against Belgium's Xavier Malisse. And the baby-faced assassin David 
Goffin,having accounted for that feisty young Australian Bernard Tomic in round 
one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/26/wimbledon-2012-bernard-tomic?newsfeed=true>
, is warming up against the American Jesse Levine.

11.48am: Hmm not the start Keothavong was after. The British No1 is broken to 
15.According to the nifty IBM SlamTracker 
<http://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/slamtracker.html?ts=1340617071599&ref=www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/index.html&syn=none>
, Keothavong will have to win more than 58% of points on her first serve. She 
definitely hasn't done that so far.

12.02pm: At 5ft 5in, Errani is one of the shorter players on tour, but what 
she lacks in size she makes up for in the variety of her shots. Slicing, dicing 
and throwing in the odd drop shot too, the Italian moves 4-0 up. Keothavong's 
coach Jeremy Bates and the omnipresent Fed Cup captain Judy Murray wince in the 
stands.

12.06pm: As Jonfon mentions below the line, one potential cracker this 
afternoon is the Court 12 encounter between the talented young Bulgarian Grigor 
Dimitrov and the former Australian Open finalist and Wimbledon semi-finalist 
Marcos Baghdatis. At 21, Dimitrov is now starting to fulfil some of his 
potential, having reached the semi-finals at Queen's a couple of weeks ago, and 
is one to keep an eye on. But if he does get through, it could be Murray in the 
third round.

12.15pm: News on Keothavong: she loses the first set 6-1 in 26 minutes.

12.25pm: Have you heard the story about Brian Baker? The 27-year-old from 
Nashville was once ranked No2 in the world as a junior, but after some 
promising results on tour, his body started to break down. From 2005, he was 
sidelined for the best part of six years following five surgeries – three on 
his hip, one on his elbow, and a hernia operation – before he returned to play 
some Challenger and Futures events last year. And here he is on Court Nine 
leading Finland's Jarko Nieminen 6-0, 5-2 in the Wimbledon second round. My 
colleague Tim Lewis has more on the Baker back-storyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jun/26/wimbledon-2012-mardy-fish-brian-baker>
.

12.29pm: Make that 6-0, 6-2. Elsewhere, Xavier Malisse is doing his bit for 
women's rights. He leads Gilles Simon by a set and a break, 6-4, 2-0. A late 
break means David Goffin is a set down, 6-4, against Jesse Levine, while the 
former semi-finalist Zheng Jie leads Canada's Aleksandra Wozniak 6-4, 2-0.

12.37pm: It doesn't get any better for Keothavong out on Court Two, where 
she's a break down, 4-1, in the second set against Sara Errani. Too many 
unforced errors from Keothavong and too much quality from Errani, who is in the 
form of her life. And all of this after she paid a $30,000 penalty to switch to 
a different racket company before this season.

12.46pm: Errani quickly turns defence into attack to bring up her first match 
point. An attempted drop shot from Keothavong slumps into the net, and Errani 
completes an impressive Italian job on the Brit, winning 6-1, 6-1. For a 
clay-court specialist, that was a fine performance on the grass. And then there 
were three (well, four, if we count Heather Watson).

12.55pm: David Hopkins emails in with a fine suggestion: "Hi Katy, given that 
Gilles Simon suggested that male players deserved higher pay due to them 
playing five-set matches, I assume that if he were to get booted out after 
three sets today, he'll be giving away 20% of his prize money?" If it does play 
out that way, our intrepid reporter Jamie Jackson seems game for going to the 
press conference to find out. I'll let you know how he gets on. Simon's level 
at three games all in the second set at the moment.

1.01pm: Speaking of intrepid reporters, the BBC have cornered the giant Ivo 
Karlovic on the practice courts. They ask him howAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> should deal with his service 
missiles later. "I would leave them," he replies. "I would not return them."

1.04pm: James Taylor is taking issue with David Hopkins's maths, the pedant: 
"Shouldn't he give away 40% of his prize money, not 20? Damn my pernickitiness!"

1.10pm: I've already had a few angry emails about Maria Sharapova's grunting, 
so you'll be pleased to hear the world No1 is back shrieking her way through 
the denouement of her match against Tsvetana Pironkova, who knocked out Venus 
Williams in 2010 and 2011. Play was suspended last night with Sharapova 7-6, 
3-1 ahead, having saved five set points in the opening set.

That's on Court One, meanwhile Serena Williams, sporting a striking cerise 
headband, is just getting started against the Hungarian qualifier Melinda Czink 
on Centre Court. No doubt Miss Serena will be pleased about that after 
tournament organisers had the audacity to bump her out to Court Two for her 
opening match.

1.22pm: The overnight break has done Pironkova some good. She breaks and then 
holds to level up at three games all.

A couple of results to bring you: the amazing life of Brian has continued, 
with Mr Baker completing a 6-0, 6-2, 6-4 win over Jarkko Nieminen, while Zheng 
Jie is through in straight sets.

David Goffin has come from a set down to lead 4-6, 6-4, 6-1 against the rather 
Wild-West sounding Jesse Levine.

And Gilles Simon is now two sets to love down, 6-4, 6-4, against Xavier 
Malisse. Ha!

1.30pm: Serena Williams is literally throwing the, ahem, kitchen sink at 
Czink, and has taken the first set 6-1 in exactly 20 minutes.Here are the stats 
so far 
<http://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/slamtracker.html?ts=1340617071599&ref=www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/index.html&syn=none>
. Sadly there's no Prince Charles in attendance today. At the moment the Centre 
Court patrons are having to made do with Harriet Harman in the royal box.

1.35pm: No wait, a certain P Middleton is there too.

1.44pm: Back to Court One, where Pironkova has five set points against 
Sharapova, leading 6-1 in the tie-break. After the five she had in the first 
set last night,surely she'll take one of these? She misses the first. And the 
second. But takes the third. They're into a decider.

"Maria's ball toss is all over the shop. Blustery conditions tricky. Pironkova 
wins the breaker. Maria's great three-set record again tested," says
@darren_cahill <https://twitter.com/#!/darren_cahill> on Twitter.

1.51pm: Here are Anne Keothavong's thoughts following her comprehensive defeat 
to Sara Errani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/wimbledon-2012-anne-keothavong-beaten>
:

Against an opponent like Sara, she doesn't give you that much. She's pretty 
consistent and she's playing with lots of confidence. I felt like I had to be 
the one who was aggressive, because I'm not going to win that match rallying. 
She's better at that than I am. I just felt like I forced it a bit too much. I 
was a little slower around the ball.

Thinking about the Olympics is the one thing that puts a smile on my face. 
It's great that all four of us British girls have a chance to be part of the 
team. I have never been part of an Olympic team before. It's something new. 
It's something special. And the fact that it's in London, yeah, I'm super 
pumped about it.

2.10pm: Pironkova should have known better than to anger Sharapova. The 
wounded world No1 charges 5-0 up in the deciding set.

And an email from Jonathan Downey: "I've always thought the best solution to 
the equal pay thing would be to have best of five matches on the women's side 
from the quarter-finals onwards. Make it more about fitness and conditioning. 
Theres only a total of seven matches by then anyway so the scheduling shouldn't 
be too badly impacted either."

It's an interesting suggestion Jonathan. The women have always said if they 
were asked to play five sets, they would do so. The players are in such good 
shape these days: the overall fitness levels in the top 100 are significantly 
higher than they were, say, 10 years ago. The WTA has only tried best-of-five 
matches once before, at the end-of-season championships in the 1980s and 90s. I 
think with the grand slams there's always been an issue of scheduling, but yes, 
it wouldn't be such an issue from the quarter-finals onwards.

2.17pm: The results are coming in thick and fast. Sharapova completes a 
final-set whitewash to beat Pironkova 7-6, 6-7, 6-0 over the best part of a 
day. The top seed blows a kiss or two to the Court One crowd. Serena, 
meanwhile, dispatches of Melinda Cznik with the minimum of fuss, 6-1, 6-4. The 
four-times champion does a regal wave for the Centre Court patrons. The 
exciting young Belgian David Goffin sees off the gun-slinging cowboy Jesse 
Levine, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1, 6-3. And Gilles Simon is put in his place with a 
straight-sets defeat to Xavier Malisse, 6-4, 6-4, 7-6. So maybe the Frenchman 
will be returning some of his prize money.

2.26pm: Serena's and Sharapova's wins mean here come Andy Murray and James 
Ward, on Centre Court and Court One respectively. You can follow Murray v Ivo 
Karlovic withJacob Steinberg's game-by-game report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/andy-murray-ivo-karlovic-live-wimbledon>
. And there's just enough time to readour columnist Greg Rusedski's preview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jun/27/wimbledon-2012-andy-murray-ivo-karlovic>
 too. I'll be keeping an eye on Ward v Mardy Fish, along with the rest of the 
happenings on the outside courts.

2.46pm: Not the best of starts from Ward. He's a break down, 3-0, inside nine 
minutes. Fish has already rattled off seven winners.The match stats are here. 
<http://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/slamtracker.html?ts=1340617071599&ref=www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/index.html&syn=none>
 Meanwhile, the marathon man of two years ago, Nicolas Mahut, is out. The 
Frenchman's match went to five sets – no surprise there – before he succumbed 
6-4, 6-3, 4-6, 4-6, 7-5 to the Colombian Alejandro Falla. And news of two 
Spanish victories for the seventh seed, David Ferrer, and the 17th seed, 
Fernando Verdasco.

2.56pm: An email from David Hopkins, entitled Gilles Simon's 40%: "As James 
Taylor rightly pointed out, Gilles Simon should of course be giving away 40% of 
his winnings, not 20%. Perhaps Jamie Jackson could suggest that, in recognition 
of my appalling maths having saved him some dough, he give the original 20% to 
charity, 10% to me, and he can keep the rest?" You won't have too much longer 
to wait, David. Simon's press conference is coming up at 3.15 and Jamie is 
primed and ready to put the question to him.

3.08pm: In the meantime, here's Simon's conqueror Xavier Malisse attempting to 
not get involved in the issue, but kind of inadvertently getting involved at 
the same time:

 Everybody is entitled to his opinion. He has his opinion. I share his 
thought, but I'd rather not get into it. I'd rather he gets into it. I've 
gotten into too many things in my life, so I'm done with that.

Fish, meanwhile, takes the first set 6-3 against Ward. And Murray looks to be 
heading for a tie-break against Karlovic. There's a surprise.

3.15pm: But wait, at 6-5 up on serve, Murray produces a backhand winner and 
then the serving machine Karlovicdouble faults on set point. Murray takes it 
7-5.Jacob Steinberg is typing away furiously next to me and has the full story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/andy-murray-ivo-karlovic-live-wimbledon>
.

3.23pm: It's a bit congested in the press conference room at the moment. First 
to Sharapova, who was asked about thenews that a system could be adopted to 
measure the noise when players hit the ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/wimbledon-2012-excessive-grunting>
. So would she be able to reduce the noise she makes?

Uhm, certainly not now, not since I've been doing it since I was four years 
old. It's definitely tough and impossible to do when you've played this sport 
for over 20 years.

But it's something, I mean, I certainly spoke to Stacy [Allaster, the WTA 
chief executive] about it. We've had numerous conversations. It's the first 
person actually that's sat down with many people and coaches and sports 
psychologists and analysts and really reviewed what could be done.

I'm really happy with the system that she put forth. Going to the juniors, 
going to the academies that are producing the young players, and putting a 
system in place, I think it's extremely smart.

As for her thoughts on Mr Simon:

We women have fought so long to get equal prize money. It was a big challenge 
and nobody really supported us. It's been a few years since we've gotten that. 
We're all really proud of it, and we continue to build the sport and make it 
bigger. I'm sure there are a few more people that watch my matches than his.

3.39pm: Next to Serena:

Oh, my gosh. You know I can't bite my tongue. Yeah, definitely a lot more 
people are watching Maria than Simon. She's way hotter than he is. Women's 
tennis I think is really awesome. With that being said, everybody is entitled 
to his opinion. If that's his opinion, he's allowed to have one. I think that's 
an opinion.

3.44pm: And here's the one you've been waiting for, as Jamie puts the 
questions to Simon, who insists every male player thinks the same as him about 
equal pay:

Q: Does it undermine your point given the fact you lost in straight sets today?
A: No, doesn't change anything. My point of view doesn't depend of my result. 
It's not only my point of view, it's the point of view of everybody in the 
locker room, even for you, the media. It's just difficult to talk about it. I 
don't know why.

Q: Do you think it would be a fair thing for you to forfeit maybe 20% of your 
match fee because you only played maybe three quarters of your match?
A: The time is not a problem. It's just about the general thing, about the 
show, the enterainment.

Q: Do you feel you delivered entertainment today?
A: Well, I don't care. It's a general thing. It's just not my point of view. 
Just about the tournaments also, the sponsors. You can ask to everybody. Not so 
many will answer because, as I said, it's difficult to talk about it. But it's 
just like this.

Sorry David, it doesn't sound like you're getting your 10% then. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/wimbledon-2012-day-four-live#block-31>

3.56pm: Right, anyone for some tennis? Taking a look around the grounds, 
Britain's James Ward has broken back against Mardy Fish and is level at five 
games all in the second set, former world No1 Ana Ivanovic has beaten Kateryna 
Bondarekno in straight sets, Caroline Wozniacki's conqueror Tamira Paszek is 
through in three, Andy Roddick is a set up against Germany's Bjorn Phau. Oh and 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga is just getting under way. Phew.

4.13pm: Considering Fish's recent health problems, you have to think the 
longer this match goes on, Ward will have the advantage, despite the huge gap 
in their world rankings. Leading 6-5 on serve in the second set, Ward gets to 
deuce on Fish's serve. The Londoner pounces on the short ball to bring up set 
point, and takes it with a forehand cross-court pass. Cue a big roar and leap 
back to his chair. Game on. They're level at one set all. As are Murray and 
Karlovic, because Murray has just lost out in a second-set tie-break.Jacob 
Steinberg has the skinny. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/andy-murray-ivo-karlovic-live-wimbledon>

4.33pm: Some match reports for your tea-time perusal: here's Simon Cambers on 
Serena's serene progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/wimbledon-2012-serena-williams>, 
and here's more onSharapova's third-set demolition of Tsvetana Pironkova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/wimbledon-2012-maria-sharapova-pironkova>
. I'm off to get a quick cup of tea and top up my tan ...

4.55pm: It's too damn hot out there. I instead opted for the shade of Heather 
Watson and Laura Robson's press conference, following their defeat in the 
doubles. The probing journalistic questions ranged from what they thought of 
David Beckham's Olympic omission – "we're very disappointed that he won't be 
joining us in the Olympic village" – to what Watson should do to cure her 
recent insomnia – "I'm going to drink lots of milk, have some chicken and open 
the windows tonight". So there you go. Watson also said she'd be watching some 
DVDs of tomorrow's third-round opponent, Agnieszka Radwanksa.

5.05pm: As for the scores on the doors, Murray is now two sets to one up 
against Karlovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/andy-murray-ivo-karlovic-live-wimbledon>
, but Ward is two sets to one down against Fish, losing the third set 6-4. Why 
can'tboth of them do well at the same time?

Elsewhere, the fifth seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga is a set down against Spain's 
Guillermo Garcia-Lopez. But no such bother for Andy Roddick or Juan Martín del 
Potro: Roddick is two sets up against Bjorn Phau, while Del Po is on the verge 
of doing the same against Japan's Go Soeda. And the potential crackerjack that 
is Grigor Dimitrov-Marcos Baghdatis is just getting under way.

5.23pm: Double Croatian success: Marin Cilic, a potential fourth-round 
opponent for Murray and the Queen's champion courtesy of David Nalbandian's 
angry kick, is through in straight sets. And the qualifier Mirjana Lucic, who 
way back when reached the Wimbledon semi-finals as a 17-year-old before 
disappearing off the scene for almost eight years, has accounted for the 2007 
finalist Marion Bartoli.What with Brian Baker too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/wimbledon-2012-day-four-live#block-14>
, this is turning into quite a day for unlikely comebacks.

5.25pm: Oh, and Roddick has set up a third-round meeting with David Ferrer.

5.38pm: Again, diverging fortunes for the two Brits, as the Murray and Ward 
finales play out almost simultaneously. As Murray triumphs, Ward toils.Murray 
overcomes Karlovic in four brutal sets, 7-5, 6-7, 6-2, 7-6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/andy-murray-ivo-karlovic-live-wimbledon>
, but Ward is on the brink. Fish is serving for the match in the fourth set.

5.45pm: But wait. Ward – having already saved a match point on his own serve 
at 5-3 down – breaks to 15 and Fish batters his racket. It's five games all in 
the fourth.

5.52pm: Make that 6-5 to Ward. And here are some post-match Murray musings:

It's so challenging getting into a rhythm against a guy like that. The 
tie-breaks can be a lottery – you need to get your racket on the returns and 
hope he makes a mistake. I thought I returned well today, I didn't get aced too 
many times, and I tried to make him play as many shots as possible. I was 
hitting the ball fairly cleanly on my forehand and I came up with some good 
passing shots at the right time, and that got me through it.

5.56pm: Ward and Fish will settle this set in a tie-break. Fish blinks first, 
netting to hand Ward the mini-break, 4-2. If Ward holds serve they'll be 
heading into a decider. The British No3 takes care of business on his serve to 
get to 6-3, three set points. And Fish double faults! After three hours and 28 
minutes – and around half an hour after Fish missed that match point – they're 
into a fifth set. The Court One crowd stands to hail James Ward.

6.15pm: A flat-footed Fish looks spent out there. But the American somehow 
holds serve from 15-40 down, and then it's Ward's turn to dig deep from 0-30. 
One game all.

A let down out on Court 12 in what could have been one of the matches of the 
day, as Grigor Dimitrov is forced to retire due to illness when 7-5, 4-1 down 
against Marcos Baghdatis. Up next for Baghdatis? A certain Mr Murray.

And what about Rafa? This evening's  victim  opponent is the Czech world No100 
Lukas Rosol. The last time Nadal lost to a player ranked as low as Rosol was 
five years ago. Needless to say he's already a break up, 3-2.

The IBM SlamTracker 
<http://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/slamtracker.html?ts=1340617071599&ref=www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/slamtracker/index.html&syn=none>
 reckons Rosol needs to convert at least 25% of his break-point chances. I'd 
maybe tie Rafa's shoes together too.

6.27pm: I shouldn't have spoken so quickly. Nadal is pegged back to four games 
all by Rosol, who can half hit the ball. It's more of a gone than a go for Go 
Soeda, beaten 6-2, 6-3, 1-6, 6-4 by the 2009 US Open champion Juan Martín del 
Potro. And the Ward and Fish decider is going on serve, Fish 3-2 up.

6.38pm: It would seem Judy Murray was shouting a little too loudly during her 
son's win. "Mr Lendl has asked me to bring him ear plugs if I'm sitting behind 
him next match,"she reveals on Twitter. <https://twitter.com/#!/judmoo>

6.45pm: Three unforced errors from Ward, including a framed forehand, and it's 
0-40. A brave serve saves the first break point, but he nets on the second. 
First blood Fish in the final set, and the American will serve for the match at 
5-3 up. Mind, he's done that before and you know what happened then.

6.49pm: As the evening sun gives way to the shadows on Court One, Ward's brave 
fight comes to an end. Fish settles matters with an ace, prevailing 6-3, 5-7, 
6-4, 6-7, 6-3 after four hours and 10 minutes. Nonetheless, a fantastic effort 
from Ward, who with a second-round prize-money cheque of £23,125may be able to 
buy back his Arsenal season ticket now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/26/wimbledon-2012-elena-baltacha?newsfeed=true>
. Elsewhere, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga is through, as is Victoria Azarenka.

Azarenka's win has opened up a slot on Court Two, so the final Brit to play 
today, Elena Balatcha, is winding her way through the Wimbledon crowds for her 
meeting with the defending champion Petra Kvitova. It was due to take place on 
Court One, but Sam Querrey and Milos Raonic are next to appear there.

7.15pm: So after a busy, busy day we're down to Nadal v Rosol, Baltacha v 
Kvitova and Querrey v Raonic. Saving three set points, Rafa repels Rosol to 
take the first set 11-9 in the tie-break. The 6ft 5in Rosol is playing out of 
his skin. Baltacha already trails Kvitova 4-0 in the opener. And Querrey and 
Raonic are level at one game all. It's time for me to take my leave, but I'll 
leave you withKevin Mitchell's report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/28/andy-murray-ivo-karlovic-wimbledon>
 on Murray's bruising battle with Ivo Karlovic. Fancy more of the same 
tomorrow? Then Xan's your man. Thanks for reading. Bye.
 