
It will take an awful lot for the glow of being awarded a wildcard for the 
Olympics to fade butAnne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> and Elena Baltacha saw 
their Wimbledon adventures ended in the second round by two dominant 
performances on Thursday night. Keothavong, the British No1, went down 6-1, 6-1 
to Sara Errani, the Italian who reached the final of the French Open this 
month, while Baltacha rallied late but was beaten 6-0, 6-4 by the defending 
champion PetraÂ Kvitova.

Both British women will be back at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> next month for the Olympics but 
they were both distinctly second-best on Thursday. Keothavong was disappointed 
with the level of her performance against the tactically astute Errani but 
Baltacha was blitzed by the power and class of Kvitova, who may yet have 
another big say in the destination of the title.

The temperature was already nudging 27C by the time Keothavong took to the 
court and she failed to recover from a sluggish start against the No10 seed. 
The Briton conceded that she was "not sharp enough" and started far too 
shakily, going 4-0 down before she or the crowd on Court Two had the chance to 
find their feet. The Italian usually saves her best performances for clay but 
even on the faster surface she was far too good for Keothavong, with her drop 
shot frequently leaving her opponent scrabbling in vain.

The 28-year-old served slightly better in the second set and missed two 
opportunities to break Errani in the fifth game, but she was never in 
contention as she went out in the second round for the second year running. 
Heather Watson, who became the first British woman to reach the third round in 
a decade on Wednesday, could yet overtake Keothavong in the rankings if she 
springs a surprise against the No3 seed Agnieszka Radwanska on Friday.

Keothavong said she felt her tennis is still improving and that she is 
"super-pumped" for the Olympics. "Every time I think of the Olympics, I'm just 
over the moon about the selection," she said. "It's great that all four of us 
British girls have a chance to be part of the team. And for me, I have never 
been part of an Olympic team before. It's something new. It's something 
special."

Fourth seed Kvitova is as nice as they come when she is away from the court 
but on it she is utterly ruthless, and the 22-year-old blasted winners as she 
stormed through the first 10 games. In typically gutsy fashion, Baltacha fought 
back, saving two match points to reduce the deficit to 5-4, and another in the 
next game, before Kvitova closed out victory.

The performances of Watson this week and the promise shown by Laura Robson 
have caught the imagination of the home crowd and they were stacked four and 
five deep around Court Eight to watch Britain's Olympic doubles pair in round 
one.

Watson and Robson have formed a strong partnership in the Fed Cup this year 
and though they ultimately lost 6-3, 7-6 to Germany's Sabine Lisicki and Hsieh 
Su-wei of Taipei, they showed plenty to suggest that they might be a decent 
pair. "I think as a team we've come a long way already in just this short 
season that we've been playing together," Watson said. "If we keep playing, I 
think we're going to start doing really well."
 