
 Kate Winslet is in talks to take a co-starring slot opposite Kevin Spacey 
and Laura Linney in the Universal-backed drama The Life of David Gale, which 
begins shooting in Austin, Texas on Friday. Produced by Nicolas Cage's 
production company Saturn Films and directed by Alan Parker, the film promises 
a Dead Man Walking-style examination of the death penalty in the US. Spacey 
stars as an ardent opponent of capital punishment who winds up on death row 
after he is wrongly convicted of the murder of a colleague (Linney). Winslet 
would play the pivotal role of the journalist who investigates his case.

 In the meantime, Winslet's Enigma co-star Dougray Scott is rumoured to have 
landed the role of Dylan Thomas in the long-time-coming Map of Love, a biopic 
of the wild Welsh poet. Scott, 37, supposedly beat out the likes of Daniel 
Day-Lewis, Rupert Everett and Robert Carlyle for the part. Sean Kier of the 
Dylan Thomas Centre in Swansea is approving: "I think they've made a really 
good choice. As I understand it, the hold-up has been [caused by] trying to 
find someone who can do the real emotion behind the story. The lookalike 
element isn't so important."

 Aaron Eckhart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart> has secured 
the starring role in the sci-fi outing The Core, directed by Britain's Jon 
Amiel. Eckhart remains best known for his roles in schoolmate Neil LaBute's In 
the Company of Men and as Julia Roberts's boyfriend in Erin Brockovich. He can 
next be seen as Jack Nicholson's wayward sidekick in The Pledge.

 Almost unnoticed, 80s sexpot Kim Basinger appears to be moving into that 
middle-aged twilight of the Hollywood star. The Batman star is reported to be 
in talks to play the role of Eminem's mother in a fictionalised biopic of the 
bad boy rapper to be directed by LA Confidential's Curtis Hanson. Basinger won 
an Oscar for her own turn in LA Confidential, but her recent movie choices have 
been box-office bombs.

 Having enjoyed close links with Hollywood throughout his tenure in the Oval 
Office, Bill Clinton could well be about to make a move into acting. The 
ex-president is being courted to play himself in a film about the Mafia 
entitled Godfathers, Popes and Presidents. The movie is being spearheaded by 
actor-producer Gianni Russo, who played the role of Carlo Rizzi in the first 
two Godfather movies. According to Russo's spokesman, the producers are 
currently in talks with Clinton's office: "We are in the process right now. We 
should have the answer soon."
 