
Scott Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/scott-walker>, the governor 
of Wisconsin who is considering a Republican presidential run, has promised to 
sign into law an anti-union bill targeted at the state’s private sector workers 
that is an almost verbatim copy of model legislation devised by an 
ultra-rightwing network of corporate lobbyists.

How a powerful rightwing lobby is plotting to stop minimum wage hikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/alec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage>
On Friday, Walker dropped his earlier opposition to a so-called “right to 
work” bill, which he had described as a “distraction”, signalling that he would 
sign it into law should it succeed in passing theWisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> legislature. Republican members 
are rushing through the provision, which would strip private sector unions of 
much of their fee-collecting and bargaining powers.

On Monday, the bill cleared a committee of the state senate. A vote of the 
full chamber is slated for later this week, and of the assembly early next 
month.

The resumption of union battles in Walker’s home state comes at an awkward 
time for the probable 2016 candidate, as he seeks to shift attention away from 
Wisconsin and towards a national political platform. On Thursday he will speak 
<http://cpac.conservative.org/agenda/> at the high-profile Conservative 
Political Action Conference (CPAC) in Washington, where he will seek to press 
home his recent meteoric rise from a relatively obscure midwest executive toa 
leading contender among top Republicans. 
<http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/politics/iowa-poll/2015/01/31/iowa-poll-walker-leads-tight-pack/22659477/>

It has now been disclosed that the Wisconsin 2015 right to work bill is a 
virtual carbon copy of a model bill framed by the American Legislative Exchange 
Council (Alec). The council acts as a form of dating agency between major US 
corporations and state-level Republican lawmakers, bringing them together to 
frame new legislation favorable to big business interests.

The Center for Media and Democracy (CMD), which monitors the activities of 
Alec, has compared the Alec model bill and the new Wisconsin proposal and found 
them to be nearly identical <http://www.prwatch.org/files/wi_rtw.pdf>. 

“This bill is word for word from the Alec playbook, and that’s no surprise as 
the Wisconsin legislature is dominated by Alec members,” said the CMD’s general 
counsel, Brendan Fischer.

Walker too has close ties to Alec. He actively supported several Alec bills 
between 1993 and 2002, when he was a member of the Wisconsin assembly. On 
Sunday Alec posted to its Twitter feed 
<https://twitter.com/ALEC_states/status/569642687978192896> a photograph of 
Walker with the Alec chief executive, Lisa Nelson, in which she said: “Great to 
be with Alec alumni @ScottWalker”.
ALEC (@ALEC_states) 
Great to be with ALEC alumni, @ScottWalker <https://twitter.com/ScottWalker>, 
and@andrecushing <https://twitter.com/andrecushing> this weekend. @Lisabnelson 
<https://twitter.com/Lisabnelson> pic.twitter.com/v55xEP93Ex 
<http://t.co/v55xEP93Ex>
 <https://twitter.com/ALEC_states/status/569642687978192896> February 22, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ALEC_states/status/569642687978192896> 
The governor is no stranger to fighting unions. His current ascendancy is in 
part due to the national name recognition he gained when taking on public 
sector unions at the start of his first term in office, leading to 
headline-grabbling mass demonstrations 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/2011-02-26-wisconsin-saturday-rally_N.htm>
.

To some extent, a renewal of such battles could play to his favour among the 
hardcore of rightwingRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> who tend to determine the 
outcome of the party’s primary elections. On the other hand, any suggestion 
that Walker gave his backing to cookie-cutter legislation devised by a 
corporate lobbying group could hand the Democratic party valuable ammunition 
should Walker win the nomination and go on to face a general election.

He has already provided his opponents with considerable material for potential 
attack ads. In a recent trip to London to burnish his foreign policy 
credentials, he dodged a question 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/speak-up-gov-walker/2015/02/16/5c63a1d0-b5ff-11e4-9423-f3d0a1ec335c_story.html>
 about whether he believed in evolution. In December he got his “Mazel tovs” 
confused when he signed a letter to a Jewish constituent 
<http://host.madison.com/ct/news/local/writers/jessie-opoien/the-political-pitfalls-of-cultural-crossover-scott-walker-edition/article_c33f5f82-1541-54df-807e-32c0b6134487.html>
: “Thank you again and Molotov.”

Scott Walker sidesteps question on Giuliani remarks about Obama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/21/scott-walker-rudy-giuliani-obama-loves-america>
The brewing union confrontation comes as Walker is increasing the pace of his 
exploratory activities around a 2016 campaign. The son of a preacher, he has 
been wooing evangelical Christian conservatives 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/23/us/politics/scott-walker-hardens-tone-on-social-issues-to-woo-christian-conservatives.html>
 who are a key constituency in the opening caucuses of the presidential 
election in Iowa.

He has also stepped up meetings with prominent Republican donors.

The Wisconsin right to work bill is just one part of a nationwide push by Alec 
to undermine union power and rein in minimum wage levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/alec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage>
. Twenty-four states currently have right to work laws and a rash of state 
legislatures are taking up the issue, partly under Alec’s encouragement.
 