
It was less than one week after Uber and Lyft pulled out of the city of Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/09/uber-lyft-austin-vote-against-self-regulation>
 – and a crowdsourced ride-sharing alternative began to emerge.


In May, voters in the Texas capital rejected a proposal that would have 
overturned a city council measure forcing ride-sharing companies to require 
fingerprint-based background checks for drivers. Uber and Lyft lost despite a 
vicious $9m lobbying and publicity campaign by the two ride-sharing companies, 
which included arecall effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/10/uber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas>
 against the legislator who proposed the measure.


In response, both companies pulled their operations from Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, perhaps hoping that the people of 
the city, starved of the convenience of their ride-sharing apps, would try to 
overturn the measure at a later date.


But they appear to have underestimated the people of Austin.


Organizing through a 32,000-member Facebook group called Arcade City Austin 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/ArcadeCityAustin/>, drivers and riders now 
contact each other peer-to-peer, with riders posting to the group when they 
need a lift. Drivers post their time of arrival, and riders then connect over 
Facebook and exchange phone numbers; both parties have ample opportunity to 
evaluate each other for safety, proponents say.


There is no formal payment structure in place. Some individual drivers set 
prices when responding to requests; others choose to leave it up to the rider 
to pay what they believe the service was worth – or whatever they can afford.


Solomon Hapshire is an early adopter of Arcade City who used to drive for Lyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft> in his spare time before the 
company pulled out of Austin. At first, he was driving in order to put money 
aside for his wedding next year but quickly fell in love with driving people 
around.


With Arcade City … they are more than just a ping – they’re a person
Solomon Hapshire 
He said that he makes more money now from driving with Arcade City, with no 
set pricing, than he did driving with an app that prices by the mile. “It’s not 
‘you’re driving this far for this much’, you are bringing a personal experience 
to someone, and they understand that,” he said. “It’s you choosing to help 
them, and them choosing to help you.”


“With Lyft and Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> you’re 
driving ’round in circles waiting for the ping,” Hapshire said. “You don’t know 
who this person is, all you know is it’s a ping on the map. With Arcade City … 
they are more than just a ping – they’re a person.”

Hapshire told the story of one of his regular clients, who is blind and relies 
on him to get to work. “I give him at least three rides a week,” he said. 
“Sometimes he pays me a good amount, sometimes he pays me [just] what he can, 
but it doesn’t matter, because I’m helping.” The two have become good friends, 
Hapshire said.


Arcade City was founded on New Year’s Eve in New Hampshire as a project that 
aims to decentralize ride-sharing, according to Chris Winston, Arcade City’s 
director of regions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fuber-lyft-austin-texas-facebook-rideshare-program%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F805f215368a8f83c84a2005875b98115b49e75e3%2F0_0_4288_3216%2Fmaster%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20no%20Uber%20or%20Lyft%2C%20a%20Texas%20city%20is%20crowdsourcing%20rides%20on%20Facebook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fuber-lyft-austin-texas-facebook-rideshare-program%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20no%20Uber%20or%20Lyft%2C%20a%20Texas%20city%20is%20crowdsourcing%20rides%20on%20Facebook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fuber-lyft-austin-texas-facebook-rideshare-program%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F805f215368a8f83c84a2005875b98115b49e75e3%2F0_0_4288_3216%2Fmaster%2F4288.jpg>
 Campaign signs concerning the Austin vote over fingerprint requirements for 
Uber and Lyft. Photograph: Reuters 
It is unclear yet whether Arcade City can scale into places where Uber and 
Lyft operate, but there is no doubt that it has truly found its footing in 
Austin. Winston estimated that the Facebook group was facilitating at least 
21,000 rides a week with roughly 1,400 drivers – an estimate he said was very 
conservative.

“Did they expect that the city would dissolve [without them]? It’s hard to 
say,” Winston said. “But why leave to come back? You have citizens that need to 
get to the airport, to the hospital.”

“If people aren’t going to play nice, or cooler heads don’t prevail, does that 
mean you cut a whole city off?” he added.

The two ride-share companies – which Winston describes as a duopoly – badly 
miscalculated if they thought Austin would clamor for their return. “Now people 
are saying ‘we don’t want Uber to come back, we’re doing fine’,” he said.


An Arcade City app is in the works, though it has not yet launched, and seven 
Austin drivers have been selected to begin trialling a beta version – Hapshire 
is one of them.


Another is Natalie Williams, who drove for both Uber and Lyft before they left 
town. She enjoyed it but much prefers Arcade City. Partly, she said, because 
Uber and Lyft don’t have preferred driver or passengers lists, “you don’t know 
who you’re going to get – you might get somebody male if you’re a female, and 
you don’t feel comfortable.”


But more than that, Arcade City was bringing people together, Williams said. 
“It was very impersonal with Uber and Lyft; now we’re taking care of each 
other.” She said that recently she got out of bed in the middle of the night to 
pick up a young woman “where it seemed like this young lady was in an 
uncomfortable situation”. Williams picked her up and took her home. “We talked, 
I gave her advice.”


Like Hapshire, Williams said that despite the donation system she had no 
problems making as much of a living as she had been from Uber and Lyft. “There 
are some people who bid low, there are others who have bid high,” she said. 
“I’ve been lucky to have amazing and generous passengers who are really 
appreciative.”
 