
Young women with vocational qualifications earn 15% less than their male 
peers, a significantly bigger pay gap than for those with academic 
qualifications, according to new research.

Men aged between 22 and 30 with a vocational qualification above GCSE level 
earn on average £10 an hour, the Trades Union Congress (TUC) found in an 
analysis of official figures. Women with the same qualification level earn only 
£8.50 per hour.

The gender pay gap: how much would a feminist cupcake cost you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/apr/08/the-gender-pay-gap-how-much-would-a-feminist-cupcake-cost-you>
The 15% difference was higher than the gender pay gap of 10% between young men 
and women with academic qualifications. It was also higher than an overall 
gender pay gap of 9%, calculated from figures for gross hourly pay for workers 
aged between 22 and 30.

The TUC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> general secretary, Frances 
O’Grady, said young women with vocational qualifications experience a “huge 
gender pay gap”, partly because they work predominantly in sectors where pay is 
poorer.


“In better-paid sectors like engineering and construction [women] remain a 
rarity,” she said. “Unless we challenge gender stereotyping and discrimination 
from the outset, the situation is not going to improve. Unions, employers and 
government must work together to provide better careers advice in schools and 
to support and improve training opportunities for all young people.”

The TUC analysis found that in 2015, just one in 40 vocational qualifications 
in construction were awarded to women and they received just 11% of vocational 
qualifications in engineering and manufacturing. By contrast, in health and 
care, women dominate with 63.6% of vocational qualifications.

The government has been promoting vocational qualifications to tackle skills 
shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/21/government-contract-bids-commitment-apprenticeships>
 and has vowed to create 3m apprenticeships by the end of the decade. But a 
recent report claimed women were not benefiting from apprenticeships as much as 
men.

The report 
<http://www.youngwomenstrust.org/assets/0000/2906/Making_Apprenticeships_Work_for_Young_Women.pdf>
 last month from theYoung Women’s Trust <http://www.youngwomenstrust.org/> 
found that although more women were now entering apprenticeships than men, they 
were paid less than their male counterparts and were less likely to go on to 
gain employment. The charity said the main reason was that women were still 
underrepresented within male-dominated sectors, which tend to be better paid 
and have better career prospects.
 