
Tuesday is Ada Lovelace Day <http://findingada.com/>. Who’s Ada Lovelace, 
apart from someone with a truly bitchin’steampunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/08/steampunk-lincoln> name? Well, 
she deserves all the brass-and-clockwork associations her name brings up 
because she was probably the world’s first computer programmer. She was born in 
1815, and studied maths and logic out of a deep personal interest. She 
befriended and worked with mathematician Charles Babbage, and her ideas for how 
Babbage’sAnalytical Engine <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytical_Engine> 
might work prefigure modern computer science. Ada Lovelace Day was founded to 
celebrate the achievements of women in science, technology, engineering and 
maths (Stem).

And because Lovelace’s achievements were in programming, I want to celebrate 
two other women who lit up the world of coding. Did you know that two of the 
first software houses worthy of the name in the UK were founded by women, in 
the late 1950s and early 1960s? And that they both made – and this isn’t 
emphasised enough in lists of women’s achievements, in my view – enormous piles 
of cash doing it? And that this wasn’t so unusual in the 1950s and 60s, because 
there was a brief period where coding was seen as “women’s work”, as it 
involves a lot of focus on detail and typing (coding is overwhelmingly male 
today)? If you didn’t know these things – and I didn’t until I started digging 
– then it’s about time we celebrated the work of Dina St Johnston and Dame 
Stephanie “Steve” Shirley.

The 1960s weren’t the sexiest years in UK computing history. Unlike the Enigma 
machines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2011/nov/25/tommy-brown-north-shields-tyneside-george-medal-enigma>
 of the 1940s, or the 1980s personal computing revolution, the 1960s brought 
computers to bear on far more mundane matters: train signalling, payroll 
automation, banking systems, air-traffic control. The kind of computing we 
never think about, but that underlies almost every aspect of our lives. The 
kind in which – and it really can’t be emphasised frequently enough – there was 
a lot of money to be made.

Before the late 1950s, there were no “software houses”. That is, there was no 
one actually making all the programs you might run on your home computer today. 
If you bought a computer – and don’t think of a sleek MacBook Air, imagine one 
of those machines the size of a room that ran on reel-to-reel spooling tape, 
instead – it was supplied as“bare metal” 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bare_machine>, and you’d have to write all the 
programs yourself. It was thought no one but a science department or a 
technical firm employing their own programs would want one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Foct%2F13%2Fada-lovelace-day-women-computing-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F13%2F1413212287710%2F813206a1-4caf-40c4-a1e9-8d4b3d852d75-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Women%20in%20computing%3A%20the%2060s%20pioneers%20who%20lit%20up%20the%20world%20of%20coding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Foct%2F13%2Fada-lovelace-day-women-computing-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Women%20in%20computing%3A%20the%2060s%20pioneers%20who%20lit%20up%20the%20world%20of%20coding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Foct%2F13%2Fada-lovelace-day-women-computing-60s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F13%2F1413212287710%2F813206a1-4caf-40c4-a1e9-8d4b3d852d75-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ada Lovelace: English mathematician, friend of Charles Babbage and early 
computer programmer. Photograph: Print Collector/Print Collector/Getty Images 
Dina St Johnston (nee Vaughan) had always had an independent streak, her 
friend, Colin Porter, chief executive and secretary of theInstitute of Railway 
Signal Engineers <http://www.irse.org/default.aspx>, told me. She left school 
at 17 to join pioneering computer firm Elliot Brothers, where she learned 
programming – and thought she had spotted a gap in the market. No programmers 
were selling software directly to the industry or, as she put it, as quoted in 
the Computer Journal in 2008: “There was a shortage of processor-oriented 
people who were happy to go round a steel works in a hard hat.” Dina St 
Johnston, however, loved working with machinery, and rejoiced in putting on the 
hard hat; later in life she collected fast cars and drove them at enormous 
speed around the private roads on her estate. She founded Vaughan Programming 
Services in 1959, the first software house in the UK. They created software for 
the BBC, Unilever, BAA, British Rail and GEC. She produced pioneering real-time 
passenger information systems – the forerunner of those clickety-click 
timetable boards in stations up and down the country – and flight simulators 
for the RAF. When she died in 2007, one obituary said that she’d “left a 
lasting contribution to both the art and science of programming” – and the 
company she founded still exists, now as a part of GE.

Stephanie “Steve” Shirley arrived in Britain as a Kindertransport child in 
1939. “I think my ‘guilt’ about surviving the Holocaust gave me a strong urge 
to succeed,”she has said <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-19559738>, “to 
prove that my life had been worth saving.” She took a maths degree at night 
school and founded her software house, Freelance Programmers, from her dining 
room table in 1962. She wanted to be able to work while raising her family, and 
was determined to help other women do the same. Shirleyonly employed female 
programmers until 1975 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/4s0xGFrTYm9GMPD1KD4Tg9S/dame-stephanie-steve-shirley>
, when the Equal Opportunities Act meant she had to open up applications to 
men. Her company, renamed Xansa, was listed on the FTSE-250 and sold software 
in areas including banking, transport and telecoms. Since retiring, Shirley has 
become a philanthropist; her late son Giles was autistic, and she takes a 
particular interest in autism charities. I met Steve Shirley once, and told her 
how much I admired her: for the company she created from nothing, and for her 
philanthropy today. “Well,” she said to me, “I had a lot of fun making the 
money, and now I’m having a lot of fun giving it away.”

I’ve gone on a lot about the money in this piece. The thing is, there aren’t 
enough messages to young women that technology is a fascinating area to work 
in, a fast-moving field, one that rewards hard work, an area where you really 
can change the world. And there also aren’t enough people saying to young 
women: a million dollars isn’t cool, you know what’s cool? Selling the 
multimillion-dollar programming company you founded and then spending the cash 
on whatever you like, from fast cars to charitable giving. And these two 
amazing women were two of the first people in the UK to do just that. There is 
not a reason on Earth it couldn’t be you, or your daughter. HappyAda Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> Day.
 