
This week saw a day of celebration for Ada Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/15/nerd-cabaret-wikipedia-ada-lovelace-day-2013>
, a brilliant mathematician who wrote the world's first computer program before 
computers were even invented. Lovelace grew up in a world of enormous gender 
inequality, and her first experience of it came moments after birth with her 
father's reported disappointment that she was not "the glorious boy" he had 
hoped for. But even now, nearly 200 years later, women in science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics (Stem) are still fighting an uphill battle against 
professional gender imbalance.

According to e-skills UK 
<http://www.e-skills.com/research/research-publications/women-in-it/>, women 
make up just 17% of the UK IT and telecoms workforce. And the number of women 
in the most senior research positions in Stem in the UK also stands at the 
paltry figure of 17%, according to a2012 European Commission study 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/science-and-technology-committee/inquiries/parliament-2010/women-in-stem-careers/>
. Even worse, according to a2012 Wise campaign report (pdf) 
<http://www.wisecampaign.org.uk/files/useruploads/files/wise_stats_document_final.pdf>
 only 13% of Stem jobs in the UK are occupied by women.

So why has progress been so slow since Lovelace blazed her trail some two 
centuries ago? Partly because women in Stem are still battling attitudes 
towards women that belong in the 19th century. To celebrate Ada Lovelace day, 
theEveryday Sexism Project <http://www.everydaysexism.com> invited women on 
Twitter to share their experiences in Stem careers, good or bad. Many positive 
stories were shared, with one woman saying she was "so proud of my electrical 
engineer mother who's been head of her department for 20+ years" and others 
reporting positive moves in the right direction …

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> My fantastic male science 
teacher encouraged me into science BECAUSE I'm a woman, not in spite of. Final 
year neurosci now!

— Katie Clements (@katie_elvira) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/katie_elvira/statuses/390098784975208449>

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> I'm a female PhD on a 
course directed by a woman. Primary supervisor is female as are many of the 
Dept's best researchers :)

— Alice-Emma-Louise (@AliceEmmaLouise) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/AliceEmmaLouise/statuses/390074047301955584>

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> Part of mostly female 
research group working in coding/physics/fieldwork heavy area. Love it.

— Hayley Evers-King (@HayleyEversKing) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/HayleyEversKing/statuses/390063639002370048>

But these stories were far outweighed by the tales that flooded in from women 
in Stem careers facing sheer archaic sexism at every turn. From the decision to 
go into the field in the first place …

.@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> I was warned off 
software dev by female HR person who told me it was all men and v hard for 
women - told her I didn't care.

— Rosey Tyler (@RoseyTyler) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/RoseyTyler/statuses/390060258422710272>

@Eilidhcraig <https://twitter.com/Eilidhcraig> @EverydaySexism 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> I got the variant of that " you are too 
pretty to do science."

— Eims (@bugamonster) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/bugamonster/statuses/390080895463735296>

… to studying Stem …

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> - studying engineering, 
maths lecture described a graph and why all the women would recognise it as 
shaped like washing line

— Ethel Fletcher (@EthelFletcher) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/EthelFletcher/statuses/390095872790634496>

My CompSci Mstrs orientation: Lecturer: Why are there so few women in CS? Male 
student: Because men are better programmers.@EverydaySexism 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism>

— Sofie Bird (@sofie_bird) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/sofie_bird/statuses/390054645759893504>

… to challenges when trying to advance in their careers …

as lab tech saving money for grad school, i was told that, if i wanted letter 
of rec, i had to "sleep with" my boss@everydaysexism 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism>

— GrrlScientist (@GrrlScientist) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/GrrlScientist/statuses/390057263114641408>

@huhsmile <https://twitter.com/huhsmile> @EverydaySexism 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> this also happened when i was a postdoc 
looking for a job in science. i refused. ended up chronically unemployed.

— GrrlScientist (@GrrlScientist) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/GrrlScientist/statuses/390060105946771456>

… to facing sexism on the job itself …

.@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> #ALD13 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ALD13&src=hash> I work in biology lab, 
repeatedly called "wifey" by a male academic and leered at, lude remarks made. 
Charming

— Dr Rachael Dunlop (@DrRachie) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/DrRachie/statuses/390058802776535040>

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> I stopped working in the 
IT-Sector as I never have been taken serious. Good enough to make coffee though 
& to get sent porn.

— Canan (@_Canan__) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/_Canan__/statuses/390055421811384320>

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> one of few women at IT 
conference when doing my Masters. Man turned round, saw me & said "Whoa, what 
are you doing here?"

— Jane (@ephemera_jane) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ephemera_jane/statuses/390100203006480384>

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> I'm a mech engineer, got 
told at an industry function "you don't look like an engineer". I asked him if 
it was the breasts.

— Karen Hovenga (@khovenga) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/khovenga/statuses/390095358363070464>

Some people complained that by sharing these stories we would put even more 
girls off going into Stem. But they are stories that need to be heard. What 
message does it send to the scores of women facing this outdated, unacceptable 
discrimination, if they are told to put up and shut up to avoid putting off 
more women unwittingly signing up to face the same treatment? Burying our heads 
in the sand won't solve the problem, it'll just make it even more invisible and 
normalised.

Far better to get these stories out in the open; to scream and shout about 
them until something is done. And something does need to be done, because these 
are just a tiny number of the hundreds of examples we have collected. But the 
good news is that women aren't taking it lying down. Tomorrow's budding female 
scientists can take joyful motivation from these strong, inspirational women …

"I used to purposefully jam the copier so people would stop asking me to make 
photocopies for their meetings. I'm an engineer." Everyday Sexism Project entry

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> Aged 10: mocked 
mercilessly at school cos I said I was going to be a scientist with a lab with 
loads of cool stuff in it...

— Cath Aubergine (@CathAubergine) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/CathAubergine/statuses/390094310462332929>

@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> ...Aged 41: I'm actually 
an engineer (semiconductor failure analysis), and I DO have a lab with loads of 
cool stuff in it :)

— Cath Aubergine (@CathAubergine) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/CathAubergine/statuses/390094389076193280>

TV eng: TV needs a new tube love, pricey Me: That's a split capacitor fix it 
for free or I report you@EverydaySexism <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism>

— Lovelyjane (@reallovelyjane) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/reallovelyjane/statuses/390077107474530304>

@TonyTimes2 <https://twitter.com/TonyTimes2> @EverydaySexism 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism> Free repair, and an apology.

— Lovelyjane (@reallovelyjane) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/reallovelyjane/statuses/390082386366840832>

Careers teacher said he'd eat my indentures if I became engineer. Took them & 
salt to school 5 years later. Got banned@EverydaySexism 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism>

— Lovelyjane (@reallovelyjane) October 15, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/reallovelyjane/statuses/390066866066300928>
 