
Today, as you'll probably see from many tweets and blog posts, is Ada Lovelace 
Day. Asthe Finding Ada website explains <http://findingada.com/about/>, this 

aims to raise the profile of women in science, technology, engineering and 
maths by encouraging people around the world to talk about the women whose work 
they admire.

Many of the talks and posts that mark the day will be about mentors and 
leaders in science today. Many will highlight the sometimes overlooked work of 
women in the history of STEM.

As I discussed on this blog last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-h-word/2012/oct/16/history-science>, I 
find myself somewhat conflicted about Ada Lovelace Day and similar projects 
that focus on highlighting women in the history of science. On the plus side, I 
am wholeheartedly supportive of the attempt to encourage young women to think 
about scientific careers and to appreciate the work of women in the past, when 
opportunities were even more circumscribed. I am also glad to see stories from 
the history of science getting wider attention.

However, I am also wary. In celebratory mode, there is a tendency to overplay 
the work that the women highlighted actually did. There is no better example of 
this than Lovelace herself, who iswrongly credited with writing the first 
computer program 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace#Controversy_over_extent_of_contributions>
. Likewise, just as with the heroic "great man" mode of history, focusing on 
individuals can hide the extent to which science is always a collaborative 
enterprise. Finally, although some women are rescued from the background 
shadows, other individuals and groups, equally deserving of attention, remain 
ignored.

As a historian, I am always likely to be suspicious of the use of history to 
serve particular purposes, whether that is to get more women into ormore 
funding for British science 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01d56dn/episodes/guide>. Laudable though 
those aims might be, there is a risk that the historical evidence will be 
selected or distorted to suit the current purpose.

Certainly there were (are) remarkable women in all spheres of life, but the 
more important story is the one that explores why there were so few and how and 
why their talents – and those of whom we'll never hear – were wasted. While 
it's good to encourage girls and women to have the confidence to succeed in 
science or elsewhere, we also need them to look at the societies that have 
made, and still make, this a difficult task.

It always strikes me that should women of the past read some of what is 
written about them today, they would be hugely surprised and perhaps even 
offended. Before the 20th century, and often after, women who did scientific 
work tended to present themselves as a support to science or men rather than as 
pioneers. Although this is a reflection of the patriarchal society in which 
they lived, and they may sometimes have said things they did not privately 
believe in order to appear acceptable, it was their chosen self-presentation.

Recently, for example, a post was published 
<http://thereconstructionists.org/post/59444876063/mary-somerville?utm_content=buffer62f3d&utm_source=buffer&utm_medium=twitter&utm_campaign=Buffer>
 that claimed thatWilliam Whewell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Whewell>
 had coined the word "scientist" to describeMary Somerville 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_somerville>. The response suggested that 
this is something that people really wanted to believe. However, while it is 
true that the first published appearance of the word was in a review of 
Somerville's bookOn the Connexion of the Physical Sciences 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ELcAAAAAMAAJ&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 (1834), neither Whewell nor Somerville would have dreamed of its being applied 
to her. Women, Somerville suggested, did not have original ideas, but the 
female mind might, as Whewell wrote, provide a "peculiar illumination" in 
explaining the ideas of others.

Somerville undertook aspects of science that were "women's work": writing, 
translation, popularisation. She also frequently highlighted her role as a wife 
and mother. Others, who approved of and supported her, did likewise. The 
American astronomer Maria Mitchell met Somervilleand wrote 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=RwF-VBDJwKIC&pg=PA180&dq&f=false#v=onepage&q&f=false>
:

I could not but admire Mrs Somerville as a woman. The ascent of the steep and 
rugged path of science had not unfitted her for the drawing-room circle; the 
hours of devotion to close study have not been incompatible with the duties of 
wife and mother; the mind that has turned to rigid demonstration has not 
thereby lost its faith in those truths which figures will not prove.

Somerville and others underlined the distinction between men and women's minds 
and appropriate spheres of activity because of the society in which they lived. 
Somerville was a supporter of women's education and it was important to show 
that learning mathematics and the sciences would not turn young women into 
unattractive, barren spinsters. Those campaigning for women's suffrage had a 
similar choice: emphasise your acceptable femininity or reinforce the 
stereotypes of Punch caricatures.

We like to think that we have moved on. In many ways we have: women in the UK 
can vote, be educated and enter careers and remain in them even after getting 
married or having children. Yet they are still radically underrepresented in 
the most highly paid and esteemed positions, and overrepresented at the other 
end of the scale. We are, asAlice Bell explained yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2013/oct/14/science-policy-women>
, still in a society that asks for female intelligence to be mitigated with the 
use of lipstick and a focus on domestic details.

By all means celebrate individuals, but understand them as they would have 
understood themselves. Make sure to think of the society in which they operated 
and look hard at what has and what has not changed.
 