
Employing women in writing and directing roles makes business sense, yet is 
still relatively rare, suggests a new study by theBFI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi>. The report, Succes de plume? Female 
Screenwriters and Directors of UK Films 2010-2012, indicates 30% of the most 
successful and profitable independent British films of the period had a female 
screenwriter and/or director.

The disproportion comes from a comparison of the percentage of female 
directors (11%) and writers (16%) of all UK indies in that period with the 
equivalent stats for the top 20 films at the box office. Of these, 18% had a 
female director and 37% a female writer.
 Kick-Ass writer Jane Goldman. Photograph: Richard Saker 
 Key figures boosting the stats include Emma Thompson, who wrote both Arthur 
Christmas and theNanny McPhee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/132846/nanny-mcphee-and-the-big-bang> 
sequel, and Jane Goldman, who penned the originalKick-Ass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/135252/kick-ass>. Significant directors 
included Debbie Isitt (Nativity 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150688/nativity-2>), Lone Scherfig (One 
Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141706/one-day>), and Phyllida 
Lloyd, who took the reins on The Iron Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140396/iron-lady>. The screenplay for 
that film was written by Abi Morgan, who was thesole British winner at the 
Emmys earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/23/emmys-2013-abi-morgan-the-hour-axed>
for her script for TV drama The Hour. Morgan, who has previously scripted Shame 
and the BBC adaptation of Birdsong, has a new play, The Mistress Contract, 
opening in the spring, as well as her new film,The Invisible Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156899/invisible-woman>, adapted from 
the non-fiction book about Charles Dickens by Claire Tomalin.

The research found that women who had made inroads in the field were more 
likely to have credits on platforms other than just cinema, and also 
highlighted the crucial role of key commissioners such asChristine Langan at 
BBC Films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/01/christine-langan-bbc-films>, and 
Tessa Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/04/tessa-ross-film4-slumdog> and 
Katherine Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/30/katherine-butler-gambler-film4-features>
 at Film4.

 Said Maria Miller, culture minister and minister for women and equalities: 
"The creative industries underpin this country's economic growth and are 
increasingly front and centre in representing Britain on the world stage. Of 
course, there is still a long way to go to address under-representation across 
the sector in general, but with the number of women being employed within the 
creative industries growing year by year, I know we can look forward to a 
future for film where the talent of women can shine."
 Tom Hanks as Walt Disney and Emma Thompson as PL Travers in Saving Mr Banks. 
 Her words were backed by BFI CEO Amanda Nevill, who expressed frustration 
that "overall the numbers of women in writing and directing roles remains low". 
At the BFI London film festival in October, festival director Clare Stewart 
introduced akeynote speech  
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/alison-owen-internet-wont-kill-movies/5062653.article>
from producer Alison Owen, who focused not on gender inequality but the fallacy 
of a battle for audiences posed by the internet. Owen's latest film,Saving Mr 
Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156373/saving-mr-banks>, opens 
this Friday in the UK and has been praised for thecentral role it gives to a 
middle-aged woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/14/why-we-force-film-makers-to-fake-it>
 (PL Travers, played by Emma Thompson). TheOscar-hopeful  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/30/oscar-predictions-2014-saving-mr-banks-mary-poppins>
was scripted by theBrit Kelly Marcel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/kelly-marcel-disney-hollywood-scriptwriter-fifty-shades-of-grey>
, who has also adapted the EL James book Fifty Shades of Grey for Sam 
Taylor-Johnson's film version.
 