
It might be time to stop looking for the next Spitting Image. In retrospect, 
it’s weird we ever even tried. Spitting Image was as singular as it was 
era-specific, managing to funnel a golden age of impressionists, a bracingly 
iconoclastic bunch of writers and a beautiful raft of puppets – the likes of 
which had never been seen before – into a satire that combined the highbrow and 
the lowbrow to phenomenal success.

Finding a replacement to something that unique is completely redundant – 
especially since not even Spitting Image could keep pace with itself. When many 
of its writers left in the early 90s, roughly coinciding with the loss of the 
show’s de facto lead character Margaret Thatcher, the show fell into a swift 
decline it couldn’t escape.

And yet people keep trying. After Spitting Image came its cheap knock-off 
2DTV. After that came its even cheaper knock-off Headcases. And then, last 
year, came the slightly more promising but ultimately forgettable Newzoids. And 
now, god help the lot of us, there is WONKchannel, which might just qualify as 
the cheapest knock-off of them all.

An online show that bills itself as being from “the team behind Spitting 
Image”, WONKchannel is the clearest sign yet that we should all give up on 
animated satire while we still can.

It looks – and this cannot possibly be intentional – like one of the Taiwanese 
news animators from a few years ago fell into a tub of ayahuasca then tried to 
depict their abstract internal nightmare using only a ZX Spectrum. All the 
impressions sound like Siri losing hope at the bottom of a well. The sketches 
feel like clustered cries for help. It is, despite the apparent involvement of 
that show’s alumni, a million miles from Spitting Image.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6WuYq0qxTh0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6WuYq0qxTh0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6WuYq0qxTh0&media=>
 Britain Seeks Attention. 

Take the recent Britain Seeks Attention sketch, which seems like the first in 
an ongoing series. It’s a legitimate mess. Simon Cowell has nightmarish dead 
eyes and a mouth that only seems capable of making small little kissy 
movements. Kate Middleton is literally just a woman’s voice. Donald Trump 
sounds like he’s talking with his head down a toilet. Kanye West is a 
disembodied face that sounds like Mike Tyson doing his best to defeat an 
unusually sticky toffee. The closest thing to a success is David Cameron, and 
even he’s ruined by a heavy-handed punchline where he tramples on people while 
the words DISABLED BENEFITS and WELFARE STATE tumble down the screen like the 
world’s most literal newspaper cartoon.

To say WONKchannel needs work is a profound understatement. Currently, the 
whole thing comes off like a series of placeholder demos created to show what 
it will look like when it gets better at animation and voices and humour. One 
of the main selling points of WONKchannel, apparently, is that it’s cheaper to 
produce than Spitting Image. On this basis, there has never been a stronger 
argument for heavily investing in something if you want it to succeed.

This cannot possibly be the finished article, especially if it came from the 
team behind Spitting Image. If it is, it might be time to give Spitting Image – 
and the entire concept of animated satire as a whole – the viking funeral it so 
sorely needs.
 