
Woody Allen and Cate Blanchett have issued statements in response to the open 
letter posted by Allen's adopted daughter, Dylan, on a New York Times blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/02/dylan-farrow-woody-allen-abuse-allegations>
. The letter reiterates accusations of sexual abuse that were thrown out of 
court in 1993.

On Sunday, Leslee Dart, publicist for Allen, 78, said in a statement:

Mr Allen has read the article and found it untrue and disgraceful. He will be 
responding very soon. In the meantime, it is essential that your coverage make 
the following facts clear.

At the time, a thorough investigation was conducted by court appointed 
independent experts. The experts concluded there was no credible evidence of 
molestation; that Dylan Farrow had an inability to distinguish between fantasy 
and reality; and that Dylan Farrow had likely been coached by her mother, Mia 
Farrow. No charges were ever filed.

Cate Blanchett also responded to Dylan's accusation that the actor had acted 
thoughtlessly in working with Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/03/cate-blanchett-responds-to-letter-by-woody-allens-daughter-dylan-farrow>
. Blanchett wrote:

It's obviously been a long and painful situation for the family and I hope 
they find some resolution and peace.

Likewise, Blanchett's Blue Jasmine co-star Alec Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin> appeared to call for an end to 
the public nature of the row, terming Dylan’s allegations “this family’s 
personal struggle”.

The actor earlier engaged in conversation with Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> followers but subsequently 
deleted the tweets. Responding to the claim that he owed Dylan an apology, 
Baldwin wrote: "What the f&@% is wrong w u that u think we all need to b 
commenting on this family's personal struggle?"

Another follower replied to Baldwin's tweet saying: "@ABFalecbaldwin 
disappointed in your response. You have 2 daughters. You should know better," 
to which hereplied 
<https://twitter.com/ABFalecbaldwin/status/429982461645582337>, "You are 
mistaken if you think there is a place for me, or any outsider, in this 
family's issue."

Baldwin's timeline does still include two retweets which appear to be 
endorsements.
Patrick Crain (@patrickcrain73) 
@geezlouweezy <https://twitter.com/geezlouweezy> @ABFalecbaldwin 
<https://twitter.com/ABFalecbaldwin> I think the situation is horribly sad and 
thought so in 1992 when it happened.
 <https://twitter.com/patrickcrain73/statuses/429990435725910016> February 2, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/patrickcrain73/statuses/429990435725910016> CoPi 
(@coreypierceart) 
So ppl are baiting @ABFAlecBaldwin <https://twitter.com/ABFalecbaldwin> to 
comment on Woody Allen, and are essentially calling him a complicit 
collaborator in abuse by refusing.
 <https://twitter.com/coreypierceart/statuses/429996076628586496> February 2, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/coreypierceart/statuses/429996076628586496> 
Girls creator Lena Dunham, however, expressed sympathy with Dylan, and was 
heartened by what she perceived to be the widespread sharing of her views.

Lena Dunham (@lenadunham) 
To share in this way is courageous, powerful and generous. Please read: 
http://t.co/RKKREFB8hM <http://t.co/RKKREFB8hM>
 <https://twitter.com/lenadunham/statuses/429753542295842816> February 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/lenadunham/statuses/429753542295842816> Lena Dunham 
(@lenadunham) 
Grateful my timeline is full of so much love and respect for Dylan
 <https://twitter.com/lenadunham/statuses/429784136102854656> February 2, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/lenadunham/statuses/429784136102854656> 
Meanwhile Robert B Weide, who directed a documentary about Allen, tweeted that 
the letter contained nothing which hadn't already been discussed and dismissed 
in the original investigation.
Bob Weide (@BobWeide) 
Nothing new that wasn't covered in 2 prev. VF articles & nothing that 
contradicts anything in my@DailyBeast <https://twitter.com/dailybeast> piece. 
http://t.co/ikb7c4jnn0 <http://t.co/ikb7c4jnn0>
 <https://twitter.com/BobWeide/statuses/429767242494922754> February 2, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/BobWeide/statuses/429767242494922754> 
Weide's blog on the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/01/27/the-woody-allen-allegations-not-so-fast.html>
 was published before Dylan's letter but seeks to debunk myths about the case 
that had resurfaced in the wake of Mia Farrow's Vanity Fair interview last 
October and her and son Ronan's tweets around the time of Allen's Golden Globes 
win last month.

• Read the full article on Dylan's letter, Allen's refutal and the backstory 
to the case. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/02/dylan-farrow-woody-allen-abuse-allegations>
 