
Woody’s women arrive behind the director in a big bustling caravan – a noisy 
train of flakes and nymphs, art snobs, academics and intellectuals, hookers, 
healers and harpies. Allen’s own nebbish persona aside, women are easily the 
most recognisable roles to come out of his films: Annie, Hannah, Jasmine. 
Female actors in his films have won no fewer than six Oscars. At the same time, 
few directors have drawn as much fire for the typology of female characters 
they have established onscreen.

“Increasingly, the women in his movies can be divided up between menopausal 
nuts and coltish sluts,”noted James Wolcott in Vanity Fair in 1998 
<http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/MRC/woodyallen.html>, after Celebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/72965/celebrity> completed a trio of 
films, beginning withMighty Aphrodite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/61289/mighty-aphrodite>, and continuing 
withDeconstructing Harry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/68987/deconstructing-harry>, in which 
obscene language, hookers and fellatio all featured prominently. “The balance 
of power has shifted. Now when a woman opens her mouth in a Woody Allen movie, 
it isn’t because speech is required.”

Emma Stone on Woody Allen, whitewashing and why Hollywood pairs her with older 
men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/emma-stone-on-woody-allen-whitewashing-and-why-hollywood-pairs-her-with-older-men>
Allen is so vilified by some these days, it may be hard to remember the time 
when he was seen as feminism’s friend, the non-threatening alternative to John 
Wayne machismo in bra-burning, post-Vietnam America. “It’s a comedy of sexual 
inadequacy,” observed Pauline Kael of his act. “What makes it hip rather than 
masochistic and awful is that he thinks women want the media macho ideal, and 
we in the audience are cued to suspect, as he secretly does, that that’s the 
real inadequacy. Woody Allen is a closet case of potency; he knows he’s potent 
but he’s afraid to tell the world.” The release of a newWoody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> film is therefore always 
something of a puzzle. Which Woody are we getting? The sotto voce confidante of 
the female inner chamber? Or the condescending connoisseur of dimbulb Lolitas?

The trailers for his new film, Irrational Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/irrational-man>, frame it as another of the 
May-December romances that have so irked his feminist critics, this time 
between Joaquin Phoenix’s dissolute philosophy professor and the bright-eyed 
student, played by Emma Stone, who sits adoringly at his feet lapping up his 
romantic-tragic world-view. “He’s so damn fascinating and so vulnerable,” she 
swoons. The plot of the movie, however, takes an unadvertised leftward turn 
towards murder – the great preoccupation of late Allen films – and the 
relationship between teacher and student is turned on its head. The balance of 
power shifts back.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhP8mPkyBntw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhP8mPkyBntw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhP8mPkyBntw&media=>
 Irrational Man trailer 
In many ways, Allen has been working and reworking this reversal since Annie 
Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall>and Sleeper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/04/the-10-best-woody-allen-films>, 
the romantic plot of both films essentially retellings of Shaw’s Pygmalion. “Do 
you think I’m stupid?” asks Luna (Diane Keaton) in Sleeper, before transforming 
herself with books of Marxist theory into a khaki-clad revolutionary; “she’s 
read a few books and suddenly she’s an intellectual,” complains Allen’s Miles. 
In Annie Hall, Alvy Singer introduces Annie to adult education classes, The 
Sorrow and the Pity, and therapy. “You’re the reason I got out of my room, and 
was able to sing and get in touch with my feelings and all that crap,” she says 
at the end, by which time she has fallen in love with the teacher of her class 
on existential motifs in Russian literature. Like Miles, Alvy is hoist by his 
own petard. In Hannah and Her Sisters, Michael Caine woos Hannah away from her 
artist-lover Max Von Sydow with a book of poems by EE Cummings, only to see her 
leave him, in turn, for her literature professor. In each case, the man, 
assuming a position of intellectual superiority, establishes himself as the 
woman’s tutor-lover, only to lose her once she grows confident enough to leave 
him. The problem with entwining romance is that education has an end in sight: 
graduation.

Allen’s sympathy for the self–discovery of insecure young women – Annie Hall, 
or Barbara Hershey’s character, Lee, inHannah and Her Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hannah-and-her-sisters> – is more than just 
that of a romantic machiavel looking for an “in”. It came in part from his own 
experience. He didn’t started reading until he was in his late teens, regarding 
it “a chore”, but after marrying first wife Harlene Rosen, the daughter of a 
shoe-shop owner he had met through the Flatbush Jewish social clubs, and a 
student of philosophy at Hunter College, he arranged for a tutor at Columbia to 
guide him through a course of great books – Plato, Aristotle, Dante, Joyce. At 
four every afternoon, he would walk the four blocks from his apartment to the 
Metropolitan museum on East 78th Street and spend half an hour studying a 
different exhibit until he had worked his way around the whole museum. “They 
weren’t interested in me because I was a lowlife culturally and 
intellectually,” Allen once said of his first attempts to date women. “I used 
to take them out and they’d say, ‘Where I’d really like to go tonight is to 
hear Andrés Segovia’ and I’d say, ‘Who?’ Or they’d say, ‘Did you read this 
Faulkner novel?’ and I’d say, ‘I read comic books.’”
 Mia Farrow, Barbara Hershey and Dianne Wiest in Hannah and her Sisters. 
Photograph: Allstar/Orion/Sportsphoto Ltd 
So education and romance were bound from the beginning. So, too, was his 
sympathy for women characters. He was raised “the only male in a family of 
many, many women” – a slight exaggeration, for he had his father around – but 
the loudest and most powerful voices belonged to his mother and many aunts, 
yelling at each other in a mixture of Yiddish, German and English. “It was a 
madhouse all the time,” said Allen – the perfect training for farce, you might 
think, and also the root of his fascination with sisters: his mother’s, but 
also Keaton’s (the inspiration forAnnie Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> and the trio of sisters in 
Interiors), and later Mia Farrow’s, in Hannah and Her Sisters. “While we 
walked, worked, ate, slept and lived out lives, the story of Hannah was fleshed 
out, detail by familiar detail,” wrote Farrow after they split, with a strong 
hint that Allen had simply transcribed his dialogue directly from real life.

More reliable, perhaps, is Keaton’s account of the writing of Annie Hall, 
which grew from Allen’s fascination with Keaton, her mother and sisters. “I was 
constantly complaining about things and constantly had this low self-esteem and 
had a tendency toward crying and worrying about why I wasn’t good enough, and 
he took it,”Keaton told the New York Times recently 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/21/movies/woody-allens-distinctive-female-characters.html?_r=0>
. “We can all feel it and understand it, but we cannot write other people’s 
sounds,” said Keaton. “Annie Hall, flumping around, trying to find a sentence. 
That’s just remarkable, what he did for me.” You have only to look at an 
earlier Allen script, Play it Again Sam, written before he had met Keaton, to 
hear how Allen’s ear developed. In the earlier film, the Keaton character is a 
mere dupe, left hanging doe-eyed while Allen takes dating tips from Bogart and 
mugs for the camera (“she bought it!”). He could not yet write well for women. 
By the time of Love and Death, Keaton was enjoying to-camera asides – she and 
Allen get simultaneous, duelling soliloquies, comic equals – and in Annie Hall 
she eclipses him altogether.


“As far as Annie Hall goes, the question you raise about it being my first 
film to be centered on a character not played by me raises a point I’ve always 
made about the enormity [sic] of Diane Keaton’s talent and screen presence,” he 
said earlier this year. “Like a number of movies that I have done with her, the 
films were designed to be about me and while I wouldn’t go so far as to say she 
wipes me off the screen, the movies turned out to be hers. I’m happy to replace 
myself in movies because it opens up more possibilities.”
 Cate Blanchett in Blue Jasmine ... ‘You could have played this role,’ she 
told Allen. Photograph: Allstar/Sony Pictures Classics 
What’s most interesting about the career that followed is how often Allen 
chose to replace himself with female and not male characters. Of all his 
characters, it is Mia Farrow’s mousy cinephile inThe Purple Rose of Cairo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bp6YDZVVbj0> that best represents him, he has 
said, and through the late 80s and early 90s, it was Farrow who most often 
played the “Woody Allen role” – giving voice to the director’s neuroses, fears, 
and midlife crises. The problem with some of the films that followed their 
break-up – from Mighty Aphrodite through Deconstructing Harry – is not that 
they subscribed to too male a point of view, but that Allen was trying on male 
attitudes almost for the first time – he sounded like a teenager making blowjob 
jokes – and the resulting callowness cut him off from the streak of creative 
androgyny that is the source of his best work: Annie Hall, The Purple Rose of 
Cairo, Hannah, Blue Jasmine. There’s a reason Allen performed the Blanche 
Dubois role in Sleeper and even considered taking the Elaine Strich role in 
September. His best female characters are the ones in which he sees the most of 
himself.

“You know, you could have played this role,” Cate Blanchett observed during 
the shooting ofBlue Jasmine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/blue-jasmine>. 
Allen thought about it for a while, then replied, “No, it would have been too 
comic.” That was the only reason, note. Not “because I’m a man”. Finally, 
Allen’s secret is out. The reason he writes women so well? He would have made a 
very good one himself. The reason he occasionally writes them badly? Because he 
cannot see in them enough of himself.

• Irrational Man is released in the UK on 11 September; Tom Shone’s book Woody 
Allen: A Retrospective is published by Thames & Hudson the same day. To order a 
copy for £23.96 (RRP £29.95) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/333896/> or call 0330 
333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of 
£1.99.
 