
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Tuesday 19 May 2009

 The article below about an impending lawsuit should have given Woody Allen's 
latest film as Whatever Works. The piece was also wrong in referring to the 
director's divorce from Mia Farrow. It was a drawn-out contest over child 
custody; the two were not married.



A year-long dispute between two prominent figures in the worlds of fashion and 
cinema will reach a New York court tomorrow, as the men go to battle in a bid 
to preserve their reputations.

On the offensive is the prolific director Woody Allen, who will be taking a 
break from publicising his latest movie Hollywood Ending to pursue a $10m 
(Â£6.6m) lawsuit. In the defendant's corner is Dov Charney, the charismatic head 
of the Los Angeles clothing firmAmerican Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>.

At face value, the two men have more in common than they have in contention. 
Both are lauded as brilliant, if eccentric and erratic, creative spirits. Both 
have endured their fair share of controversy, having seen their private lives, 
and alleged sexual indiscretions, paraded in public.

But as day one of the trial kicks into gear, Allen has shown himself willing 
to risk further public opprobrium in order to disassociate himself from the 
other man.

The dispute began last year when Charney approved a short-lived billboard 
advertising campaign in New York and Los Angeles. The poster used an image from 
Allen's Oscar-winningAnnie Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> 
of him dressed as a Hasidic Jew above the American Apparel logo and alongside 
Yiddish words that translate as "the holy rebbe".

The poster was designed as one in a series of controversial ads. Charney 
prides himself on his ability to provoke: he takes many of the advertising 
photographs himself, and they often feature semi-clad young women.

Allen, who eschews all commercial endorsements, was mightily unimpressed. He 
called the poster "sleazy" and "infantile" and promptly sued American Apparel 
for $10m for loss of reputation.

Over the past few months the tone of the dispute has grown ever more 
rancourous. How much of that bile will be brought into the Manhattan federal 
court from tomorrow remains unclear.

Charney's lawyer initially indicated that the defendants were prepared to play 
hardball. In order to prove that Allen had no reputation to damage they 
intended to call his former wife, the actor Mia Farrow, and his wife, Soon-Yi 
Previn, to the stand.

Allen famously went through an ugly divorce with Farrow after it was 
discovered that he was having an affair with Previn, Farrow's then 22-year-old 
adopted child and Allen's stepdaughter. When he heard that Farrow and Previn 
could be called as witnesses, Allen denounced the idea as a "brutish attempt to 
smear and intimidate him".

But since then the defence has made assuaging noises. Charney has said he has 
no intention of making the director's personal life a central focus of the case 
and that he has "deep respect for Mr Allen who is a source of inspiration to 
me".

Rather, Charney said, the case American Apparel would present the court would 
be that the billboards were intended to be a social parody of the rumours and 
spurious claims that have in recent months been hurled against him. The 
clothing magnate has been the subject of several sexual harassment suits 
brought by female members of his staff which have been widely publicised, even 
on the satirical TV show Saturday Night Live.
 