
The director Woody Allen has issued a statement in response to the open letter 
by Allen's adopted daughter, Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/02/dylan-farrow-woody-allen-abuse-allegations>
. The letter, posted, on a New York Times blog, reiterates accusations of 
sexual abuse that were dismissed from court in 1993.

On Sunday, Leslee Dart, a publicist for Allen, 78, said:

Mr Allen has read the article and found it untrue and disgraceful. He will be 
responding very soon. In the meantime, it is essential that your coverage make 
the following facts clear.

At the time, a thorough investigation was conducted by court appointed 
independent experts. The experts concluded there was no credible evidence of 
molestation; that Dylan Farrow had an inability to distinguish between fantasy 
and reality; and that Dylan Farrow had likely been coached by her mother,Mia 
Farrow <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mia-farrow>. No charges were ever 
filed.


Cate Blanchett also responded to Dylan's accusation that the actor had acted 
thoughtlessly in working with Allen. Blanchett wrote:

It's obviously been a long and painful situation for the family and I hope 
they find some resolution and peace.

Likewise, Blanchett's co-star Alec Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin> appeared to call for an end to 
the public nature of the row, terming Dylan's allegations "this family's 
personal struggle".

On Saturday, Allen's adopted daughter Dylan Farrow spoke out for the first 
time independently over allegations that the director sexually assaulted her 
when she was seven.

In an open letter published on a New York Times blog 
<http://kristof.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/02/01/an-open-letter-from-dylan-farrow/>
, the 28-year-old, now known as Malone Farrow, renewed the claims and blamed 
Hollywood for exacerbating her torment by "turning a blind eye".

All allegations were denied by Allen at the time, who then called them "an 
unconscionable and gruesomely damaging manipulation of innocent children for 
vindictive and self-serving motives". Following an investigation in 1993, no 
charges were brought.

Farrow's letter alleges sexual abuse by Allen, in particular at the family's 
holiday home in 1992, during which time he was fighting his former partner Mia 
Farrow for custody of their two adopted children, Dylan and Moses, as well as 
their biological, son Ronan.

The couple, who were together for 12 years but maintained separate houses, 
split up after she discovered his relationship with Soon-Yi Previn, then 19, 
whom Farrow had adopted with former husband André Previn.

Dylan Farrow alleges she was led to a "dim, closet-like attic" and instructed 
to lie on her stomach and play with her brother's train set while Allen 
sexually assaulted her. Other abusive behaviour, skilfully hidden from her 
mother, and continuing for years, was also alleged.

The prosecutor at the time of the incident said he lacked evidence to 
prosecute but suspected abuse occurred. After the publication of Dylan Farrow's 
letter, former Litchfield county state attorney Frank Maco confirmed that the 
statute of limitations on the accusations had expired many years before.

Dr John Leventhal, who led the investigative team and conducted repeated 
interviews with Dylan, said at the time thathe and his colleagues discredited 
her testimony 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/05/04/nyregion/doctor-cites-inconsistencies-in-dylan-farrow-s-statements.html>
 because they felt she "was coached or influenced by her mother".

In her letter, Dylan Farrow describes suffering eating disorders and self-harm 
after her traumatic childhood, but is now married and living in Florida.Woody 
Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> and Soon-Yi Previn married 
in 1997 and adopted two girls, who are now teenagers.

In the letter, Farrow explains her motivation in speaking up as guilt over her 
fears Allen could abuse others, and disgust at what she sees as the film 
industry's defence of a "predator".

"That he got away with what he did to me haunted me as I grew up," she wrote. 
"I was stricken with guilt that I had allowed him to be near other little girls 
… Woody Allen is a living testament to the way our society fails the survivors 
of sexual assault and abuse."

She went on to name actors with whom Allen has recently worked – such as Louis 
CK and Scarlett Johansson – and ask them to examine their consciences. "What if 
it had been your child,Cate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett>? You knew me when I was a 
little girl, Diane Keaton. Have you forgotten me?"

The notion that Hollywood's continued embrace of Allen may make the industry 
culpable for alleged abuses was the logic offered by Times columnist Nicholas 
Kristof, on whose blog the letter was published. In an introductory paragraph, 
he explains that he sees it as a continuation of the debate about the propriety 
or otherwise of giving Allen a Golden Globe award. In a separate article,he 
says he is a family friend of Mia and Ronan Farrow 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/02/opinion/sunday/kristof-dylan-farrows-story.html>
. Some havevoiced disquiet  
<http://www.showbiz411.com/2014/02/01/mia-farrow-uses-close-pal-journalist-in-woody-allen-war-writer-of-latest-piece-is-close-friend>
about his potential conflict of interests.

When Allen was awarded the Cecil B DeMille Golden Globe for lifetime 
achievement in January, the Farrows took to Twitter to voice their disgust. 
When the director's tribute started, Mia Farrow wrote: "Time to grab some ice 
cream & switch over to #GIRLS 
<https://twitter.com/MiaFarrow/status/422562332397428736>." Ronan, an activist 
lawyer and now a TV news host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/feb/02/ronan-farrow-young-blue-eyes>
, added: "Missed the Woody Allen tribute – did they put the part where a woman 
publicly confirmed he molested her at age 7 before or after Annie Hall? 
<https://twitter.com/RonanFarrow/status/422582684636807168>"

It was in an interview last October in Vanity Fair magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/02/woody-allen-son-ronan-frank-sinatra-mia-farrow>
 that Mia, Ronan and Dylan – the latter then breaking a long silence – first 
returned to the claims of abuse.

"I have never been asked to testify," said Dylan, whose initial allegations 
were only via video. "If I could talk to the seven-year-old Dylan, I would tell 
her to be brave, to testify."

Her letter has led to heated debate on Twitter over the allegations, although 
the Farrows themselves have remained relatively silent, with Ronan simply 
tweetingtweeted <https://twitter.com/RonanFarrow/status/430112126707843072> "I 
love and support my sister and I think her words speak for themselves."

Many, including Girls creator Lena Dunham, have tweeted support for Dylan 
<https://twitter.com/lenadunham/status/429753542295842816>, while others have 
pointed to a blog from last week by the director Robert Weide, who made a 
documentary about Allen and who seeks to debunk some of the misapprehensions 
about the case.

In a long piece on the Daily Beast, he also revealed that Mia Farrow had 
granted permission for her image to be used in film clips honouring Allen 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/01/27/the-woody-allen-allegations-not-so-fast.html>
 during the Golden Globes, and expressed surprise at her Twitter reaction.

Allen is nominated for an Oscar for best original screenplay at the Academy 
Awards next month, forBlue Jasmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155586/blue-jasmine>, his most 
critically acclaimed film in many years, with Blanchett up for best actress and 
Sally Hawkins best supporting actress.The film tells the story  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/26/woody-allen-blue-jasmine-tantrums>
of a wealthy New York socialite and pathological liar whose inability to 
control her rage on learning of her husband's infidelity leads to the whole 
family's downfall.
 