
“There’s an old joke,” begins Woody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>, talking straight to camera. “Two 
elderly women are at a Catskill mountain resort, and one of ’em says, ‘Boy, the 
food at this place is really terrible.’ The other one says, ‘Yeah, I know; and 
such small portions.’ Well, that’s essentially how I feel about life – full of 
loneliness, and misery, and suffering, and unhappiness, and it’s all over much 
too quickly.”

According to the Writers Guild of America, these are the opening lines to the 
funniest screenplay ever written. In a ballot filled out by thousands of 
writers, Annie Hall, written by Allen and Marshall Brickman in 1975, was voted 
the film that made them all laugh the most, beating classics such as Some Like 
It Hot, Airplane! andThe Big Lebowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-big-lebowski> to top the list of 101 
funniest screenplays.

Allen’s film, starring himself and Diane Keaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/diane-keaton> as a neurotic couple living in 
Allen’s beloved New York, is often celebrated as a game-changing work by the 
director. It swept the 1978 Oscars, including best actress for Keaton, best 
script, best director and best picture.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEsHwIBR6ivA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEsHwIBR6ivA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEsHwIBR6ivA&media=>
 Woody Allen in the opening scene from Annie Hall. 
In an interview with the New York Times when the film was released in 1977, 
Allen said he had written the film as a comic “stream of consciousness showing 
one individual’s state of mind, in which conversations and events constantly 
trigger dreams, fantasies and recollections”.

The film’s bitingly funny and neurotic script boasts some of the most-quoted 
lines in modern cinema about love and relationships. In one memorable scene, 
Allen turns to Keaton’s character in bed to say: “That sex was the most fun 
I’ve ever had without laughing.”

Speaking about the Writers Guild’s decision to name Allen’s film as the 
funniest ever written, Lowell Peterson, executive director of Writers Guild of 
America East, said: “I think it’s a combination of Woody’s unique sensibility 
and his commitment to drama as well as to joke. Annie Hall is the complete 
screenplay in that sense; it is that sublime intersection between compelling 
characters, dramatic conflict and great jokes. While it is not the only film of 
his to combine those things, I think maybeAnnie Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> does it best of all.”

Peterson said the votes for Allen’s film proved that both the film-maker’s 
storylines and his jokes had not dated in the 38 years since the film was 
released.

Annie Hall: Archive review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/annie-hall-archive-review> 
“It was released alongside so many other films in the1970s heyday of 
Hollywood,” he said. “Not many of those films stood the test of time, but Annie 
Hall certainly has. That speaks to the quality of the writing but also the 
experience of a New York-based writer who absorbed the city he loved and 
described it to the world.

“It was a game-changer because the internal lives of these characters became 
something that could be laughed at in a knowing way, and people could laugh but 
also recognise themselves in these people.”

As well as Annie Hall, Allen also had six other scripts in the Writers Guild 
funniest film rankings, including Sleeper, Bananas, Take the Money and Run,
Broadway Danny Rose <https://www.theguardian.com/film/broadway-danny-rose>, 
Love and Death, and Manhattan.

With the abuse allegations that have recently been levelled at Woody Allen by 
his daughter Dylan Farrow still ongoing, Peterson responded to suggestions that 
Allen may have been a controversial choice for the award. Allen denies the 
allegations.

“Controversial choice in winning? No,” he said. “Our members voted entirely on 
the quality of the scripts and I think that many writers, maybe most writers, 
prefer to focus on that. When they are voting on these screenplays, they tend 
to put to the side the weaknesses, transgressions or allegations about 
individual artists’ personal lives and make purely artistic judgments.”

Woody Allen and the women in his work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/woody-allen-inner-woman-irrational-man>
Despite the obviously autobiographical elements to the Annie Hall (Allen was 
in a relationship with Diane Keaton at the time and, like his character Alvy, 
had been married twice before), he insisted that the film was mostly fiction. 
Allen did, however, concede that at least one aspect of his own life was 
reflected in Alvy: “There’s one clear autobiographical fact in the picture,” he 
said in 1977. “I’ve thought about sex since my first intimation of 
consciousness.’’

Peter Bradshaw, the Guardian’s chief film critic, said that while Annie Hall 
was “arguably Woody Allen’s best film”, anddespite writing in 2010 that the 
film was the best comedy of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/annie-hall-comedy>, he now had a 
“bee in his bonnet” about it being described as his funniest.

“There’s hardly any subject about which pundits, critics and writers are more 
solemn and pompous than the business of making people laugh,” said Bradshaw.

“My feeling about this is that they wanted it to be a Woody Allen film, 
because it gives these lists a certain cultural cachet, but felt they couldn’t 
choose one of the early, genuinely funny films because that makes them look 
stupid. So they chose a Woody Allen comedy with the most serious content.

“I would say, for the actually business of making people laugh, I would put 
Love and Death higher than Annie Hall.”

The Writers Guild’s top 10

 * Annie Hall – Written by Woody Allen and Marshall Brickman, 1977 
 * Some Like It Hot – Screenplay by Billy Wilder & IAL Diamond, 1959 
 * Groundhog Day – Screenplay by Danny Rubin and Harold Ramis, 1993 
 * Airplane! – Written by James Abrahams & David Zucker & Jerry Zucker, 1980 
 * Tootsie – Screenplay by Larry Gelbart and Murray Schisgal, 1982 
 * Young Frankenstein – Screenplay by Gene Wilder and Mel Brooks, 1974 
 * Dr Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb – 
Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick, Peter George and Terry Southern 
 * Blazing Saddles – Screenplay by Mel Brooks, Norman Steinberg, Andrew 
Bergman, Richard Pryor and Alan Uger, 1974 
 * Monty Python and the Holy Grail – Written by Graham Chapman, John Cleese, 
Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin, 1975 
 * National Lampoon’s Animal House – Written by Harold Ramis, Douglas Kenney 
and Chris Miller, 1978
 