
Global development – alleviating poverty and improving the lives of billions 
of people around the world – is as important today as it has ever been. And 
while governments and large charities are necessarily at the frontline of this 
effort, the involvement of individuals throughout the world is also key to 
ensuring change.

In a way, this competition is also part of this process, highlighting and 
explaining issues that would otherwise remain unknown to readers. And the 
sponsors of this competition see the competition as a way to raise awareness 
about the issues they champion.

Antony Jenkins, Barclays group chief executive, says: "This competition is a 
powerful opportunity for young talent to focus on important global development 
issues. Some 2.5 billion people around the world do not have access to 
financial services, which makes it more difficult for them to break the cycle 
of poverty. Awareness of this issue helps to increase the collaboration that is 
needed across sectors to help break down the barriers to financial inclusion."

The issues written about in the competition can be complex and difficult, but 
reading about them can be inspiring, rather than depressing.

According to Phil Thomson, SVP global communications, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK): 
"It is a great way of highlighting both the very serious health challenges that 
people who live in developing countries continue to face and some of the 
excellent work being done to help tackle these issues."

The competition – started by Marie Stopes International and the Guardian, and 
subsequently sponsored by Barclays and GSK – is in its fifth consecutive year. 
More than 20 other NGOs have supported the project in that time, some of them 
on several occasions. Journalists have written on many aspects of development, 
including family planning, old age, disability and education, HIV/Aids, the 
media and development, climate change, microfinance, women's rights and malaria 
prevention.

In March a call for entrants to the competition appeared in the newspaper and 
on the Guardian's website.Amateur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/journalismcompetition/amateurs> and professional 
journalists were invited to submit a feature on an aspect of international 
development.

About 450 people entered and a panel of distinguished judges chose their 
favourites for the shortlist. The judges were Behrouz Afagh, head of Asia 
Pacific region, BBC World Service; Lilie Chouliaraki, professor of media and 
communication, London School of Economics; Liz Ford, deputy editor of the 
Guardian's global development website; Krishnan Guru-Murthy, anchor, Channel 4 
news; Natasha Kaplinsky, broadcaster; Richard Kavuma, editor, the Observer, 
Uganda; and Jenny Kleeman, journalist, writer and documentary-maker.

The 16 finalists – eight amateur, eight professionals – were sent to a country 
in the developing world to write a feature on a theme suggested by the NGO that 
hosted their trip. The features from the amateur finalists appear in this 
supplement. (The professional finalists' work was printed in a supplement 
published in the Guardian on 26 November and can be read online.)

The articles should also encourage readers to think more about development as 
a whole – what it is, why it is needed, and how they can get involved.

According to Michael Tirrell, lead, global media and public affairs at Marie 
Stopes International: "Journalism, particularly good journalism like we see in 
this competition, tells stories. For example, there are not enough doctors to 
serve the population in many countries and so organisations such as Marie 
Stopes International can help to train nurses to take on simple medical 
procedures (as nurses do here in the UK). This means that doctors are able to 
concentrate on the most difficult cases. By telling this story, journalism 
helps to build support for programmes like this."

The better the writing, the more involved and engaged the reader will be. That 
should inspire people to be more interested in development issues, as writers, 
readers, and global citizens.

As Jenkins says: "Constant reinforcement of development issues through the 
media will raise awareness and prompt positive action."
 