
The World Bank plans to work together with the Chinese-led Asian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asian-infrastructure-investment-bank> to 
fight poverty and fund infrastructure projects, the World Bank president, Jim 
Yong Kim, has said.

Worried about China’s growing diplomatic clout, the United States has been 
urging countries to think twice about joining the AIIB, arguing that its 
projects may not adequately safeguard the environment and people.

But more than 50 countries including Britain, France 
<http://uk.reuters.com/places/france> and Germany 
<http://www.reuters.com/places/germany> have rushed to join China’s initiative, 
a $50bn (£34bn) multilateral infrastructurebank 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/04/07/uk-asia-worldbank-kim-idUKKBN0MY1QI20150407#>
 that will provide project loans to countries across Asia and plans to begin 
operations at the end of the year.

Kim said in a speech on Tuesday at the Washington-based Center for Strategic 
and International Studies: “With the right environment, labour and procurement 
standards, the AIIB and the New Development Bank, established by theBrics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/brics> countries, have the potential to 
become great new forces in the economic development of poor countries and 
emerging markets.”

The Brics developing nations – Brazil <http://uk.reuters.com/places/brazil>, 
Russia, India, China and South Africa – are also workingon a development 
institution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/mar/28/brics-countries-infrastructure-spending-development-bank>
, though they have run into disagreements over funding and management.

“If the World Bank Group, other multilateral banks 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/04/07/uk-asia-worldbank-kim-idUKKBN0MY1QI20150407#>
, and these new development banks form alliances, work together and support 
development ... we all will benefit, especially the poor and most vulnerable,” 
said Kim, who was nominated to lead the World Bank by the United States.

Kim said he planned to meet Chinese officials next week during the spring 
meetings of the International Monetary Fund and theWorld Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank> to discuss collaboration.

He suggested the World Bank and AIIB could co-finance individual 
infrastructure projects or work on regional integration, as developing 
countries face at least $1tn in infrastructure needs.

The United States has not joined the AIIB but has said it supports 
co-financing projects with it and existing institutions such as the World Bank 
and the Asian Development Bank to ensure appropriate safeguards are followed.

“I will do everything in my power to find innovative ways to work with these 
banks,” Kim said. “The decisions we make this year, and the alliances we form 
in the years ahead, will help determine whether we have a chance to reach our 
goal of ending extreme poverty in just 15 years.”
 