
“Is it mine? Can I keep it?” Kieran has just read a poem aloud in the foyer of 
St Mungo’s Broadway hostel for the homeless in London’s Covent Garden.Silence 
by Mourid Barghouti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/13/mourid-barghouti> begins: 
“Silence said: / truth needs no eloquence.”


Why did he choose that one? “Because I like silence. There’s not enough of 
it.” Kieran, 24, has lived in the hostel for more than a year since a serious 
motorbike accident interrupted his working life as a mechanic. Soon, he hopes 
to leave, to find a job, a place of his own.

He is holding a copy of a specially printed edition of the poetry anthology 
Essential Poems, edited by Neil Astley 
<http://www.worldbooknight.org/books/6673583>, one of 250,000 books that is 
being distributed to mark Thursday’sWorld Book Night 
<http://www.worldbooknight.org/>. This annual event, run by the Reading Agency, 
sees thousands of volunteers share their love of reading by pressing books into 
the hands of others. The aim is to reach people who rarely read and don’t own 
books.

But how to tell who reads, who doesn’t? I wonder how the people I see daily on 
my street – the Irish builders, the Bangladeshi newsagent, the Italian 
hairdresser – will react to: “Psst! You look as if you rarely read. Can I 
interest you in a book?”

Oddly, it’s easier to offer a poem than a book. A novel or a biography 
requires a reader to start at the beginning, plough on to the end, persevering 
through interruptions. A poem delivers more, with fewer words. An anthology can 
slot into free moments in a chaotic day. You don’t have to like every page: 
just one. Seen this way, the quick hit of the single poem is a more promising 
gateway into reading than any other form of literature.

This is the first year World Book Night has included a poetry anthology in its 
giveaway – and the response has been extraordinarily positive. The initiative, 
supported by theForward Arts Foundation <http://www.forwardartsfoundation.org/> 
and theJerwood Charitable Foundation <http://jerwoodcharitablefoundation.org/>, 
clearly struck a chord with the 394 individuals and 224 institutions – homeless 
shelters, prisons, mental health trusts – who were offered a choice of 20 World 
Book Night titles, all but one written in prose, and went for the poems. 12,500 
anthologies were printed: all have been snapped up. The givers’ enthusiasm, as 
seen on Twitter with the hashtag #shareapoem, suggests an unslakeable appetite 
for sharing poetry. Why?

Mass redistribution of words: World Book Night prepares for UK-wide book 
giveaway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/23/world-book-night-uk-book-giveaway>
Simon Phillips, a basic skills tutor at St Mungo’s Broadway, tells of 
reluctant hostel-dwelling readers who have been kickstarted into writing their 
own poems by discovering a poem that works for them: “John Hegley is good that 
way, and Invictus – the poem that kept up Nelson Mandela’s spirits in prison. 
People who aren’t confident with spelling and punctuation seem happier writing 
poetry than prose: there’s a bit more freedom for them.”

Writing a poem can lead to other things: involvement in the St Mungo’s 
magazine, turning up to editorial meetings, co-operating, being punctual, 
taking pride in an achievement. “Lots of the clients here have troubles and 
don’t see anyone except others in the same predicament or professionals – 
doctors, psychiatrists, nurses, key workers. And they have to describe what’s 
happened to them again and again. It’s quite depressing. It can get them down. 
But the right poem gives them something else to talk about,” adds Phillips. 
Rumi, he says, works particularly well for a client with mental health issues: 
“He tells me the Persian version: we look at the words in English together. It 
makes him happier, no question.”

It makes Phillips happier too: “When you read a poem like Frost’s The Road Not 
Taken with a group, they see their whole lives in it. They all find different 
meanings. The first time this happened, I’d never heard a conversation go so 
well: hierarchy goes out of the window.”

The World Book Night <https://www.theguardian.com/books/world-book-night> 
edition of Essential Poems includes Frost, alonside Cavafy, Rilke, Neruda, 
Elizabeth Bishop plus – in a special addendum – work by Emily Berry, Michael 
Symmons Roberts, Liz Berry and Kei Miller, all recent winners of the Forward 
prizes for poetry.

The language is current, fresh, vivid: my fears of coming across as a 
patronising missionary for culture are dissolved by the warmth of the book’s 
reception. Liz Berry’s poem, about a seven-year old girl pretending to be a 
boy, gets a hoot of recognition from my hairdresser, who immediately pledges to 
make her copy go further by offering it to customers with their blow-dries 
instead of Grazia and Hello! “I like a poem to make you laugh, make you feel 
good. Who doesn’t?”




• Irvine Welsh appears with Lynda La Plante and a host of other authors for a 
World Book Night event <http://www.worldbooknight.org/news/flagship-event> at 
the Shaw theatre in London at 7.30pm on 23 April 2015
 