
Expedia, the world’s largest online travel company, has become the latest tech 
firm to sever ties with Alec, the rightwing lobby group with a history of 
fighting against climate change legislation and other progressive causes.

The company had previously been a sponsor of Alec (American Legislative 
Exchange Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alec-american-legislative-exchange-council>
), a lobby group that promotes conservative legislation at state level across 
the US. But in an email to advocacy group Common Cause this week the travel 
firm, which also owns Hotels.com, Hotwire.com and trivago among others, 
confirmed it had severed ties.


It becomes the latest of a series of large corporations to cut ties with Alec. 
In FebruaryFord ended its relationship with Alec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/17/ford-quits-alec-lobby-conservative-environment>
. Other corporations that have severed their connections include the technology 
companies eBay, Facebook and Google as well as the energy giantsBP and Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/07/royal-dutch-shell-alec-climate-change-denial>
.


Scott Swenson, vice-president of communications at Common Cause, said: “Alec 
is bad for business and democracy. It’s great that Expedia has joined more than 
100 companies that decided to leave Alec. Alec skirts tax and ethics laws, 
while lobbying for extreme policies. Other companies should follow Expedia and 
travel as far from Alec as possible. When customers realize the companies they 
patronize are funding such an extreme agenda they recoil and they make their 
voices heard.”


Expedia’s decision follows another blow for Alec this month. Last week the 
retirees organization AARP announced it would no longer be making donations to 
Alec.


The ties between the two organisations were first exposed by the Center for 
Media and Democracy 
<http://www.exposedbycmd.org/2016/07/28/revealed-aarp-funding-alec/> and led to 
an online backlash from AARP members. Alec has consistently lobbied to cut 
government spending on programs that benefit seniors and has close ties to 
pharmaceutical companies.


“After hearing from many of you, we’ve decided not to renew our membership to 
Alec. We would never work against the interests of older Americans and our 
engagement with Alec was NOT an endorsement of the organization’s policies, but 
an opportunity to engage with state legislators and advance our members’ 
priorities,” AARP said in a statement. 
<https://www.facebook.com/AARP/videos/10154465159528960/?video_source=pages_finch_main_video>

 