
Had Shigetaka Kurita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/17/crying-with-laughter-how-we-learned-how-to-speak-emoji>
 realised when he sat down to design the first emoji that he was laying the 
foundation for what would become the world’s fastest-growing form of 
communication, he might have chosen his icons a little more carefully. Kurita’s 
original 176 designs, which launched in February 1999 for Japanese mobile 
phones, were weirdly specific, including no fewer than five phases of the moon, 
three timepieces (watch, clock, sand-timer) and two states of umbrella (open, 
closed).
 Shigetaka Kurita, the inventor of emojis 
Unmoderated by any panel, Kurita’s choices reflected his priorities and 
predilections, producing a singular suite of icons that, against the odds, 
proved universally handy. Today, there are now more than 1,800 emojis, which 
are estimated to be used by more than 90% of the world’s online population. As 
Satoe Haile, an emoji designer at Google, puts it, these pictograms 
“communicate beyond language”, transcending tongues and borders.

For some, these “brainless little icons” (as Guardian art critic Jonathan 
Jones described them last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/may/27/emoji-language-dragging-us-back-to-the-dark-ages-yellow-smiley-face>
) represent not an adjunct but a regression for our species. Their precursor, 
hieroglyphics, Jones argues, never produced an Iliad or an Odyssey because, put 
simply, the written word is infinitely more adaptable. But, for most, emojis 
offer not a substitute for the written word, but a complement, lending brevity 
or wit, irony or joy, to a text message.

The people who use emojis are certainly proving detractors wrong, at least in 
terms of the form’s adaptability. For example, denied a pictorial penis, 
millions have come to rely on the aubergine emoji – purple, engorged, topped 
with a pubic shock of green leaves. This abusage is now so widespread that, in 
2015, Instagram banned search results for photographs tagged with an aubergine 
emoji, fearing it could be used as a signifier of nudity. The double meaning 
was formalised last month when an American woman launched a vibrator made in 
the eggplant’s image. (Be thankful, perhaps, that the hive mind settled on the 
vegetable as a genital stand-in, rather than the umbrella, in either state.)

The emoji’s success has attracted scrutiny. Just as English has adapted to 
remove signifiers of sex in professions – hoping to make obsolete words such as 
“actress” and “male nurse”, terms coined at a time when certain occupations 
were dominated by one gender – sothe custodians of emojis are having to adapt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/10/female-emojis-google-equality>
 to compensate for Silicon Valley’s bias.

Emoji is dragging us back to the dark ages – and all we can do is smile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/may/27/emoji-language-dragging-us-back-to-the-dark-ages-yellow-smiley-face>
In 2015 Unicode <http://unicode.org/emoji/>, the California-based consortium 
that standardises the use of these pictographs across the internet, added 
modifiers to enable us to alter the skin tone of our emoji (according to the 
Fitzpatrick Scale for humans, no less). A forthcoming update will add scores of 
gender-swap icons for existing professions, including a third, androgynous 
option. In this way, emojis present a rare opportunity. Many words smuggle 
quiet atrocities at an etymological level. Women who cannot have children are 
known as “barren”. Disabled children are known as “invalids”. Pictorial writing 
systems are no different. The Japanesekanji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/japanese-tourists-cat-lucky-eyebrows-hachi>
 for “noisy”, for example, consists of three kanji for “women” squished 
together. The kanji for “wife” is comprised of the symbols for “house” and 
“inside”.

When sexism is entangled with language at such an elemental level, reforging 
words takes a great deal of time and education. Emojis work differently. 
Unicode assigns an object a numerical text code, to which companies add a 
relevant image according to their whim or aesthetic. “U+1F63B”, for example, is 
the code for “SMILING CAT FACE WITH HEART-SHAPED EYES”. Apple interprets this 
as a yellow cat with its mouth agape.Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> translates the arcane script 
into a black cat with its mouth closed. Fixing problematic imagery, therefore, 
is as easy as redrawing the image associated with the code.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Femojis-shigetaka-kurita-mark-davis-coding-language%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28d8b90637a4335daecc05b9d5c3a5839f34f786%2F453_0_1663_2079%2F1663.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Worried%20face%3A%20the%20battle%20for%20emoji%2C%20the%20world's%20fastest-growing%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Femojis-shigetaka-kurita-mark-davis-coding-language%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Worried%20face%3A%20the%20battle%20for%20emoji%2C%20the%20world%27s%20fastest-growing%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Femojis-shigetaka-kurita-mark-davis-coding-language%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28d8b90637a4335daecc05b9d5c3a5839f34f786%2F453_0_1663_2079%2F1663.jpg>
 Google’s Mark Davis. Photograph: Alamy 
Mark Davis, who is 63 and works at Google, helped originate Unicode in the 
late 80s while working at Apple in Japan, where he was trying to find a way to 
encode kanji so they would display correctly across computers and operating 
systems. His elegant solution of assigning images to immovable codes proved 
popular. Today, every operating system, laptop, smartphone and even the 
internet itself is based on Unicode. For its first decade, the Unicode 
Consortium, which is made up of unpaid volunteers, many of whom work atApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, Google and other tech giants, 
dealt principally with characters unique to specific written languages, 
current, classical and historical. The latest version of Unicode contains more 
than 128,000 characters covering 135 modern and historic scripts, and emojis 
are accounting for a greater number of additions every year.


New emojis can be proposed <http://unicode.org/emoji/selection.html> by 
companies, such asDurex condoms 
<http://www.techinsider.io/durexs-condom-emoji-for-safe-sex-2015-11>, and by 
private citizens <http://www.buzzfeed.com/charliewarzel/there-will-be-dumplings>
. Additions cannot be bought, but are rather considered by an impartial panel, 
which votes on their inclusion based on a variety of factors including 
distinctiveness (is there really a need for “stew” when we already have 
“soup”?), whether it feels a meaningful gap in the vocabulary and the emoji’s 
expected levels of usage (a microphone versus a gramophone, for example).

While less than one percent of the 7,500 characters added to the latest 
version this summer are emoji, some argue that too much effort is being 
directed at the script.

Instagram ban on emoji has sexters searching for fruity alternatives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/29/instagram-ban-eggplant-emoji-sexters-fruity-alternatives>
For Everson, this focus has distracted effort and resources away from minority 
and historical writing systems, such as medieval Cornish. However, Mark Davis, 
president and co-founder of the Unicode Consortium, denies this is the case. 
“Emoji is still only a small part of what we do,” he says, pointing out that 
the attention emojis have brought has helped the consortium to further its 
goals for support of languages by allowing people to “Adopt a Character” for 
between $100 and $5,000 to raise money.

“There’s certainly an impression that new emojis get approved faster than 
writing system proposals or additional characters for historical scripts,” says 
John Hudson, another prominent typographer within Unicode. For Hudson, this is 
partly due to the fact that the questions that arise from emoji use are 
relatively straightforward (“Is the dumpling emoji just for East Asian 
dumplings, or can it be used forperogies <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierogi>
?”) while historical languages require experts, who often disagree on finer 
points.

A greater issue, according to Hudson, and one that will deepen as the script 
continues to grow in popularity, is the use of Unicode to handle emojis in the 
first place. “It was the wrong technical solution,” he says. “The set of little 
pictures that people might want to send between mobile devices is boundless; 
therefore, it needs a technology that is endlessly extensible, which Unicode is 
not.” In other words, if emoji continues to evolve at its current rate, Hudson 
believes that will need much more flexible technology, capable of sending 
images between devices in a more efficient and flexible way. Davis, 
understandably perhaps, disagrees – although he won’t be drawn on the question 
of emoji’s future. “It’s very hard to say,” he wrote. “I don’t have a U+1F52E.” 
That’s emoji code for a crystal ball.
 