
Henbane. Do not be tempted to include this in a salad. Photograph: Eric 
Hosking/Corbis

There something about Antony Worrall Thompson that speaks to me. Maybe it's the
hobbit <http://www.thehobbitblog.com/>-like demeanour or the voice like an 
indignant squirrel <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=a1Y73sPHKxw> that says, 'here 
is a man in touch with nature, at one with the lore of the trees, a man you 
could trust in a forest'.

Which could, it transpires, be an extremely dangerous assumption since 
yesterday when AWT, rubicund darling of the menopause set and culinary Shrek, 
gleefully leapt onto a passing 
local/seasonal/foraging/save-money-in-a-credit-crunch bandwagon andsuggested we 
should put henbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/aug/04/foodanddrink.foodsafety> 
in our salads.

Now I'm guessing, from Ant's nicely rounded vowels that he benefited from at 
least a very good education, if not an excellent one so it is intriguing to 
speculate which part of 'henbane' he didn't get. Fair enough, the name isn't 
quite as much a giveaway as that of its close relative Deadly Nightshade but 
anyone with an interest in food or ingredients could, surely take a fair guess 
that anything that was a bane to poultry was unlikely to make a human spring 
like a flea.

Damage control at the AWT nerve centre <http://www.awtonline.co.uk/home.asp#> 
has, predictably swung into action with a comprehensive, good-humoured apology 
on national media - apparently Wozza mispoke and was actually referring to 'fat 
hen weed <http://www.dgsgardening.btinternet.co.uk/fathen.htm>' - and an almost 
unbelievably quick update to the Wikipedia entries on bothherb 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henbane> and cook 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antony_Worrall_Thompson>. I suppose we should 
expect this, such is the nature of modern celebrity, but part of me is 
incensed. How dare they try to shut this down before we've finished gloating?

Fortunately, as we all know, though everybody watches sleb chefs on the telly, 
buys their books and hangs upon their every word, precisely nobody can be arsed 
to get off the sofa to cook their recipes let alone forage in a nearby forest 
for obscure ingredients. Though this would ordinarily be cause for lament, on 
this occasion it means nobody has actually perished following yer man's 
assertion thathyoscyamus niger, aka stinking nightshade, Dr Crippen's 
prescription <http://www.stephen-stratford.co.uk/dr_crippen.htm> and Juliet's 
terminal tipple is in fact a "tasty addition to salads".
 