
The news 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/jul/16/writers-schools-vetting-children-s-laureate>
 that children's authors are going to be required to pay £64 to go through a 
vetting procedure before being allowed to read in schools has beengreeted with 
outrage by many of my colleagues 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/jul/10/authors-vet-school-visits>. But 
while I have a certain amount of sympathy with those who are angry about the 
new government scheme, I have no plans to stop my own school visits as a result 
of it.

Although it will be irritating to have to pay for the privilege of being 
registered on a national database 
<http://www.dcsf.gov.uk/everychildmatters/safeguardingandsocialcare/safeguardingchildren/vettingandbarringscheme/vettingvandbarring/>
, I don't feel that we should be treated any differently from others who work 
with children. Of course, there's a completely different argument to be had 
over whether children are being over-protected generally in society – but if 
all those who work in a position of trust with children and vulnerable adults 
are checked, then I certainly don't feel "insulted" or "demeaned" by being 
included. I don't believe that the process will make any difference to how the 
children in schools feel about us, and nor will it create or reinforce a gulf 
between children and society.

In fact, it's extremely important that authors should continue to visit 
schools: both the lesser-known writers for whom school visits constitute a 
considerable portion of their earnings, and more famous ones who don't need the 
money. One of the benefits of school visits is that we can show children that 
writers and illustrators are no different from anyone else – we're just like 
them! When I talk to children I always try to stress that when I was a boy I 
wrote and drew no better than they do now. As children, we are all amazingly 
creative, but as we grow older something happens to most of us – we become 
self-conscious, inhibited and lose confidence. We stop creating. I encourage 
the children I meet in schools to continue, and tell them that the main 
difference between me and most other adults is that I didn't stop creating. I'm 
still doing what I loved to do as a child: drawing and making up stories.

So for us to say, as we do if we ask to be exempted from this scheme, that 
we're NOT the same as other people – that we're special, and should have 
special rules made just for us – goes completely against what I believe.
 