
Hundreds of writers including Irvine Welsh, Ruth Padel and AL Kennedy are 
taking part in aworldwide reading 
<http://www.worldwide-reading.com/archiv-en/14-01-2016-worldwide-reading-of-selected-poems-and-other-texts-in-support-of-ashraf-fayadh>
 in support of the Palestinian poetAshraf Fayadh, who has been sentenced to 
death in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/saudi-court-sentences-poet-to-death-for-renouncing-islam>
 after being accused of renouncing Islam.

The readings of Fayadh’s poetry at 122 events in 44 countries on Thursday are 
part of a campaign organised by theInternational literature festival Berlin 
<http://www.literaturfestival.com/aktuelles-en/14-01-2016-7-30-pm-hau-2-worldwide-reading-for-ashraf-fayadh-in-support-of-the-palestinian-poet-who-has-been-sentenced-to-death-in-saudi-arabia>
 calling on the UK and US governments to halt his beheading and to put pressure 
on Saudi Arabia to improve its human rights record.

Saudi conviction of poet for renouncing Islam seriously flawed, lawyer argues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/saudi-conviction-poet-renouncing-islam-flawed-appeal>
The action comes ahead of a panel of judges considering Fayadh’s appeal next 
week, where it will be contested that the poet’s conviction for apostasy is
seriously flawed and based on false and uncorroborated allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/saudi-conviction-poet-renouncing-islam-flawed-appeal>
.


Poems being read at the worldwide event include a selection from Fayadh’s 2008 
book, Instructions Within, which his accuser claimed promoted atheism, a charge 
the poet has denied.

AL Kennedy, who is participating in a reading organised by PEN England at the 
Mosaic Rooms in west London <http://mosaicrooms.org/event/ashraf-fayadh/>, said 
Fayadh’s persecution was “very obviously unjust and morally repellent”.

Calling on the Saudi authorities to show mercy and wisdom, the novelist also 
offered the poet her “admiration for his courage and his devotion to truth and 
justice” and hoped that the international show of solidarity would “provide a 
measure of comfort in what must be a horrifying situation”.

Irvine Welsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/20/irvine-welsh-scottish-independence-glorious-failure>
, who will read at the Two Hearted Queen coffee shop in Chicago, said he hoped 
the campaign would put “pressure on governments who espouse democracy and 
freedom to consider their actions in dealing with [Saudi Arabia]”.

The Trainspotting author added: “I have distaste for all clerical regimes. I 
believe that people should be free to practice and renounce any religion they 
see fit. If you believe in human rights and are anti-fundamentalist terrorism, 
then isolate the regime inSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>. Otherwise, you are guilty by 
association.”

Earlier this month, organisers of the Berlin festival sent a letter, signed by 
350 writers’ associations and authors, including Nobel laureates Orhan Pamuk 
and Mario Vargas Llosa, to Barack Obama, David Cameron and the German foreign 
ministrycalling on them to intervene in the imprisoned poet’s case 
<http://www.worldwide-reading.com/archiv-en/14-01-2016-worldwide-reading-of-selected-poems-and-other-texts-in-support-of-ashraf-fayadh/aufruf>
.

The letter also demanded that the United Nations suspend Saudi Arabia from its 
Human Rights Council until the country’s “abysmal record on upholding civil 
liberties improves”.

British author Priya Basil <http://priyabasil.com/>, who co-wrote the letter, 
said Fayadh’s poemFrida Kahlo’s Moustache 
<http://www.worldwide-reading.com/archiv-en/14-01-2016-worldwide-reading-of-selected-poems-and-other-texts-in-support-of-ashraf-fayadh/lesetexte>
 would be read at the Berlin event because “it’s addressed to a lost love but 
if you read it now ... it’s an elegy to a lost life”.

She added that this illustrated how “his poetry can’t be condemned because it 
can be read so many different ways”.

Fayadh was born in Saudi Arabia to Palestinian refugee parents, and under 
Saudi law is classed as a refugee himself, without Saudi citizenship. He 
co-curated a Saudi art show at the 2013 Venice Biennale, and has been in prison 
since January 2014 after a man accused him of making blasphemous remarks during 
an argument in a cafe in the conservative city and for renouncing Islam in 
Instructions Within, charges Fayadh denies. He was originally sentenced to four 
years in prison and 800 lashes for apostasy by the general court in Abha, a 
city in the south-west of the ultraconservative kingdom, in May 2014.

After his appeal was dismissed, Fayadh was retried and in November 2015, a new 
panel of judges ruled that he should be executed. His father died of a stroke 
after hearing of his death sentence, but the poet was not allowed to attend the 
funeral.

British Palestinian author Selma Dabbagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/selma-dabbagh>, who is also reading at the 
Mosaic Rooms, said she hoped the campaign would “raise the profile of a man and 
his work, who is at risk of losing his life due to what appears to be … a 
personal vendetta against him”.

It was remarkable that Fayadh, as a Palestinian refugee in a small town, had 
achieved so much in terms of promoting Saudi art internationally and writing 
his own work, she added. “If Saudi nationality laws were different ... Fayadh 
would be an exemplary citizen [of Saudi Arabia]” she said.

Last month, UN human rights experts called on the Saudi authorities to halt 
Fayadh’s execution 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=16838&LangID=E>
, which they condemned as a grave violation of artistic freedom of expression.
 