
X+Y <https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/mar/12/x-plus-y-video-review> 
(12A)
(Morgan Matthews, 2014, UK) Asa Butterfield, Rafe Spall, Sally Hawkins. 112 
mins

The title suggests a formula, as do the variables: an autistic boy with a gift 
for maths; his struggling single mum; his maverick maths tutor; and a big 
international maths competition approaching. But the outcome isn’t quite as 
calculated as you’d expect. Matthews previously made a documentary on the same 
subject, and though there’s an element of feelgood manipulation, this earnest 
coming-of-age story is more concerned with empathetic characters and 
down-to-earth credibility - even during an extended detour to Taiwan, where 
Butterfield’s character discovers he is not alone in more ways than one.

Suite Française 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/suite-franaise-michelle-williams-founders-in-saccharine-version-nemirovsky-bestseller>
 (15)
(Saul Dibb, 2014, UK/Fra/Can) Michelle Williams, Matthias Schoenaerts, Kristin 
Scott Thomas, Margot Robbie, Ruth Wilson. 107 mins

No surprises regarding what happens to Williams’ résistance when her French 
country home takes in a cultured, handsome Nazi officer as a lodger. 
Fortunately there’s more to this village drama, based on Irène Némirovsky’s 
posthumously published 1940s writings, which sketches an occupied France that’s 
far from unified or noble. And there are at least some decent (albeit mostly 
English-speaking) actors to handle the story’s soapier elements.

Run All Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/mar/12/run-all-night-video-review> 
(15)
(Jaume Collet-Serra, 2015, US) Liam Neeson, Ed Harris, Joel Kinnaman. 114 mins

Wind Neeson up and watch him go on another nocturnal killing spree, in a 
bus-pass hitman thriller that could almost be mistaken for a Taken sequel. His 
shooting of Harris’s son (to save his own) sparks a generational Brooklyn war 
that’s going to take some action set-pieces to settle.

Lou! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nNM8ddHUyDY> (12A) 
(Julien Neel, 2014, Fra/Bel) Ludivine Sagnier, Lola Lasseron, Kyan Khojandi, 
Nathalie Baye. 101 mins

Neel adapts his own hit comic book on the cutesy everyday exploits of a misfit 
teenager and her even odder mother – all set in a retro-styled Paris.

My Name Is Salt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N_bO-phlgaY> (U) 
(Farida Pacha, 2013, Swi/Ind) 92 mins

Striking, surprisingly absorbing landscape documentary observing the Sisyphean 
labours of salt harvesters on the coastal desert plains of Gujarat, whose 
strenuous efforts are washed away every year and must begin anew.

Far From The Madding Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/09/far-from-the-madding-crowd-julie-christie-terence-stamp>
 (U)
(John Schlesinger, 1967, UK) Julie Christie, Terence Stamp, Peter Finch, Alan 
Bates. 160 mins

Get up to speed for the forthcoming Carey Mulligan-led version with this 
handsome, expansive rendition of Thomas Hardy’s classic, jam-packed with 
British talent (including Nicolas Roeg as cinematographer). Julie Christie is 
on captivating form as the 19th-century heiress who attracts three disparate 
suitors.

Elle L’Adore <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XNDcAP5W7k> (15) 
(Jeanne Herry, 2014, Fra) Sandrine Kiberlain, Laurent Lafitte, Pascal Demolon. 
102 mins

A middle-aged beautician’s loyalty to her pop idol is tested in this novel 
suspense thriller when he turns up on her doorstep and asks for her help in 
covering up a crime.

Out from Friday
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2Fthis-weeks-new-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426181827538%2F0264be20-d2ae-4983-871a-c979cff59656-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=X%2BY%2C%20Suite%20Fran%C3%A7aise%2C%20Run%20All%20Night%3A%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20new%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2Fthis-weeks-new-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=X%2BY%2C%20Suite%20Fran%C3%A7aise%2C%20Run%20All%20Night%3A%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20new%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2Fthis-weeks-new-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426181827538%2F0264be20-d2ae-4983-871a-c979cff59656-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Insurgent. Photograph: Allstar 
Drake’s Homecoming: The Lost Footage Doc based around the rapper’s 2009 
Toronto gig.Thu only

The Divergent Series: Insurgent Shailene Woodley continues her revolution 
against Kate Winslet’s dystopian regime.

The Voices Talking pets drive Ryan Reynolds to murder in this black comedy.

The Gunman Hitman thriller with Sean Penn.

Home Rihanna befriends a lost extraterrestrial in a colourful family animation.

Mommy Xavier Dolan’s acclaimed study of a fraught mother-son relationship.

The Tale Of The Princess Kaguya Lush animated fantasy from Japan’s famous 
Studio Ghibli.

Wild Card Another gravel-throated action workout for Jason Statham.

A Second Chance Game Of Thrones’s Nikolaj Coster-Waldau leads a Danish 
baby-napping drama.

Dark Summer A housebound teen’s voyeurism unleashes supernatural terror.

Coming soon

In two weeks... Disney’s new live-action Cinderella… The Meredith Kercher case 
channelled inThe Face Of An Angel…

In three weeks... Ben Stiller and Naomi Watts age inappropriately in While 
We’re Young… One more for the road in the speed franchise’s new one Fast & 
Furious 7…

In a month... Keanu Reeves goes for the kill as John Wick… Ryan Gosling directs
Lost River…
 