
‘Stone age’ is shorthand, for many, for a human past before the dawn of 
civilisation. Cavemen, clad in furs, throwing stone-tipped spears at woolly 
mammoths. Perhaps some dinosaurs parading around in the background. Maybe these 
humans are a little heavy of brow and shaggy of hair.


Notwithstanding the dinosaur bit (non-avian dinosaurs were all wiped out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/06/dinosaurs-killed-off-by-one-two-punch-of-climate-change-and-asteroid-strike-study>
 in a mass extinction event around 66 million years ago, long before any 
hominids existed), ‘the stone age’ is a label that encompasses the vast 
majority of human existence.


The start is marked by the earliest stone tools made by ancestor species – for 
a long time thought to be around 2.6 million years ago. But in 2015 asite 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v521/n7552/full/nature14464.html> in 
Turkana, Kenya, revealedtools that are a staggering 3.3 million years old 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/20/stone-tool-discovery-pushes-back-dawn-of-culture-by-700000-years>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cdfbf82838f0c25b679d2688a89cae5b78139e8%2F0_125_1876_1126%2F1876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yabba%20dabba%20don't%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yabba%20dabba%20don%27t%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cdfbf82838f0c25b679d2688a89cae5b78139e8%2F0_125_1876_1126%2F1876.jpg>
 One of the earliest stone tools made by ancestor species, discovered at a site 
in Turkana, Kenya. Photograph: MPK-WTAP 
These tools were probably created by ancestors from the Kenyanthropus genus, 
which predate even the earliestHomo species. Which means archaeology sort of 
begins before humans did.


In Britain, the stone age ends with the introduction of metalworking 
techniques, around 2,400BC. Globally, the earliestevidence 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305440310001986> of casting 
and smelting copper dates from around 7000BCE, in eastern Serbia. This time is 
associated with a cultural package of farming, established settlement, large 
monuments, elaborate personal adornment and trade.


So the stone age spans more than 96% of human existence on the planet. It 
spans the convoluted evolutionary journey of our species. It encompasses apes 
bashing things with rocks, but also the intricate material culture of 
intellectually modern people who didn’t know how to make metal, but otherwise 
lived lives as innovative and sophisticated as our own.


A label is a powerful thing. It doesn’t just describe, it shapes our 
imaginations. And that’s why the stone age is such a perilous misnomer. Not 
only does it throw up those Flintstones mischaracterisations, it also serves to 
blind us to the range of materials that early people relied on and had mastery 
over. Stone (and metal) obviously had important functions. But not necessarily 
more important than wood, bone, ivory or hide.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8986d06505c1bb860a1ab948ec4768716075770f%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yabba%20dabba%20don't%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yabba%20dabba%20don%27t%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8986d06505c1bb860a1ab948ec4768716075770f%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A Neolithic polished flint axe (4000 BCE) and a A Palaeolithic flint hand-axe 
(250-400,000 BCE) (foreground). Photograph: David Levene/the Guardian 
The common labels used for prehistoric periods – stone age, bronze age, iron 
age – are known as the Three Age System. First formulated by a Danish museum 
curator, Christian Thomsen, in 1836, it was a way of categorising sites 
chronologically using the primary identifiable material in the archaeological 
record.


Shortly afterwards, there was a push for a distinction between the really old 
stone age, and the recently old stone age – so Paleolithic and Neolithic were 
coined. Then identification of a discrete type of material culture, typified by 
tiny worked flint blades known as microliths, resulted in a middle stone age – 
Mesolithic – inserted between Paleo- and Neo-.


Based on typologies of stone blades, flakes, cores and axes, stone became 
central to identifying and describing the cultures existing in these periods. 
Implements made from organic materials were far less likely to have survived. 
And paucity of evidence leads to an underestimation of its importance.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F989ddce193fbeeb158a3b5e936d4a1dff053323f%2F0_80_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yabba%20dabba%20don't%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yabba%20dabba%20don%27t%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F989ddce193fbeeb158a3b5e936d4a1dff053323f%2F0_80_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Britain’s oldest house, found at an early Mesolithic site at Star Carr, 
Britain. Photograph: University Of York/EPA 
Nineteenth century antiquarians didn’t have the techniques to identify, 
analyse or preserve the fragments of organic evidence that may have been 
present on stone age sites they investigated. With modern excavation and 
analysis techniques, we can build a picture of prehistory with many more of the 
jigsaw pieces.


The early Mesolithic site at Star Carr <http://www.starcarr.com/index.html> in 
North Yorkshire dates to around 9,000BCE. Bone, antler and wooden artefacts 
have been exceptionally well preserved in peat beds that once formed a verdant 
lakeside. 21 antler headdresses made from smoothed and pierced red deer skulls 
may have been used by shamans, or in ritual ceremonies involving the wider 
community. Barbed harpoon points made from bone and antler – 193 in all – 
represent an important non-stone tool-making technology for the 
hunter-gatherers who lived at Star Carr. An engraved shale pendant was subject 
toaward-winning analysis <http://intarch.ac.uk/journal/issue40/8/index.html> - 
using high-resolution imaging techniques, and examining for organic residues 
and use-wear patterns, the research team have been able to explore the 
biography of the pendant, posing questions about how it may have been 
embellished, used, and how it relates to pieces of portable art from other 
Mesolithic sites across northern Europe.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed350c604027429ffbfab2b060c5aca1de7f8def%2F111_0_2215_1329%2F2215.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yabba%20dabba%20don't%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yabba%20dabba%20don%27t%3A%20archaeology%20needs%20to%20leave%20the%20stone%20age%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fyabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed350c604027429ffbfab2b060c5aca1de7f8def%2F111_0_2215_1329%2F2215.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of how the Durrington Walls monoliths might have looked 
more than 4,500 years ago. Excavations this summer revealed that there were 
also holes for huge timber posts. Photograph: Ludwig Boltzmann 
Institute/Briti/PA 
At the late Neolithic site at Durrington Walls, in Wiltshire, 
ground-penetrating radar surveys completed last year led the research team to
announce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/07/stonehenge-archaeology-ritual-arena-neolithic-monument>
 that a ‘major new prehistoric stone monument’ comprising up to 90 standing 
stones had been discovered 3km from Stonehenge. Excavations this summer have
revealed 
<https://ntarchaeostonehengeaveburywhs.wordpress.com/2016/08/11/durrington-walls-2016-thursday-11-august/>
 that the anomalies discovered under the vast henge earthwork are, in fact, 
holes for huge timber posts. The posts appear to have been erected around the 
time settlement at the site ceased, but then removed (rather than burnt or 
rotted in situ), before the henge was constructed. We have no way of knowing 
what these post looked like, and whether they were decorated, daubed, carved or 
shaped. Archeological reconstruction drawings of timber monuments often opt for 
a ‘neutral’ telegraph-pole look, but these visualisations are likely to be 
widely of the mark. Tantalising examples of the strange things prehistoric 
Britons did with trees and timber are wellshowcased 
<http://www.museums.norfolk.gov.uk/Research/Collections/Archaeology_Collections/Seahenge/index.htm>
 at Holme in Norfolk.


Must Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/14/uks-best-bronze-age-site-must-farm-dig-ends-analyis-continue-years>
, although bronze age in date, offers the most comprehensive insight into how 
little we normally see when looking at prehistoric worlds. Timber houses 
complete with thatch, wicker walls and clay chimneys; knapped stone tools still 
hafted into their wooden handles; fine linens, reels of thread and complete 
sets of pots and cooking vessels all survive. These homes, hastily abandoned 
during a devastating fire, are preserved in all their glory. Far from the 
meagre homestead toolkits we’ve allowed ourselves to imagine previously, Must 
Farm reveals material wealth. If only the stone and bronze had survived, as 
would be expected, the site would be filed alongside the multitude of 
significant-but-ultimately-insignificant prehistoric sites in the country.


Time travel into a mid- or late stone age community and the primary 
technologies and many of the valuable artefacts will be made from wood, 
leather, bone, pottery and plant-based textiles. By missing those technologies 
from the label for the period, we risk missing them from of our imaginations, 
and our understanding. The Pottery, Wood, Textile, Leather and Stone Age isn’t 
as catchy (the PoWoTexLeSto?), but it’s an awful lot more accurate.

 