
Watching a film-maker use tweezers to extract wriggling, inch-long Amazonian 
parasites from his bloody leg would normally rank among the more 
stomach-churning of cinematic experiences, but it is a mere sideshow in a new 
documentary that shows Ecuador’s most famous nature reserve faces far graver 
threats than it poses.

Over the past seven years, US biologist Ryan Killackey has endured bot fly 
larvae, dysentery, bullet ant stings and malignant melanoma in order to film an 
intimate and polemical account of a remote forest community under pressure from 
US and Chinese oil companies.


The result is Yasuni Man <http://www.yasuniman.com>, a 90-minute record of a 
stunningly beautiful region believed to be one of the most biodiverse on the 
planet at a particularly troubled time in its history.


It focuses on the Yasuni biosphere reserve, which inspired hope around the 
world in 2007when the Ecuadorian government announced a global fundraising 
drive for its protection against mining firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/sep/03/ecuador-yasuni-conservation>
.

interactive <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/ecuador-yasuni/> 
After the discovery of a $7.2bn oil reserve inside Yasuni, the government 
proposed leaving the fossil fuel in the ground if the international community 
would donate half that amount.

The ITT Initiative (which covered the Ishpingo, Tambococha and Tiputini 
regions) was hailed as a bold new approach to climate change and habitat loss, 
but the plan was eventuallykilled off by President Rafael Correa  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/16/ecuador-approves-yasuni-amazon-oil-drilling>
 after it raised only $13m (£8.3m) in donations.

Despite widespread domestic and international opposition, in 2013 Correa gave 
the go ahead for drilling, though he insisted it would affect only 1% of the 
reserve.

Killackey’s film, however, suggests that the project was long doomed: even as 
donations were pouring in from environmental well-wishers around the planet, 
oil companies were already moving into the area.

Killackey says that in 2012, he filmed roads built by Ecuador’s state-run oil 
company, Petroamazonas, between the nature reserve and Block 31, an extraction 
zone that is now off limits and patrolled by security guards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fyasuni-man-film-ecuador-ryan-killackey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32762056255df99199802e1467b1b26d0c631c95%2F0_125_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yasuni%20Man%20film%20is%20an%20intimate%20portrait%20of%20a%20beautiful%20land%20under%20siege%20for%20its%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fyasuni-man-film-ecuador-ryan-killackey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yasuni%20Man%20film%20is%20an%20intimate%20portrait%20of%20a%20beautiful%20land%20under%20siege%20for%20its%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fyasuni-man-film-ecuador-ryan-killackey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32762056255df99199802e1467b1b26d0c631c95%2F0_125_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The camouflage of this super cryptic Osteocephalus buckleyi allows it to blend 
perfectly among the moss and lichen that cover many of the forest’s trees. 
Photograph: Ryan P. Killackey/Pollywog Productions 
In recent weeks, the first wells inside the Yasuni fields have come into full 
commercial operation.According to Amazon Watch 
<http://amazonwatch.org/assets/files/2016-amazon-crude-report.pdf>, the oil 
from the Yasuni fields is being pumped to California, where it is processed at 
US refineries. In the future, the group expects major Chinese companies – such 
as CNPC or Sinopec – to join Petroamazonas in drilling more than 200 wells.

Despite these powerful interests, indigenous groups have slowed the expansion 
of the extraction industries into Yasuni. Killackey’s film – which will be 
shown on 13 October at theWildscreen film festival 
<http://www.wildscreen.org/panda-awards-database/2016/yasuni-man/> in Bristol – 
calls for the tribes to be given more support.


The film looks at a community of Waorani (also spelled Huaorani) in Boanamo, a 
remote village that is two-and-a half-day boat ride away from Coca, the 
regional capital. On four extended visits, Killackey spent close to 150 days 
here, filming rituals, family life, hunting expeditions, as well as a stunning 
variety of wildlife, including giant green anacondas, river dolphins, rare 
short-eared dogs, white lipped peccaries, limbless salamanders and brilliantly 
coloured leaf frogs.

He also organised scientific expeditions by leading biologists. Their findings 
– such as the discovery of several news species and fresh research on migratory 
patterns – will be released during the upcoming screening.


Ecuador: Amazon families split over lure of oil money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/05/ecuador-amazon-split-oil-money> 
“I want this to be more than a documentary. I hope the data will be used to 
draw attention to Yasuni and help advocate for genuine preservation that works 
for the benefit of indigenous people,” Killackey said in a phone interview.


Killackey was first drawn to Yasuni in 2005 by a love of frogs. Film-making 
began four years later when he was invited to Boanama and then launched a 
Kickstarter campaign to document the lives of the people there. He has since 
spent close to $160,000, partly supported by groups such as Yale Environment 
360 and Passion Planet, but mostly from his own funds.


Over the past decade, he has seen the oil companies move closer to Yasuni, 
building roads and bridges that open up new areas for land clearance, logging 
and the bush-meat trade. Faced by the rush of development,local indigenous 
groups have held out for as long as they can 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/13/ecuadorian-tribe-die-fighting-rainforest>
but are then often sucked into the destruction of their own forests.


The most isolated tribes – the Tagaeri and Taromenane, who shun contact with 
the outside world – are in theory protected by the state, buttheir territory 
has steadily shrunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/sep/03/uncontacted-tribes-wildlife>
, which has led to increased conflict. Among the victims was one of Killackey’s 
friends, Caiga Baihua, who was speared to death in January.

Killacky says the blame lies mostly with the destabilising encroachment of 
outside cultures and foreign corporations, though he acknowledges that he too 
is an emissary of western values.

“I feel conflicted every day. I always ask myself whether I will be viewed as 
the missionaries were. Although I was invited, I bring cameras and tents from 
the outside world. When the Waorani see them, they want them too. But I have to 
think too about the good that we can bring. Without a presence here, I don’t 
think the story would get out. I want it to reach as wide an audience as it 
can.”

The region is now harder for foreign journalists and scientists to enter than 
it was when Killackey started filming; drilling areas are entirely closed off 
by private security, the footage is now an important historical record. 
Killackey hopes it can also stimulate change – and not just inEcuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador>.

“This story goes way beyond Yasuni. It is representative of what is happening 
in so many other places in the world. As an American, I’d like to see a change 
in the way our people do business. We are mostly responsible for what is 
happening here. One of the messages to viewers is that you do have a choice. 
Get educated where your petrol comes from. Reduce your footprint. Support 
products that are more sustainable.”


“It’s difficult to be hopeful,” he says. “But I’m optimistic there is still 
time to make a change.”

 