
BBC executive Alan Yentob <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> has 
branded the culture secretary’s suggestion that the broadcaster’s main 10pm 
news programme be moved so as not to compete with ITV’s evening bulletin as 
“ridiculous”.

The BBC’s creative director dismissed John Whittingdale’s concerns, pointing 
out it was ITV’s choice to move its News at Ten programme in 1999 that led the
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to “step in” to fill the slot in 
the first place.

Yentob’s criticism came after the culture secretary spoke of the importance of 
looking at the “impact the BBC has on commercial rivals”. In a wide-ranging 
speech to the Royal Television Society’s convention in Cambridge on Wednesday, 
Whittingdale said: “To give one example, is it sensible that its main evening 
news bulletin goes out at the same time as ITV’s?”

But, on Thursday, Yentob insisted that “everywhere in the world puts news on 
the hour”.

ITV rejigged its schedule  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/31/itv.tvnews>in the late 90s in an 
attempt to arrest sliding viewing figures. After much lobbying, it gained 
permission to move its flagship News at Ten programme to a primetime slot and 
introduce a second, shorter bulletin at 11pm, which was fronted by Dermot 
Murnaghan.

The later programme became known as “news at when” because it kept moving 
around to accommodate other programming. Within six months, the BBC announced a 
plan to move its 9pm news bulletin to the unguarded 10pm slot.

BBC could be forced to change time of 10pm news programme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/16/bbc-could-be-forced-to-change-time-of-10pm-news-programme>
A shorter News at Ten programme then returned to ITV for three nights a week 
under orders from the regulator, setting the two broadcasters’ main news 
bulletins against each other.

Speaking on Thursday, Yentob said the then BBC director general Greg Dyke’s 
decision to take up the 10pm slot reshaped the TV landscape, leading to 
one-hour 9pm dramas. Previously, primetime dramas had only lasted 50 minutes.


Whittingdale’s intervention comes as the future of the BBC is hotly debated. 
Besides the consultation process over the renewal of broadcaster’s Royal 
Charter, the culture secretary also struck a deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/06/osborne-slashes-bbc-budget-pay-over-75s-tv-licences>
 to place on it the burden of free television licences for the over-75s.

On Wednesday, he declared himself surprised at the reaction to the green 
paper, saying it had been “greeted as somehow heralding the demise of the BBC 
or as evidence of a Murdoch-inspired agenda to dismantle it”.

He added: “[This was] a charge I found particularly surprising as my last 
meeting with Rupert Murdoch took place over four years ago after I served a 
warrant on him requiring his appearance in parliament in relation to the 
hacking inquiry.”
 