
The BBC’s governing body will not investigate accusations that Alan Yentob 
tried to influence the BBC’s coverage of Kids Company, because now he has 
stepped down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-steps-down-bbc-kids-company>
as creative director it is “not proportionate, appropriate or cost effective”.

The BBC Trust said that it had “listened” to the specific programmes that 
Yentob is accused of attempting to influence - onNewsnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsnight>, the Today programme and World at 
One - and found that there was “no evidence that the integrity of the output 
had been affected”.

The trust’s editorial standards committee said that Yentob, who stood down as 
the BBC’s creative director on Thursday following mounting pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-bbc-kids-company-tony-hall>
 over the Kids Company scandal, was not in the management chain for BBC News 
and that the corporation had “frequently led” on breaking news about the failed 
charity.

Critics of the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which had 
previously already cleared Yentob of wrongdoing in its own investigation, argue 
that regardless of whether the news output was affected there needs to be an 
investigation into the alleged attempts to influence the programmes.

The trust rejected launching a wider investigation because it said it took 
management’s word that programming output had not been affected, and that it 
was a moot point now Yentob had stood down from his senior management role.

“There had been wider questions about Yentob’s behaviour in connection to the 
three programmes and whether there was any potential impact on the reputation 
of the BBC,” the trust said. “Given Yentob has now stepped down as the BBC’s 
creative director, it would not be proportionate, appropriate or cost effective 
to look further at these matters.”

Despite opting not to launch an official investigation into Yentob’s 
behaviour, the trust has decided that there might be “lessons to be learned” 
from the Yentob incidents.

To this end it has asked David Jordan, the BBC’s director of editorial policy 
and standards, to file a report early next year giving his view on whether 
changes should be made to the “processes for managing conflicts affecting 
senior managers”.

Jordan has been asked to look at a number of areas, including whether there 
needs to be additional rules applied to external activities undertaken by 
senior managers.

And whether “any more specific measures should apply when an external activity 
becomes the focus of news coverage”.

The BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> said it could look 
to take “further action” depending on the conclusions Jordan draws in his 
report.

Yentob has been accused of trying to influence news coverage of Kids Company, 
where he was chairman, bymaking a phone call to Newsnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/05/bbc-denies-alan-yentob-influenced-newsnight-kids-company-report>
 ahead of a report on the charity.

The call was made to a senior staff member at Newsnight, thought to be the 
editor Ian Katz, supposedly asking him to delay a report critical of financial 
management atKids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>.

Yentob also accompanied the charity’s chief executive, Camila Batmanghelidjh, 
to Radio 4’s Today programme in July where he stood beside a producer during 
the interview.

“If it was intimidating, I regret it,” he later told a committee of MPs. 

He also telephoned Radio 4 presenter Ed Stourton ahead of a report on The 
World at One.

He has also been accused by the Daily Mail of launching a “verbal attack” on 
the BBC’s special news correspondent Lucy Manning, who was compiling a report 
on sexual abuse allegations at the charity.

He admitted the incident to the Mail, but said it was “absolute nonsense” to 
suggest that it constituted inappropriate interference with the BBC’s coverage.

“I have apologised,” he told the Mail. “I didn’t have a go about her. I said 
to her, ‘This is about the kids.’”

The BBC Trust also concluded that there was no conflict of interest in Yentob 
holding the role of BBC creative director while also the chairman of Kids 
Company.

 