
Yoghurts sold in five supermarkets have been recalled over fears that they 
contain pieces of rubber.

Manufacturer Yeo Valley has told Asda, Co-operative, Sainsbury’s, Tesco and 
Waitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> to remove a selection 
of yoghurts from their shelves. The Food Standards Agency said they posed a 
“possible risk to health”.

Customers who have bought any of the yoghurts are advised not to eat them. 
They can get a refund from the supermarket where they were bought.

The yoghurts include supermarket-own brands and some from the Collective Dairy 
brand. The products affected are:

Asda 

Asda extra special Scottish raspberry West Country yoghurt (150g); Asda 
fat-free red cherry yoghurt (450g); Asda fat-free red cherry yoghurt (four 
pack); Asda low-fat coconut yoghurt (450g); Asda low-fat lemon yoghurt (four 
pack); Asda low fat lemon yoghurt (450g);Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> low-fat mango and passion fruit 
yoghurt (450g); Collective Dairy wild blueberry yoghurt (150g); Collective 
Dairy wild blueberry yoghurt (450g).

Co-operative 

Co-op Rise & Shine Greek-style yoghurt and raspberry (160g); Co-op strawberry 
and raspberry low-fat yoghurts (four pack); Co-op Truly Irresistible limited 
edition mango, Brazilian orange and coconut yoghurt (150g).

Sainsbury’s 

Sainsbury’s Basics fruit selection yoghurts (four pack, two strawberry and two 
peach); Sainsbury’s Basics strawberry yoghurt (125g)

Tesco 

Tesco Finest strawberries and cream yoghurt (150g); Tesco low-fat coconut 
yoghurt (450g);Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> low-fat lemon 
yoghurt (450g); Collective Dairy wild blueberry yoghurt (150g).

Waitrose 

Deliciously fruity raspberry low-fat yoghurt (125g); Fragrant creamy Scottish 
raspberry yoghurt (150g); Multipack Deliciously fruity low-fat yoghurt (four 
pack, two strawberry and two raspberry); Collective Dairy wild blueberry 
yoghurt (450g); Collective Dairy wild blueberry yoghurt (150g).
 