
Piñata was a word I never encountered before reading Nick Hopkins’ article (
Why this quest for truth must go on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/14/abuse-inquiry-soap-opera-is-a-diversion-from-what-survivors-deserve>
, 15 October). But a fragile box that blindfolded children attempt to break 
with sticks to access the goodies inside is a perfect metaphor for our 
politicians – and their treatment of the NHS, the police, education and the 
powerless.
Keith Harris
Wantage, Oxfordshire 

• The notion that alcohol is fattening is raised in your pages (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/17/brits-calories-alcohol-sugary-drinks>
, 17 October). By what metabolic pathway is this achieved in the body? The only 
organisms I know that utilise alcohol are certain bacteria that downgrade it 
further to vinegar – acetic acid. It may be that some alcoholic drinks contain 
sugar too. But it is the sugar that fattens, not the alcohol.
Colin Purdom
Shotesham St Mary, Norfolk

• I keep hearing that employers value soft skills as much as academic 
qualifications. It is interesting, then, that women working on the Asda shop 
floor, where they are likely to encounter customers and require such skills, 
are being paid less than men well away from the public eye in warehouses (Report
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/asda-equal-pay-shopfloor-staff-women>
, 15 October). If Asda women win their case, maybe this will encourage young 
people to believe that what they can do, and how they do it, is as important as 
their exam results.
Carole Easton
Chief executive, Young Women’s Trust

Trump struggles to retain female voters in New Hampshire after leaked remarks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/donald-trump-new-hampshire-supporters-election-misconduct>
• If, as claimed in your review of The Book of Human Emotions (Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/14/book-of-human-emotions-tiffany-watt-smith-review>
, 15 October), there exists a condition called “basorexia, which is a sudden 
urge to kiss someone”, can we expect it to appear in the American Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> to invent a pill for it, and 
Donald Trump to blame it for hispast indiscretions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
?
Mike Hine
Kingston upon Thames

• Copycat branding in the UK certainly goes back as far as Josiah Wedgwood, 
who, in 1769, named his new pottery factory in Stoke-on-Trent Etruria so he 
could sell “Etruscan ware” (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/16/no-burger-queens-on-glorious-ripper-street>
, 17 October).
Richard Ross
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 