
With James Dasaolu <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/james-dasaolu> pulling 
out of an eagerly anticipated 100 metres showdown and Jessica Ennis-Hill about 
to have a baby, this year’s British Championships – which doubles as a trial 
for the European Championships in Zurich – offer more opportunities to focus on 
the wave of exciting athletes coming through. And they do not come more 
exciting than 17-year-old Morgan Lake.

Earlier this month Lake smashed through the 6,000-barrier for the heptathlon 
with a European youth record score of 6,081, which included personal bests in 
the shot put, 200m and javelin. That led to the inevitable contrasts with 
Ennis-Hill andKatarina Johnson-Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/16/katarina-johnson-thompson-gold-commonwealth-games-heptathlete>
. But Johnson-Thompson was two years older when she hit 6,000 points for the 
first time, and Ennis-Hill three. Lake has also leapt 1.93m for the high jump, 
which is just three centimetres off the national record. Not bad for someone 
who has just completed her AS levels.

Lake will be doing the high jump on Saturday and the long jump on Sunday – and 
has targeted her goals for both events in Birmingham. “With the high jump I 
want to keep it consistent at around 1.90m as I have done all year, and in the 
long jump I want to break my PB,” she says. “It’s two years old, it’s time I 
broke it!”

Lake has only met Ennis-Hill once, at a meeting in Bedford two years ago, but 
she is an obvious inspiration. “I was competing at the same time at an Under-17 
competition in Stoke when she was going for gold at London 2012,” she says. “I 
was running in after every event to see what was happening at the Olympics in 
the club house.”

Lake and Johnson-Thompson have been named in England’s team for the 
Commonwealth Games next month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/16/mo-farah-england-squad-commonwealth-games-2014>
 but Lake is refusing to get carried away. “I think I will cope quite well with 
the crowds,” she says, “but I am not going for a medal, just the experience. 
But I am hoping it will push me forward.”

Another athlete also hoping to shine will be Jodie Williams, who after several 
years of injuries and disappointments showed signs of her enormous potential by 
comingsecond in a 200m Diamond League race in Oslo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/11/adam-gemili-100m-oslo-bislett-games-athletics>
 earlier this month. “If you’d asked me two years ago, I would have said the 
100m was my favourite without a doubt. But now my 200m seems to be much better. 
I love doubling up but the 200m is suited to my style and body shape.”

Dasaolu, who ran 9.91sec last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/13/james-dasaolu-second-fastest-british-100m>
, has been given special dispensation to miss the British trials and to focus 
on the Glasgow Grand Prix and Diamond League race in Lausanne next month, with 
the aim of proving his form and fitness in the 100m before the team are 
selected on 14 July.

Dasaolu said: “The trials have just come a week too early for me. The best 
opportunity I have to achieve the standard is at those two races, and I am 
really grateful that the team supporting me are helping us make these 
decisions.”

With Adam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> focusing on 
the 200m, it means the race for the two automatic spots in the 100m team for 
the European Championships will be fought out between Chijindu Ujah, who ran 
9.96 earlier this month, the world indoor champion Richard Kilty, Dwain 
Chambers, Harry Aikines-Aryeetey and James Ellington.
 