
Ash <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash>  Free All Angels 
(Infectious Records) **** 
 Â£13.99


 Nowadays it's not cool to be young and enjoy it. Instead, adolescence is 
surrounded by negativity and teenagers just bemoan the fact that they have 
their whole lives in front of them. Fun without responsibility has been diluted 
by the likes of Wheatus, who celebrate the poor personal hygiene and dodgy 
taste in music that youth entails, by Westlife and their middle-aged, 
middle-of-the-road sentiments, and by dismissive declarations of "my 
generation" from the greying Limp Bizkit. Where are the head-spinning thrills, 
the heart-stopping lust, the celebration of golden summer holidays that seem to 
last for ever?

Step forward Ash, who (while they themselves wrestle with the complexities of 
mid-20s angst) have crystallised the pleasure and pain of being a teen. Back in 
1996, when they kicked up some punk-pop dust with the single Kung Fu, Tim 
Wheeler, Mark Hamilton and Rick McMurray were the naughtiest kids in the 
Britpop class. Juggling a record deal with their A-levels, they hit the charts 
with the adrenaline-filled debut album 1977. Spawning indie classics Girl from 
Mars and Oh Yeah, 1977 conjured up playground longings and Kodak memories and 
set them to lush melodies and spiky guitars. Ash held on to their innocent 
exuberance, their Star Wars fixation and the knowledge that girls were an 
unknown but desired quantity.

Following a foray into soundtracks with A Life Less Ordinary, Ash acquired a 
new guitarist in Charlotte Hatherley and released their second album, Nu-Clear 
Sounds. But the joy had evaporated into thrash and an affection for the Jesus 
and Mary Chain that vanquished the optimism and fun of the past. Personally, 
things weren't so great either. After two years of non-stop pop, the sweetness 
of success turned bitter for Wheeler, who gradually retreated into depression. 
Cue 18 months of suffering, silence and recovery.

But with Free All Angels, Ash have rediscovered their enthusiasm, and Wheeler 
- not just the singer but the band's chief songwriter - has a smile on his 
face. From the beginning, you know it's going to be good. Walking Barefoot has 
that trademark sense of nostalgia for a time you're still experiencing. A great 
festival song, it's about relishing a perfect moment while knowing it's about 
to come to an end. "Remember when the sun was hot, remember when the days were 
long," Wheeler sings, a homage to both lazy days and golden years.

The perfect pop ethic of simple, epic singalong songs continues with Shining 
Star, Ash's greatest single since Girl from Mars, a celebration of someone 
special in sixth-form prose. World Domination is another call to arms to kids 
everywhere to kick off their trainers and jump up and down. With its "we don't 
give a fuck how we're meant to be" feelgood factor, plus count-in intro, 
speeding drums and rock guitars just distant enough from Status Quo to be cool, 
it's destined to be an Ash anthem.

But Wheeler knows life isn't all about good times, and Free All Angels has its 
share of sadness. New single Burn Baby Burn initially sounds joyful, but listen 
closer and you'll hear how the nagging guitar really captures the sound of 
confusion in an ode to the slow death of a relationship. "You're all I have in 
this teenage twilight," Wheeler sings, while admitting that the bitter words 
and anger characterise the death of what was once his lifeline.

The obsession with stars is still apparent in many of the songs - from There's 
a Star to the winsome hymn Sometimes, which blames the realignment of the stars 
for the loss of love - and so too are the layered harmonies and Beach Boys 
sound. Pacific Palisades in particular is very like the Barracudas, a fantastic 
melody rising like a wave before crashing into scrunched-up pop.

There's some unlikely stuff too. On Nicole, Wheeler adopts a deranged 
serial-killer persona as he shouts: "I said no, I killed my baby, but I love 
her." He gives the impression that the blood is still on his hands. The 
weirdness continues in Submission, which would find a suitably seedy home on 
Soft Cell's Non-Stop Erotic Cabaret: a wannabe homage to S&M that doesn't work 
because Wheeler's voice is too thin to be scary. It's like discovering your 
little brother's secret stash of porn mags - it just makes you giggle.

Frothy, bizarre but beautiful, Candy is the most interesting song on the 
album. Wheeler does Dusty as the string section from the Walker Brothers' Make 
It Easy on Yourself meets the sparse keyboards of Dr Dre's Next Episode in a 
song of sweetness and reassurance. Some unnecessary guitar messes up the 
ending, but it's a brave and confident fusion of genres.

Free All Angels is simply great. Sometimes introspective, a bit strange, but 
most of all fun, it's what being young is all about.
 