
As three high street retailers went into administration this week, nearly 
10,000 people risk losing their jobs.HMV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/15/hmv-administrators-4500-jobs-at-risk>
,Blockbuster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/16/video-chain-blockbuster-falls-into-administration>
 andJessops 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ab04efbe-5c1b-11e2-ab38-00144feab49a.html#axzz2IEQMyAZY>
 announced they would close, leaving workers without work.

Redundancies have soared under the coalition government in both the private 
and public sectors. The number of people working in the public sector alone has
plummeted by more than 370,000 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-20561444> 
since April 2010. And from September 2011 to September 2012, the Department of 
Work and Pensions itself made more than 200 redundancies, according to figures 
released under the Freedom of Information Act. More than half of them were over 
50 and three quarters were women.

In total, 2.5m people are out of work — a rate of 7.9% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/14/unemployment-rises-2-5-million>
. This compares to4.7% unemployment seen in 2004 and 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/nov/17/unemployment-and-employment-statistics-economics>
. Laws on redundancies are alsoset to change 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20768345>, so knowing your rights will be 
essential if you're facing redundancy.

Detailed advice on the laws and regulations have been given by the government 
<https://www.gov.uk/browse/working/redundancies-dismissals> and the TUC 
<http://www.tuc.org.uk/tuc/rights_redundancy.cfm>. But it can still be hard to 
know where to turn to, particularly as being made redundant can knock your 
confidence and make you feel undervalued.

So, if the worst should happen, what are your options and how can you get back 
into the job market? For help and support, whether you're facing the prospect 
of redundancy or have recently lost your job, join our live Q&A onThursday 24 
January from 1pm to 3pm.

Our experts will be on hand to discuss the issues and answer your questions. 
Topics up for discussion will include:

• What rights do you have when facing redundancy?

• How to stay motivated about your career

• Training and re-training options

• Finding a new job or switching careers

Taking part in our Q&As is easier than ever. You can create a free Guardian 
account, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you 
can tweet us on@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email 
your questions to Martin Williams 
<mailto:martin.williams.casual@theguardian.com>.

Our panel

Employment law solicitor Philip Landau is a partner at Landau Zeffertt Weir 
<http://www.lzwlaw.co.uk/>. He writes on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philip-landau> legal issues in the 
workplace, including redundancy, unfair dismissal, breach of contract and 
discrimination.

Corinne Mills is managing director of Personal Career Management  
<http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>and author of You're Hired! How to 
Write a Brilliant CV 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Youre-Hired-CV-write-brilliant/dp/1844551776>.

Sarah Mortimer has been working in talent and career management for 13 years. 
Her current role atCedar <http://www.cedar-tm.com/> involves the design, 
development and delivery of innovative programmes that focus on career and 
talent management, and leadership development.

Shantha David is a practising solicitor, specialising in employment law. She 
works in-house forUNISON <http://www.unison.org.uk/>, acting for members on 
matters ranging from TUPE, unfair dismissals, redundancies, discrimination and 
collective issues.

Steve Mullins is a counsellor for the Chartered Management Institute (CMI) 
<http://www.managers.org.uk/> in the south east. He had more than 20 years' 
experience in commercial management, before entering business support 25 years 
ago. He has experienced redundancy and outplacement himself and has recently 
helped others into new employment. His new book on redundancy will launch in 
March.

Steve Nicholls is a career development coach who specialises in helping 
executives and managers forge meaningful careers. Steve has 17 years of 
career-coaching experience and a background in business across a number of 
sectors. Steve is also on the UK council for theAssociation for Coaching 
<http://www.associationforcoaching.com/pages/home/>.

Barbara Love is a principal consultant at Right Management 
<http://www.rightmanagement.co.uk/>, a talent and career management 
consultancy. Barbara coaches people who have been made redundant and helps them 
make practical decisions about their next career move as well as cope with the 
emotional side of redundancy.

Victoria Matthews is a careers adviser with seven years' experience of 
providing advice and support on careers, funding and employability to adults on 
theNational Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> helpline.

Rick Hughes is a lead advisor for the British Association for Counselling & 
Psychotherapy <http://www.bacp.co.uk/> and co-editor of 'Employee Wellbeing 
Support - A Workplace Resource' from Wiley-Blackwell. He has been a workplace 
counsellor for some 15 years.

Emma Wilkinson works with Citizens Advice <http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/>, 
providing expert advice, support and training on employment and equality rights 
issues. They regularly advise on redundancy issues including process, fairness, 
insolvency and lay-off.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 