
From Oscar Wilde to The Remains of the Day, Guardian writers have been sharing 
the books they wish more people would read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/a-book-to-share> on our blog for the 
last few weeks. To end our series, here are our readers’ favourite titles to 
share – and some of their most heartfelt and hilariousbook-giving anecdotes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/18/do-you-like-to-give-and-receive-books-share-your-photos-stories-and-memories>
.

‘Find it, buy it, read it’ – advice after 40 years selling books

“As a bookseller of 40 years standing, I have the pleasure of recommending my 
favorite books on a daily basis. There’s a bookcase in my shop titled 
‘Proprietor’s Picks’ on whose shelves I put the books I most like to impose 
upon my customers. Of the hundreds of titles that have graced its shelves over 
the years, it is impossible to choose just one that I most enjoy recommending. 
I therefore will name the least-known book that every customer who I’ve 
convinced to read it has adored:The Enormous Room 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/genres/fiction-poetry/enormous-room.html> by 
EE Cummings, a memoir of the months he was held as a prisoner of war by the 
French during World War I. Find it, buy it, read it. You won’t regret it.” By
bookmanjb <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14419064>.


‘You can guess how well the date went after that’


“This story is not safe for work, but it’s true and relevant.

Years ago, when I was new to online dating, and thought that it was an 
opportunity to meet men whom I might not otherwise have contact with, I 
arranged to meet, in a public place, a man who had represented himself as 
intellectually curious, sensitive, and a good dad to his teenage daughters. We 
talked about books and culture and other things, and he seemed like an 
interesting guy. We eventually agreed that we would move off e-mail and meet 
for coffee.

I’m not sure how the subject came up, but we mutually agreed that it would be 
fun to bring something to the date as a gift that we would like the other 
person to know about. The idea was that it would be a way of deepening the 
growing friendship. We agreed that the gift should be something that we had 
found moving, and that might not be something that the other person wouldn’t 
know about. In addition, he had emphasized that, since I was a writer, and he a 
reader, that introducing him to some great books would be appropriate.

I was a newly single mom, working as a university professor, deeply concerned 
about the world and in love with literary fiction. At the time, I had a 
favourite book, because I had just read it, and was an evangelist for it.

I livened it up with a copy of Robert Hellenga’s The Sixteen Pleasures which I 
had found both smart and erotic

The first issue was that he showed up in a gigantic yellow HumVee. It dawned 
on me that people could have their own little inconsistencies and not to make 
too much out of the most irresponsible car choice I could think of. To each his 
own, I told myself.

The conversation was going okay, and things were fine as long as we stuck to 
talking about our kids or films. The time for the gift exchange arrived. I 
produced a copy ofA Sunday by the Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview14>
 in Kigali by Gil Courtemanche, which I realized was a buzz kill, but Rwanda 
and the Congo were two issues that were dominating my activist life and I 
wanted him to know that about me, but I livened it up with a copy of Robert 
Hellenga’sThe Sixteen Pleasures 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/291912/> which I had 
found both smart and erotic. So I didn’t appear to be a complete wet blanket.

His gift? A vibrator and a piece of feminine sex wear that appeared to have 
more holes than fabric.

You can guess how well the date went after that. Turned out, he was a hedge 
fund manager. I know how to pick them, huh?” Byfingerlakeswanderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3690773>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa20f1524493e2c5fd2f87253a93d977b0b32df5d%2F0_0_1530_2341%2F1530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20book-sharing%20stories%3A%20from%20a%20grandma%E2%80%99s%20precious%20gift%20to%20an%20online%20date%20gone%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20book-sharing%20stories%3A%20from%20a%20grandma%E2%80%99s%20precious%20gift%20to%20an%20online%20date%20gone%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa20f1524493e2c5fd2f87253a93d977b0b32df5d%2F0_0_1530_2341%2F1530.jpg>
‘I have loaned my precious copy to friends over the years’

“For me it is Laurie Lee’s As I Walked Out One Midsummer Morning 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/as-i-walked-out-one-midsummer-morning.html>. I 
have loaned my precious copy to various friends over the years. I have also 
read it five or six times and at the age of 62 I look forward to reading it a 
couple more times in my precious life. I used to read it every time I visited 
Spain but I go there so often now that I take other books with me. However when 
I am visiting that beautiful country inevitably I will see a vista or an 
interaction on a street which will remind me of a scene in the book.Estupendo!” 
ByPatLux <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12168095>

‘How a copy of Frankenstein founded a relationship’


“I lent this book in pristine condition to someone I cared for dearly. Though 
after exchanging books we parted on uncertain terms and didn’t speak again. A 
few few months later I finally gathered the courage and conviction (with the 
help of a little gin) to get in touch and asked if we’d ever return books to 
their rightful owners. A wonderfully bizarre conversation ensued, featuring 
many tangents and my perhaps unjust comparison between Victor Frankenstein and 
the book receiver; both engaged in an ardent pursuit of knowledge and 
critically, both isolated themselves to their own detriment and shunned the 
ones who needed them. Soon after, Frankenstein did find its way back into my 
hands, though in the characterful condition pictured below. I said he could 
keep it, though this time we didn’t part ways.” ByBethrae97 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5671a847e4b0e7d11553d1ce/1860990>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb13d1eea6f0dcbc58477c0bee2dc092dabb70bac%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20book-sharing%20stories%3A%20from%20a%20grandma%E2%80%99s%20precious%20gift%20to%20an%20online%20date%20gone%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20book-sharing%20stories%3A%20from%20a%20grandma%E2%80%99s%20precious%20gift%20to%20an%20online%20date%20gone%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb13d1eea6f0dcbc58477c0bee2dc092dabb70bac%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Lent in pristine condition, returned in this ‘characterful’ shape. Photograph: 
Bethrae97/GuardianWitness 
‘I started a bit of a movement in Ohio when I sent a friend a copy’


“I started a bit of a movement in Ohio when I sent a friend there a copy of T
he Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time-15.html>
 by Mark Haddon. She shared it with some of her friends, then took another copy 
off me when we met, and says a number of her friends went on to buy their own 
copies. For some reason, when it was first published, that book resonated with 
a number of people I know and I have always been happy to give away my copy and 
buy another one later. I think I am on my sixth copy now.” Bypalfreyman 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2955975>.

‘I grew up separately from my siblings – this book connected us’

“I grew up separately from my French siblings (father’s second marriage) but 
saw them once a year or so, and still do.


I’ve always been a keen reader, but when I read Paul Auster’s Moon Palace 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/moon-palace.html> it affected me more than 
any ‘first reading’. It electrified me; I can honestly say the world was not 
the same to me after reading it.

It was more than spooky to discover, some years later, that the book had had 
exactly the same impact on my French half-brother and sister.

I’ve given that book away probably over 10 times by now.” By xtrapnel 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1314668>

‘There is something in this book – a yearning for something lost’

“There are so many books to share-but the one most recent one I shared with my 
sister was Hemingway’sA Moveable Feast 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/moveable-feast-3.html> – a very old copy that 
I very need to get back eventually. I don’t know why I love this book so much. 
Hemingway seemed such a jerk! There is just something in this book – a yearning 
for something lost and which you feel will never be regained.


I feel a little bit the same way when I read another favourite, Henry Miller’s 
Book Of Friends 
<http://www.abebooks.com/Henry-Millers-Book-Friends-MILLER-Capra/1680628655/bd>
. I feel I could have played with Henry on those Brooklyn streets all those 
years ago even though I am a girl and would never have been considered anything 
according to Henry at the time. However, I love that book – another book with 
that ‘yearning feel’.” By7sisters 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4654659>.

‘At 19, I still reread this old Christmas present from my grandma’

“I have always believed that books are the best present you can give or 
receive. As a teenager my friends are always spending the build up to Christmas 
hoping for the newest phone and buying bath stuff for all their friends whilst 
I spend hours every week wandering around and around Waterstones, finding the 
perfect book for each person whilst adding to my own mile-long wishlist.


Books are something that shape our personalities. The first book I remember 
being given isThe Owl who was Afraid of the Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jun/27/book-corner-jill-tomlinson>
, a Christmas present from my Grandma, and even at nineteen I still read that 
book at least twice a year. In primary school I took it in for show and tell, 
in secondary school I used it as a part of my coursework and it even featured 
in my personal statement. No other gift I have ever received has given me so 
much as that one, tattered, paperback book.


With the move to ebooks and kindles and nooks the gift of a real life book 
could easily be lost, but I hope that it never is for there is something 
magical captured in the pages of a truly amazing book.” Byrowankeith 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5671a847e4b0e7d11553d1ce/1855873>. 

‘This book will change how you see America’


“Bury my Heart at Wounded Knee 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bury-my-heart-at-wounded-knee.html> was lent 
to me by a work colleague in about 1975, shortly after its publication, and I 
have since recommended it to anyone who would listen. I have also given it as 
gifts on several occasions, most notably to my late father from whom I 
re-inherited it on his death. That copy has since been passed on to my sister. 
The story of the white man’s conquest (there is no other word) of the USA from 
the native Americans’ viewpoint is powerful, emotional, highly informative and 
well written. It will change your view of the USA for all time. It is at the 
top of my non-fiction list.” Byelectricgrapefruit 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5671a847e4b0e7d11553d1ce/1872168>. 

‘Everyone should read this working-class heroine tale’

“I can’t remember how I acquired a copy of The Heart of the Midlothian 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-of-midlothian.html>, but I recommend it 
to everyone. It is astonishingly modern in its treatment of women for a novel 
published in 1818. The central character Jeanie Deans is a working class Scot 
(contrast Jane Austen’s heroines) who sets out from Edinburgh to walk to London 
to beg a pardon for her sister, who is facing execution for child destruction. 
It is in keeping with the sisterhood theme of the novel that she petitions the 
queen, not the king. There is a melodramatic sub-plot, but it does little to 
distract from the story of an independent woman who is single minded and has a 
stronger personality than all the men around her.” Byjaneinalberta 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5671a847e4b0e7d11553d1ce/1874999>. 

‘Until recently, an almost impossible book to share’

“Until recently, sharing John Freely’s Stamboul Sketches was a difficult and 
expensive endeavor. Published in 1974 in a limited paperbound edition of one 
thousand copies by a small English-language press in Istanbul, it soon went out 
of print. Few libraries outside Turkey had copies, and those rare specimens 
offered by booksellers fetched prices otherwise associated with the middle 
register of a wine list.

Because of its reissue last year by Eland Books of London, Stamboul Sketches 
<http://www.travelbooks.co.uk/shop-online-books/stamboul-sketches> is now 
available to wider audiences. At last count I have purchased seventeen copies 
for birthdays and Christmas. Like the best literature, however, Stamboul 
Sketches creates its own reason to share. Its great value is its relentless 
optimism, even in situations where none seems apparent. It is the most personal 
and affectionate book about Istanbul ever written, readily accessible to those 
who have never visited the city.” Bydonaldspanel 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5671a847e4b0e7d11553d1ce/1870066>. 
Read morehere 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5671a847e4b0e7d11553d1ce/1870066>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce8bb5bed26ca728a0eab62596039191482b07c8%2F0_0_720_482%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20book-sharing%20stories%3A%20from%20a%20grandma%E2%80%99s%20precious%20gift%20to%20an%20online%20date%20gone%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20book-sharing%20stories%3A%20from%20a%20grandma%E2%80%99s%20precious%20gift%20to%20an%20online%20date%20gone%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbest-books-to-share-with-others-stories-giving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce8bb5bed26ca728a0eab62596039191482b07c8%2F0_0_720_482%2F720.jpg>
 The Istanbul Seaside Museum, featured heavily on the book. Photograph: 
donaldspanel/GuardianWitness 
‘That such a novel could be overlooked is an amazement’

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
“Stoner <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stoner.html> by John Williams. That 
such a novel could be overlooked is an amazement. The edition I give to those 
who I wish to proselytize is the one with the preface by John McGahern my old 
teacher, who certainly recognised this book as a classic.” Bylabowe 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1030596>. [Read an appreciation by 
Julian Barneshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/stoner-john-williams-julian-barnes>
.]


And Bacon78 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15229438> shared this 
aboutButcher’s Crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/07/butchers-crossing-john-williams-review>
, from the same author:


“It had me reading it in nearly one sitting. It was exceptional. I’ve told so 
many people about this novel and loaned it out to just as many, all came back 
with positive agreeing comments.”

What is your favourite book to share? Let us know in the comments. 
 