
“Disaster tourism” is an ugly phrase, conjuring up images of rubberneckers 
gawping at others’ misfortune.

In the immediate aftermath of a natural disaster even the most 
well-intentioned visitors can getin the way if they lack coordination and 
expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/27/earthquake-nepal-dont-rush-help-volunteers-aid>
. They can end up slowing aid efforts.

Yet for developing countries whose economies rely on tourism, luring visitors 
back at the right moment is a vital step to recovery. Timing is everything.

For two countries that suffered cataclysmic blows this year, the time to visit 
– or to book a visit – is now.

On 13 March cyclone Pam struck Vanuatu, the island archipelago that inspired 
South Pacific. With winds peaking at 250km/h, the category-five stormleft 16 
people dead and thousands homeless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/mar/22/cyclone-pam-scale-of-destruction-emerges-as-vanuatu-picks-up-the-pieces-in-pictures>
.

Vanuatu reconstruction moves ahead in the aftermath of Cyclone Pam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/vanuatu-cyclone-pam-el-nino-reconstruction>
I’m just back from a trip there organised by the Vanuatu Tourism Office to 
write a travel story in the wake of the storm and can report that the recovery 
is well under way. Should you go? Hell yes! It’s stunningly beautiful, friendly 
and safe. And they need your tourist dollars more than ever.

Another country crying out for holidaymakers is Nepal, where more than 8,000 
people were killed on 25 April when amagnitude 7.8 earthquake hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/27/nepal-earthquake-fears-grow-for-uncontacted-villages-as-more-than-3200-confirmed-dead>
 in the heart of the Himalayas. It triggered avalanches in the Langtang valley 
andon Mount Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/25/deadly-everest-avalanche-triggered-by-nepal-earthquake>
, and devastation in the quake zone onan unimaginable scale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/10/why-i-had-return-to-nepal-earthquake-2015>
.A second earthquake on 12 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/nepal-hit-by-second-huge-earthquake>
 killed more than 200 people.

You’re very likely to have donated money to help one or both of them, but go 
there? They probably haven’t been at the top of your list.

Yet travel warnings <http://smartraveller.gov.au/zw-cgi/view/Advice/Vanuatu> 
have been liftedfor most areas <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/nepal> 
and both countries are trying to get the message through that, though they 
still need aid, your holiday dollars will help greatly.

At the start of June the Nepal Tourism Board advised 
<http://welcomenepal.com/promotional/nepal-ready-to-welcome-tourists/#> that 
heritage sites were reopening, transport links were intact and most trekking 
areas were undamaged:

The government of Nepal requests international travellers to visit the 
magnificent and bustling country of Nepal, and support by visiting it as she 
attempts to stand proudly on her feet once again. Walk the beautiful trails in 
the shadows of the most magnificent mountains on Earth as you help the Nepalese 
people reset their course on the path to prosperity. Nepal is now embarking 
upon the most fascinating period in all of its ancient history, and you could 
be right there to see it all happen and your contribution will be a part of 
rebuilding new Nepal.

It was also at pains to stress that of the country’s 75 districts, just 14 
were hit by the quakes.

In the Pacific, the Vanuatu Tourism Office is letting the photos of its 
#VanuatuStillSmiles social media campaign do some of the talking:

It says those “who want to help Vanuatu but don’t know how are encouraged to 
book a holiday there”, andlists the hotel and tours open for business 
<http://www.discovervanuatu.com.au/tropical-cyclone-pam-hotel-update/>. It’s 
also trying to stress that though some islands bore the brunt of Pam – sparking
headlines claiming the entire nation had been left homeless 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/cyclone-pam-entire-nation-left-5340514>
 – others, like the country’s largest, Espiritu Santo, came through unscathed.

On my trip I saw a few trees down and roofs being repaired in Vanuatu’s 
capital, Port Vila, but there was no sign of damage on Santo. With its blue 
lagoons, diving wrecks, coconut groves and glorious beaches, it’s a slice of 
heaven.


Mount Everest: the go-slow guide to base camp – with a fast ride home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/16/-sp-mount-everest-the-go-slow-guide-to-base-camp-with-a-fast-ride-home>
I met many people working in the tourism industry in its main town, 
Luganville, who are sending money home to their families on the worst-affected 
islands. Among the other holiday-makers were foreign visitors taking time out 
from volunteering in the rebuilding efforts.

As for Nepal: after having had the best holiday of my life to date trekking 
there <http://www.traveller.com.au/inspired-to-take-a-peak-2fmk3> – and a 
second hike at higher altitude thatdidn’t go as smoothly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/16/-sp-mount-everest-the-go-slow-guide-to-base-camp-with-a-fast-ride-home>
 but did nothing to diminish my love for the place – I’ve been selling my mum’s 
jams to raise money for friends’grassroots efforts to help people in isolated 
villages <http://www.journey-nepal.org/blog/>. 

It’s often said that travellers go to Nepal for the trekking, then go back for 
the Nepalese. Their hospitality is extraordinary. A mate who clung to a swaying 
mountain in Langtang when the quake hithas written of how she was taken in by 
hard-hit villagers 
<http://www.theherald.com.au/story/3066069/trek-into-tragedy/>. Amid the 
devastation, one told her repeatedly: “I am sad that you don’t have a good 
holiday.”

Just as welcoming, and as resilient in the face of hardship, are the people of 
Vanuatu. When it comes tosmiling 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/annamendoza/these-pictures-from-storm-stricken-vanuatu-will-make-you-app#.rwdPQbMBR>
 they’re world champions. Strangers stopped me in the street constantly to chat 
and thank me for visiting. I took their lead and was soon waving and smiling at 
everyone I passed. It’s that sort of place.
 