
Following a glittery Baftas bash recently – and with the Oscars just around 
the corner – it's easy to see the appeal of a career in front of the camera or 
on stage.

But away from the boards and red carpets, breaking into acting and performance 
can be tough. While singing and acting lessons are prohibitively expensive for 
aspiring stars, it can also take years to get noticed. Samuel L Jackson was 45 
years old when he got his big break in Pulp Fiction, while Harrison Ford was in 
his 30s and working as a carpenter when he was spotted by director George Lucas.

In fact, the average number of weeks per year that UK actors work 
professionally are only 11.3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/oct/10/acting-career> and just 8% of 
UK-based actors <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/oct/10/acting-career> 
are in work at any given moment.

Bagging a major role in film, theatre or TV is more than just the perfect CV 
<http://work.chron.com/steps-send-resume-acting-agency-9809.html> or audition – 
you need to show you have the skills, experience and determination to succeed. 
Taking classes or studying for a degree is agood start 
<http://education-portal.com/articles/Acting_Career_Information_Becoming_an_Actor_or_Actress.html>
 but not suitable to all. "You don't need to learn how to act, you need to 
learn how to sell yourself,"says Paul Roseby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/24/drama-schools-waste-of-money-national-youth-theatre>
, artistic director at the National Youth Theatre.

So, what is the best way to break into a career in acting and performance? 
Join us onThursday 19 February from 1pm to 3pm GMT for a live chat with our 
experts. We'll be discussing:

• If attending university or taking classes is essential

• Cost effective ways to get training

• Unusual ways to get spotted in the industry

• Tips for finding an agent

• How to keep motivated following rejection

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can 
tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
 who can post them for you.

Panel

Paul Roseby is chief executive and artistic director of the National Youth 
Theatre. In over 10 years leading the NYT, Paul has commissioned over 100 new 
plays and directed productions. He has also established the NYT REP Company - a 
free alternative to formal training.

Emily Tilelli is a London-based casting director and founder of ET Casting 
<http://www.etcasting.com/>. As a member of the Casting Directors Guild, and 
with 15 years of experience within the industry, Emily works closely with 
actors throughout the audition process.

Mariel Witmond is the company director of Casting Networks 
<http://castingnetworks.co.uk/> in Europe and South Africa. Formerly an agent 
working in New York and then Los Angeles, Mariel has comprehensive knowledge of 
the casting industry.

Fiona Graham is convenor for the MA writing for performance and dramaturgy 
course atGoldsmiths College, London University <http://www.gold.ac.uk/>. She 
has worked for thirty years in theatre as an actor, director, writer and 
dramaturge.

Mark Summers is a casting director who has previously casted for Madonna, 
Mercedes and Beyonce; he was also the UK casting director for Michael Jackson's 
"This Is It" tour. Back in 2003, Mark won the British Advertising Craft award 
for best casting director.

Emma Dyson is the PR manager for Spotlight <http://www.spotlight.com/> and 
trained at the Guildford School of Acting. Previously she was an agent in a 
leading West End agency and has six years of experience in the performance 
industry.

Annelie Powell is the assistant casting director at The Royal Shakespeare 
Company <http://www.rsc.org.uk/> and has worked as a freelance casting director 
for over seven years.

Charlie Walker-Wise is the senior business development manager at RADA 
<https://www.rada.ac.uk/>. Charlie also teaches acting and communication skills 
at RADA and RADA in Business, and is a freelance theatre director. He trained 
as an actor and graduated from RADA back in 2005.

Dr Michael McKinnie is senior drama lecturer at Queen Mary, University of 
London <http://www.qmul.ac.uk/>. McKinnie has taught theatre theory, history 
and practice. He is also the author of City Stages: Theatre and Urban Space in 
a Global City. Before becoming an academic, Michael worked in new play 
development.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 