
Anthony Rose <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-rose>, chief 
technology officer of YouView, the project to bring video-on-demand to Freeview 
and Freesat, has dismissed accusations that the BBC-backed service is an 
anti-competitive cartel.

Twelve companies including Virgin Media and BSkyB submitted objections about 
YouView to Ofcom, but the communications regulatorthis week gave the green 
light for the project to proceed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/19/youview-ofcom-project-canvas>, 
saying potential harm to competition would be offset against the benefits to 
viewers.

"I think the top two more important misconceptions [about YouView] are: No 1, 
it's a cartel, and No 2, it's the BBC. Neither of those are true," Rose said 
yesterday .

"There are seven shareholders, clearly they are all contributing their money 
for some purpose; but to me, it's a little bit like the [movie] Usual Suspects. 
There's a body somewhere, police have arrested eight people, they've all done 
something in the past but they are probably not directly connected with this.

"When you see the way the user experience team and the technologists work to 
solve very basic problems it becomes very clear that it's nothing to do with 
these cartel aspersions."

Rose said the second most important misconception to clarify was that YouView 
is made up primarily of staff from the BBC. Only a "small fraction" of people at
YouView <https://www.theguardian.com/media/youview> are from the BBC, he added.

"It was started by the BBC some years ago as an idea but actually there are 
about 10 people from BBC R&D who are now seconded to YouView, the rest of the 
team are YouView employees. The entire proposition is by no means a BBC 
proposition," Rose said.

Rose joined YouView 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/30/bbc-anthony-rose-project-canvas> 
– formerly known as Project Canvas – on 1 May after successfully revamping the 
BBC iPlayer during his tenure as controller of vision and online media.

YouView remains on track to launch in the first half of next year, targeting 
the 7mFreeview <https://www.theguardian.com/media/freeview> households that 
have broadband access. YouView-enabled television sets are "unlikely" to be 
available by next year, Rose said, but a 2012 range was more likely.

Speaking at The Future of Digital Media Distribution conference in London, 
Rose confirmed that the video-on-demand platform will be open "in the sense 
that anyone can create content for the platform", but that there would be a 
regulatory process.

"If you look at the app store models – on the one hand there's the Apple one 
and there's the [Google] Android one. Where do we intend to play in that 
spectrum? What we say is the equivalent of an MOT," he said. "We don't seek to 
have any editorial input on what's good or bad, we set some baseline 
conditions."

Asked how open he would describe platform, in relation to the aforementioned 
policies of Apple and Google, Rose said: "It's open in the sense that anyone 
can create content for the platform. The question is, does it have a URL bar 
and can you browse the open internet?

"If you make it fully open you end up with each manufacturer having to give 
updates and your trusted TV starts becoming about as frivolous as your 
computer, and there's nothing like watching the iPlayer on your TV set through 
your computer when Windows decides now is a great time to install updates.

"The problem rights holders have with Android is that as you enable an open 
platform ... there you are recording some content and another app can go read 
that and share it. You have a tension between what rights holders want in order 
to make premium content available on the platform, and what consumers want. I'm 
not hearing any consumers right now saying 'I need BitTorrent on the platform'.

"If a site looks like a reasonable consumer proposition and passes the MOT 
process, you're in – after that it's between a rights holder and that site."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 