
Zlatan Ibrahimovic believes Ángel Di María can help Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> realise their dream of 
winning the Champions League and has urged the Argentinian to seal his move 
from Manchester United.

PSG 1-1 Chelsea (Chelsea win 6-5 on pens) | Match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/chelsea-psg-thibaut-courtois-shootout>
The former Real Madrid forward missed a flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/26/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-saint-germain>
 to join Louis van Gaal’s squad in San Francisco while Laurent Blanc’s PSG side 
were playing Chelsea in North Carolina. Blanc, the former France captain, 
although stressing a deal was not yet rubber-stamped, was hopeful Di María will 
join the French champions this week as their own North American tour continues. 
Ibrahimovic, however, cannot wait to welcome him into the fold.

“I don’t know if it is done but, of course, if you get a chance to play with 
Di María it is a fantastic thing. The guy has won everything. He is a fantastic 
player who plays for the team,” the striker said.

“He brings pace to a team. He brings quality, big quality and for sure he will 
make our team even better than it is today. He is welcome and we will receive 
him with open arms.

Manchester United 3-1 Barcelona | match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/manchester-united-barcelona-match-report-wayne-rooney>
“It shows how much PSG are willing to get what they want. Every year they 
invest to get big players but also players that fit in the team. So there is no 
limits. The people behind this, they want to become big. They are dreaming 
bigger and they will get bigger.

“It’s all about small details. Real Madrid are a fantastic team. They have 
fantastic players. Of course,when Real Madrid got Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/01/gareth-bale-real-madrid-tottenham>
 they became better and we will become better with Di María.”

David Luiz, the former Chelsea central defender, echoed Ibrahimovic and 
believes Di María, with whom he played for Benfica, would be the perfect 
signing for PSG. “For us it is always very good if we can sign a fantastic 
player like Di María. I love him, he is my friend. I played with him at 
Benfica, when me and him weighed just 70 kilos,” the Brazilian said. “He is 
fantastic and will be fantastic for the team. He also knows how to play on the 
defensive side, he is an amazing player.

“Am I surprised it didn’t work out for him in England? No, it’s not about 
this. Sometimes you cannot have luck in one place but he is still a fantastic 
player. We want to win the Champions League. If it was up to me, I’d like to 
sign many players. He is a player who can help us go up another step.

“It’s about details in the Champions League. When we played Barcelona last 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/21/barcelona-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
 we arrived in our bad moment and they were at their best level of the season. 
It can be like that. You need luck sometimes and to have all the players 
available to play. It’s not a step down joining the French League. He will love 
playing there like I do. It is a technical and tactical league and many 
fantastic players are there. There is a lot of young talent and they get a lot 
of chance to play there. I am very happy there and he will be too.

“Di María is one of the top three wingers in the world. I have played against 
many top players. He’s fast, technical, he plays for the team, he knows how to 
play as an individual, how to pass, how to score. So he’s better than me!”
 